



A GENERALL HISTORIE
OF SPAINE:
Collected out of diuers Authors, as well
auntient as moderne.


The Contents of the first Booke.
1 A discourse of the auntient and first beginning of the Spaniards.
2 Their religion and language.
3 The auntient and (may be) fabulous kings and captaines of vagabond troups in Spaine, vnto Gerion,
and so to Hercules the Great.
4 Many petie kings, or Italian pirats, spoyling Spaine.
5 Discourse of the absurdities of these antiquities.
6 Greekes spoyling Spaine.
7 Affricanes entring and wasting Spaine.
8 Confusion and medley of the people which vsurped the countrey of Spaine.
9 Phenicians and Gaditanes, their ofspring.
10 A Chorographicall description of the firme land of Spaine.
11 Islands about Spaine.
12 Distinction of the gouernments of Spaine, according to the Romans and Carthaginians, and others
after them vnto the Arabians.
13 Distinction of the kingdomes of Spaine, which are now of fame.
14 The fertilitie of Spaine, both antient and moderne.
15 The manners of the antient Spaniards, and of those which now hold it: their armes and discipline.

1 THe beginning and antiquitie of nations farre fetcht,The beginning of nations are fabulous for the most part. is alwaies
fabulous: for most of them that haue vndertaken to write histories,
either generall, or particular of some one nation, haue
thought it expedient (for their reputations) to offer a perfect
worke vnto the world; and not to passe any season without
some memorie of them of whom they write: imagining that
the studious Reader would hold it an argument of their sloth
or negligence, to leaue any thing in blancke. And therefore
when as they wanted the testimonie of graue authors, they
haue countenanced their owne imaginations; or haue imitated
the fabulous inuentions of others, imploying their time,
toyle, and eloquence in vaine things: wherin they may haply
satisfie some curious heads, but not such as desire to leame. For as a lye cannot be so disguised,
but either the conference of ages doth discouer it; or a spirit knowing the force and effect
of things created, doth reject it; or the religious condemne it, as it is fit; when it shal once appeare
that the author of any historie hath supposed things doubtfull and vncertaine, for true,
thereby to enlarge his volumes. He that is studious, and loth to loose his time, growes discontented,

and reads it with distast.Truth the subiect of a History Wherefore men of best judgement, hold, that the subject of
a historie is truth, in serious matters, and worthy to be imparted to posteritie; giuing libertie
to them that write, to season the examples with praise or blame: obseruing the rewards and punishments
which haue followed, without respect of persons, or yeelding to any passion, either
of loue or hatred, but stirred vp by the merits of vertue, or the horror of vice; to the end that
such as read their writings,The end of reading histories, is to follo^ vertue and to flie vice. may be encouraged by the worthy acts of some, to liue vertuously,
and diuerted by the dishonour and vnfortunat successe of others, from all bad affections: and
the rather, for that they do therein find imitable steps of vertue. And for that the memorie of
many things is buried in obliuion, or miscaried, they haue not been so strict, as to forbid them
that find themselues ingaged in the desars and obscuritie of the antiquitie of nations, to obserue
some steps, and go by probable conjectures, to a way passable. This is allowed them, so
as they doe it by constraint, and with judgement; remembring, that a good huntsman can
judge of a wolues footing from a dogs, which are something like.
The historie of Spaine, which we resolue to write, is herein defectiue, as in a manner all others
be:Spaine vnknown before the Carthaginians. for before the comming of the Carthaginians into that country, and the wars of the
Romans, it cannot be directly said, by what people Spaine was held, nor at what time, nor by
what policie it was gouerned, but by ill grounded conjectures. For of the acts of the first men
which were dispersed vpon the face of the earth after the deluge, we haue no author but Moyses,
who is carefull to describe the estate and succession of the Hebrues, in that chiefely which
concernes the establishing of the Church of God. Of other nations he speakes but by occasion,
and as God would doe good vnto this nation by them, or punish it for their ingratitude.
Wee must not then seeke for any mention of Spaine or Spaniards in him. The Grecians had
so little care of other nations, and haue so much respected their own, as they haue scarce vouchsafed
to speake of them, but with contempt; and to amplifie their own glorie, they haue sometimes
fed the Latines with fables: who haue adorned and enriched their Rome and Italie, and
haue had care to proclaime their gests,The Grecians authors of lyes. making vse (in regard of antiquitie) of Grecian fables,
or of conjectures; as the moderne haue in like manner done. What can we then do in
matters which are so doubtfull, but onely touch these conjectures as farre as they shall seeme
receiuable; passing that slightly ouer, which the Historians haue written of our first Spaine,
to the end we busie not our selues in a vaine labour more than is fit.
Wherefore, according to Iosephus report, and vpon their consciences which haue supposed
vnto vs a Berosus,Tubal. we say after many others, that Tubal, one of the sonnes of Iaphet, otherwise
called Iubal, or Iobel, is father to the Spaniards, although it be verie likely, that he neuer set
foot in Spaine, being then a countrey without a name: but that from Armenia or the neighbour
places, taking his way towards the North, he stayed in a region since called Iberia, situated
vpon Mont Caucasus, which couers it from the North, betwixt the Caspian and Euxine
seas: a countrey then inhabited by them which we call Georgians, whereas afterwards
the Chalibes, or Alibes were, a name approaching to Iubales, as some would wrest it, changing
some letters, as it happens in the corruption of tongues. These people were Smithes,
handling yron, whereof the countrey abounds, and applying it by their art to many good vses.
The descendants of Iubal in these places, were afterwards called Iberians, and the country Iberia,
by some man of qualitie which caried that name, and whose memory they would preserue,
as it is likely. From thence the most receiuable authors doe maintaine, that the Iberians Spaniards
parted some ages after Tubal, or Iubal, and that the people being so multiplied, as the
countrey could not well feed them, nor containe them, a part of them were constrained either
by force, or by casting of lots, to abandon the place, and seeke some new abode: the which
hath beene ordinarie among all nations, and in all ages, but especially in the first age, when it
was necessarie the world should be peopled and inhabited: and it is credible, that nature was
at that time wonderfull fruitfull, God prouiding for the propagation of mankind. The common
opinion is, that these Iberians hauing wandred much, being arriued vpon the frontiers of
the region whereof we treat, staied in the vallies of those mountaines, which were since called
Pyrenee,Pyrenee moun^taines full of yron mynes. and that they did liue long there, finding them fit to entertaine them in their first inclination
and breeding: for that country abounds in yron mynes as much as any in Europe;
and therefore they found means wherewith to imploy themselues, and to feed, for that these
mountains were ful of all things wherof these new come men, and ill prouided, had need, that

is to say, chestnuts, hazlenuts, pears, plummes, cheries, and all other wild fruites, with great
store of acornes, especially towards the West parts.
2 That there was either good religion,The first Spaniards were grosse, without art or religion. knowledge, gouernment, or any thing else, but
great simplicitie, ignorance, and pouertie, we can hardly beleeue: and wee persuade our
selues, that ciuilitie, industrie, experience and knowledge of valour and profit of things,
was taught them by necessitie, the mistresse of Artes, and by strangers which came into
their countrey from Phenicia, Aegypt, Greece, Carthage, Gaule, and elsewhere; to
whom they were for a long time a prey, and in the end they learned armes, and many other
malicious practises, whereof they had the root in their hearts, but grosly planted. As for
religion, wee shall find by this discourse, that it was most barbarous and infamous among
them. And who doubts, but the successours of Tubal did suddenly forget the true God, and
his pleasing seruice, seeing this corruption did so soone enter among the sonnes of Sem, and
namely those of the family of Heber, of whom the Eternall did frame his chosen people and his
church. I wil not busie my self to contradict them which belieue, that their first language was
that of the Biscanes in those times; discoursing, that seeing it hath so long maintained it selfe
in that proprietie, and that it cannot be discerned that this tongue hath taken any tearms from
other auntients,Biscane tongue verie antient, and held the first the Spaniards vsed. nor from other nations which inhabit about their countrey, with whom notwithstanding
they conuerse and traffique, wee must beleeue that there is something verie remarkable
in this language, and thereby conclude, that it was one of the first tongues which
did confound the builders of Babel, and by consequence the whole world, God being pleased
to haue preserued in Spaine this note of the first inhabitants thereof. Admit it be so, and that
the Bascongade, which the Biscanes at that time did vse, a part of Nauarre, and they of Alaua,
are the first, or of greatest antiquitie vpon the frontiers of Spaine.
3 Let vs be no lesse difficult to beleeue the opinion of a certaine Spanish doctor,Coniectures vpon that Sepharad did hold Spaine. who
maintaines, That one of the nephewes of Sem, or else of Cham, called Sepharad, came along the
coast of Affricke to the strait, and hauing crost it with great troups, he did people the bankes
of the Ocean and the Mediterranean seas, whereas the riuer of Guadalquiber doth ingulph,
grounded vpon that the Hebrews call the Spaniards Sepharadin, and that they may apply the
beginning of many names of towns, riuers, islands, and mountains of the countrey, to the Hebrew,
Caldee, and Syriake tongues; as Gaddir, Sepyla, Betis, Calpe, Auila, and the like. All
this is not strange, although there were no danger to deriue these names from the Phenicians,
who vsed the Syrian tongue, and had great affinitie with the Hebrew which was vsed among
the Iewes, a nation also of Syria: and to beleeue that they were brought into Spaine by the
Tyrians and others which inuaded those quarters, when they came to spoyle the treasures
thereof. That Spaine hath alwayes from the beginning beene peopled in two seuerall parts,
vpon the East and Pyrenee mountaines by the Iberians of Asia, and Caucasians descending
from Tubal; and towards the South at the strait, by Sepharad and his troups, which came out
of Syria and Affricke: and that of either side,Iberians gaue the name vnto Spaine. as the people multiplied, they aduanced farther
into the countrey: we may vndoubtedly beleeue, that those of the Pyrenee mountaines passing
the vallies by little and little on the West side, did people such a part of the country as they
gaue their name to the first nauigable riuer, and to the whole region, celebrating the memory
of their natiue countrey, and of this Iberus, of whom they were named, whatsoeuer he were.
4 Among the most auntient captains or kings of this vagabond nation, they make mention
of one Idubeda, of whom the mountaine of Iubalda, or Idubeda, might be named,Idubeda. whereof we
will speake hereafter. Then they produce Brigus king or gouernor of these troups,Brigus. who began
a ciuile gouernment, and built (as they say) many castles in Spaine, which carried the marks of
his name, all in a manner ending in Briga, as Nemetobriga, Mitobriga, and such like, by reason
whereof he carried painted in his standard a castle (although the skill to blaze Armes was
not then well knowne:) and the authors of the Spanish antiquities say, That of him the assemblies
of people were called Brigies, and afterwards Brigues, and Brigades: the which did so
multiplie vnder his gouernment and conduct, as they were forced to send whole armies out of
the countrey, to seeke new habitations; wherof some of these Brigues comming into
Thrace, and then into Asia, they brought the name of Brigie thither, the which since
by corruption hath beene turned into Phrigia: and that Castille, now called Viegia, was
in old time tearmed Brigia, and that the new Spanish tongue hath since turned it into Biegia,

calling it Castille la Biegia, in stead of Brigia. For my part I beleeue, that this word Briga, was
brought into Spaine by the Celtes,Coniectures that the Celtes were mingled with the Iberians from the beginning. which did hold a great part of that countrey, for that it is
of the language of the old Gauls, by the which was signified people, town, or assembly. Moreouer,
there were many townes in France, which had their names deriued from it; as the lake
Brigantin vpon the Alpes, which is that of Constance at this present; and Brigantium, which
is Brianson in Daulphine; the Latobriges neere vnto the Suisses, and others, wheras the Celtes
did in old time inhabit. And if there were a king so named, it is verie likely he was a Gaule,
captaine of some troupe of Celtes, in whose time there were great alterations of people, and
by consequence ambitious thefts,To rob was practised by the antients. the best exercise the noble men then gaue themselues vnto.
This is what may be spoken of this Brigus.
After whom Tagus was famous,Tagus. from whom it may bee the riuer Tayo tooke her auntient
name. Hee following the steps of his predecessour, sent many superfluous and vnnecessarie
troupes out of Spaine, to seeke new habitations, whereof some past into Asia.
Betus came after,Betus. who was also called Turditanus, hee gaue that name to the countrey
which is betweene the holy Promontorie, now called Cape S. Vincent, and the riuer of
Guadalquibir, the which was also called Betis: and in succession of time did communicat
that name to a great part of the neighbour countrey, whereof they did afterwards name one
of the chiefe prouinces of Spaine. In regard of him that countrey vpon the strait towards
the West and South, began to be famous, and knowne to strangers, especially to the Aegyptians,
and other Affricanes, nations which were then mightie and warlike, and withall cunning
and politique, good mariners, and abounding in ships, to whom the entrie into this
part of Spaine did offer it selfe, and was more commodious than any other. And therefore
the names of other inhabitants within the countrey, did for a long time after remaine obscured
and vnknowne. They doe attribute some lawes and policie vnto this Betus, and the
bringing in of some learning into Spaine, but what it was, is vnknowne.
5 To confirme that which is said, That in the raigne of Betus strangers began to tast the
riches and commodities of Spaine: Authors report, that presently after his death, a captaine,
mightie in shipping and men, came out of Affricke, landed in Turditane, and seised thereon.
Hee was a Libian,Gerion. and was called Gerion, and by some Deabus, surnamed by the Greekes
Chrysee, as one would say, of gold, or gilt; by reason of the treasures he gathered by violence
and tyrannie.Strange princes tyrannize spain For knowing that Spaine was full of mynes of all sorts of mettals, he became
curious to search for them, forcing the people to worke with such rigour, as if they had
beene brute beasts; many fainting vnder their burthens, ended their miserable liues: so as
the brute of his crueltie (an inseperable companion to couetousnesse) infected in a manner
the whole earth, in places most remote, and was abhorred of all those that had any feeling of
humanitie.
Osiris Denis then raigned in Aegypt,Osiris who mooued with pitie, and of a generous spirit,
came into Spaine with a great armie of Aegyptians, Syrians, Arabians, and other neighbour
nations, to ruine this detestable tyrant; whom he vanquished in battell, and slew: which is
the first that was giuen in Spaine, that any mention is made of since the deluge. And for that
he came neither to conquer,A iust cause of warre to deliuer the oppressed. nor to enrich himselfe, being mooued with a zeale of justice,
hauing setled the affaires of the countrey, he deliuered the seigniorie of the Turditanians
to three of his children, who had beene punished for his wickednesse, admonishing them
not to follow the wretched auarice of their father, least their ends were like vnto his. Some
Arabians Scenites of his troupe, would needs remaine in Spaine, to whom he assigned the
countrey about Cape Saint Vincent.
Neere vnto it (and where as the riuer Anas disgorgeth it selfe) dwelt the Curetes,Curetes. discended
from Curis, nephew (they say) to Champ among the Tercenian, or Tartessian forests,
which did run along the shore vnto the island of Gadir, then called Tartesse (in our time Calis:)
in which island Gerion was interred,Gadir and Tar^tesse. the first of any dead bodie that was put in the
ground in Spaine; for before the custome was to cast dead carkasses into the sea, or into riuers,
or to hang them vpon trees, or else they left them in the fields.
Osiris left in this island a sister of his, called Erythree, who (it may be by one of these young
Gerions) had a sonne called Norac,Nora the first habitation in Sardinia. who (as some say) did build Nora, the first mansion in the
island of Sardinia.

These three young princes, who were called Lominians, were so like in face and manners,
and did agree so well together, as the Poets haue fained, that they were but one king which
had three bodies. They gouerned their subjects with more modestie than their father. Imagine
that the feare of punishment kept them in awe, yet could they not so subdue their courages,
but they sought all vnworthie meanes to reuenge their fathers death.The desire of reuenge a brutall vice in man. Wherefore the
seas being now open to the Turditanes, and commerce brought in from the West to the East,
they had secret practises with Tiphon, whom they knew to be ambitious, and procured him to
kill king Osiris his brother, and to seise vpon the kingdome of Aegypt.
Osiris left many children,Hercules Oron. among the which was Hercules the Great, whom they surname
the Aegyptian Apollo, Mars, and Oron: by him the Gerions Lominians receiued a worthie reward
for their ingratitude. For hauing gathered together a great armie of diuers nations, he past into
Spaine, whereas these three brethren were readie to make head against him: yet Hercules
grieuing that so much innocent bloud should be spilt for the offence of three men,Great equitie of Hercules the Aegyptian. he offred to
fight alone with them all three in single combats: which being accepted by the Gerions, they
lost their liues. They say, that this passage of Hercules, was at the same time when as Iacob and
his family went into Aegypt, or a little before. By this victorie Hercules was receiued and honoured
of the Turditanes, and other Spaniards: who after that he had setled their affairs, and
planted two pillars vpon the straits, the one in Europe, and the other in Affricke; and two others
in the island, since called Gadir: which some hold were towers, and not pillars, for a
marke and testimonie of his conquests and toyles, he tooke his course towards Italie, leauing
the gouernment of Spaine to one of his captaines called Hispal, which some will haue to bee
his sonne.Hispal sonne to Hercules. They say also, that he left in those islands, which are now called Majorca and Minorca,
a Gouernour called Balee, of whom they since tooke the name of Baleares: although
that most men beleeue they were so named, for that the inhabitants were expert in slings.
Hispal remaining Gouernour of this part of Spaine, which is at the straits and thereabouts
neere vnto the two seas (for as we haue said, those that liued within the countrey, had not felt
much of these forraine inuasions) he began a towne called by him Hispalis, since named Sepila,Hispalis or Seuille.
and at this day Seuille.
Hispan succeeded him,Hispan. a wise and an actiue man, and a louer of vertue, as they write of him:
and we must beleeue that he was some great personage (if there were euer any such in being)
seeing the whole region whereof we treat hath retained his name, and preserued it in such sort
as it hath not beene changed since. Others notwithstanding acknowledging in no sort this
Hispan to be the author of the name which hath remained to Spaine,Spaine why so called. affirme, and it may bee
not rashly, That it came of the people of Iberia in Asia, the which in old time was called Pana,
of the name of one Pan, who gouerned there vnder his father Liber: and therefore this of
Europe was indifferently called Iberia and Pana: but those that came after, corrupting the
word, did adde some letters, and called it sometimes Spana, and sometimes Spania, as in truth
the Latines did name it in the beginning, terming it Spania, and not Hispania. The Spaniards
comming afterwards to imbrace the Roman tongue, added an E, and called it Espania, as they
haue beene accustomed to do to all Latine words which begin with S; as Escola, Escala, Escudo,
Escriber, and the like. These Iberians did also call themselues Abasgi, whereof it may bee
came Vasco, Basco, and Bascongado. Such as beleeue that Hispan raigned in Spaine, say, That
he was the first which tooke the royall diademe, and that he caused towers to bee built in the
island of Tarlesse, and in Galicia, which they call Phares, or Beacons, for the helpe of saylers:
yet others hold with more reason, that that in Galicia, which is yet standing, was the worke of
Octauius Caesar.
Hercules hauing done many great exploits in Italie, he left Atlas Kitin there to gouerne, carying
back his brother Hesperus,Hesperus, of whom Italie and Spaine are named. he returned into Spain, where he found Hispan deceased: wherfore
he himselfe did gouerne it in person for many yeares, and dyed there, as they say. His bodie
was buried in the island of Tarlesse, where at that time the kings court was, in a sumptuous
and stately tombe.
After him raigned Hesperus,Atl^^. brother to Atlas Kitin, of whose name they say that Spaine and
also Italie were called Hesperies; that is, Italie Hesperia the great, and Spaine the later Hesperia,
for that he raigned sometime both in the one and the other. But Atlas enuious of his
brothers greatnesse, came with an armie and dispossessed him of the kingdome, forcing him

to flie into Italie, from whence Hercules had brought him: where hee was well entertained,
and raigned. The which Atlas vnderstanding, hee suffered him not long quiet, but returned
into Italie with a good number of Spaniards, and chased him away; meaning to hold
Italie as his royall seat, and Spaine as an accessarie, to draw gold, siluer, and all other commodities
from thence.
Atlas parting from Spaine,Oris. he left the gouernement to Oris his sonne, who was called Sit
Oris, Sic seruing as a fore-name.Sigro (...). Of him they say the riuer Sicoris, now called Sigro, was
named: the which passeth by Lerida, and falls into Ebro. But no man can tell vpon what
occasion he was so called, nor how hee extended his limits thither, being so farre from the
straits, and isle of Gadir.
Anus succeeded Oris,Anus. whom they also called Sicanus, and of his name the riuer of Guadiana
tooke the auntient denomination. Wee must conjecture, that his predecessour Oris did
establish some estate and principalitie, or made some fort and retreat about the riuer of Sigro,
whereof this that succeeded him had the first gouernement: seeing they place along the
bankes thereof,Sicanians Spaniards. the people which are called Sicanians, so named of this Sicanus, who it
seemes were his souldiours, and the troupes which he commaunded. Some of those bands
hauing past into Italie, to helpe their countrey-men, which had beene led thither by Atlas
Kitin, and hauing inhabited the countrey of the Latines (which is the territorie of Rome)
they were there encountred by the naturall Italians. Passing on, they carried the name of
Sicanians,Siclle, why called Sicania. into the island then called Trinacria, and since Sicile: into the which, they say,
that Sicanus past in person, hauing in Italie fought with the Ligurians, Oenotrians, Lestrigons,
and others: and that he was there encountred by the Cyclopes, cruell and barbarous
men, who would not suffer the Sicanians to come and dwell in their island: but they were
forced to yeeld.
Siceleus the sonne of Sicanus raigned in Spaine,Siceleus gaue the name to the isle of Sicile. after his father, and passed in like manner
into Italie and Sicile, where he changed the former name, calling it Sicile, the which it holds.
The occasion of his passage, was the controuersie betwixt Dardanus and Iasius, his cousins,
sonnes to Electra the daughter of Atlas, for the rule of Italie; the which he reconciled. But
Dardanus hauing afterwards slaine Iasius his brother treacherously, Siceleus pursued the reuenge
so vehemently, as Dardanus was forced to abandon the countrey, and to go into Samothracia,
and then into Asia, to seeke a new habitation. This mans raigne concurres with the
time that God sent plagues vpon the Aegyptians, by Moyses and Aaron.
Siceleus being dead,Lusus, of whom comes Lusitania. his sonne Lusus held the scepter of Spaine; of whose name some will
haue Lusitania (a part therof) to be called. He past also into Italie, and at his returne brought
many Italians into Spaine.Vlus. Where, after him, Vlus, or Siculus, his sonne, raigned: whom they
called Neptune, for that he entertained many ships and gallies at sea. He past, as his predecessors
had done, into Italy and Sicile, to succour the Spaniards which were seated in those regions,
against whom the Cyclopes and others of the countrey renewed the wars. After him many
stranger thrust into Spaine, vpon diuers occasions, but for one only cause, which was, for
spoyle, being easie to take, by reason of the simplicitie of the Spanish people.
Hee that shall consider duely hereof, will not thinke it to agree with that which we haue
said before, as in truth it doth not: For if these kings (of whom we haue made mention since
Atlas) which haue raigned, according to Historians and Croniclers, for two hundred and
fiftie yeares, haue not onely had the meanes to defend Spaine from strangers, but to lead
forth many armies, and to subdue the people of Italie and Sicile; to make themselues vmpiers
of kings quarels, to build townes there, and to commaund the seas: and that from
Spaine to Italie, and from Italie to Spaine, the passage and commerce was ordinarie: How
could it be, that so soone after the death of Siculus, the Spaniards should grow so simple and
vnwarlike, as if they had neuer seene armes? And that it was in the power of the first pyrat
that came from Affricke, Phenicia, or Greece, to seise vpon it, and insult ouer them, without
any resistance? Had they learned nothing? had they gotten no courage in so many
warres which they had seene in Italie? What was become of those captaines which these
late kings had so happily imployed? had they all cursed their countrey, or found some
Lethe floud, to make them forget it, and to stay in Italie? Or if they were dead, did they
leaue no discipline, nor any impression of vertue in their youth? It is not likely, and therefore

we must put all these discourses among idle tales, or find some meanes to vnfold this
difficultie. Euery one hath free libertie to discourse: For my part I beleeue, that these men
which they say had reigned in Spaine since Atlas, haue beene Italians, acknowledging the
Soueraignetie of Italie, and gouerning Spaine as a subdued Prouince: or else respecting
onely their profit, they made voyages like vnto pyrats, shearing them to the bloud, and then
carrying their spoyles into Italie, employing the lewdest people in the countrey to oppresse
the rest; and in the meane time, through the fauour of some fort, which they did maintaine
to assure their landing and their shipping, they caused themselues to be called Kings. Then
seeing that the Spaniards (which had joyned with them to doe ill) did multiplie too fast,What the first kings of Spaine were. or
grew more cunning than was fit for their purpose, they found meanes to embarke them, and
to send them into Italie vpon some vaine hopes, whereas being once arriued, there was no
more any meanes to returne into Spaine. Such in my opinion were the armies which those
kings led out of Spaine into Italie, that is, troupes of theeues, of whom they would be assured,
that they should not conspire against them, nor take their practise from them, after
they had instructed them in their trade. By these subtile practises they did spoile Spaine both
of men and treasure, holding the grosse and rude multitude in ignorance, and setling an opinion
in them, that they were good men, and louers of justice; yea religious, for that they
dealt in the pacifying of controuersies, which happened among the people, and sometimes
they payed vowes, or made some superstitious dedication of a Temple or Chappell.Religion is a cloake for Tyrants, with the rude multitude. I say
moreouer, That those which we haue before named were not alone, which made this worke
in Spaine; but in their times, and whilest they were busie in one part, other nations did
the like in some other quarter of the countrey. So as it is no maruell, seeing the Spaniards
had yet no meanes to see a lawfull and setled Estate among them, and that those which
did gouerne them, had alwayes this affected end, to entertaine them in their simplicitie; an
assured marke of Tyrants. So as the race of these men fayling, this poore nation was presently
made subject to the first that did inuade them, the children proouing as vnable as
their fathers.
6 They report, That about that time some Greekes of the Island of Zante, in old time
called Zacynte, arriued vpon that coast whereas since the towne of Valencia was built, and
there made a little fort, or store-house, for their traffique, the which they called Zacynthium;
the which did since encrease in people and building, and became a good towne, from whence
Sagunte had her beginning,The beginning of Saguntum. renowmed for the loyaltie of the citizens to the people of Rome,
and for the occasion which shee gaue of the long and bloudie warres betwixt the Romanes
and the Carthaginians, which they called the second Punicke warre. These Zacynthians traffiquing
with them of Iberia, which dwelt within the countrey, and were neighbours to the
mountaines, did receiue from them gold and siluer, little esteemed by these simple men, for
that these mettals grew in their countrey, giuing them in exchange trifles of small value:
so, as growing rich in a short time, they published among the other Grecians, and among
the nations of Asia, the fame, happinesse, and aboundance of treasure in Spaine, inciting many
thereby to goe and discouer the countrey, and to attempt something. And for that
(as we haue said before) religion hath alwaies beene a lure for cunning and malicious men
to assure the simple, to whom they intend some mischiefe, these Zacynthians caused a goodly
Temple to bee built to Diana, in the place which is now called Denia, according vnto
some, but falsely, prouiding by that meanes and maske of religion, for their Zacynthium,
which they had built vpon that coast, that by the reuerence of this Temple they might be
assured from all violence.
7 In the meane time an Affrican called Testa seized vpon Gadir,Testa. and of all the maine
land thereabouts, calling himselfe king of Spaine. It may be that of his name they were called
Contestans, which did inhabit along the bankes of the Mediterranean sea, whereas Murcia
and Carthagena are at this present.
After him he left the gouernment to his sonne Romus,Romus. to whom they attribute the building
of the towne of Valencia (yet Titus Liuius doth not make it so auncient) the which was first
called Rome, of his name, since by the Latines, holding this name to be Greeke, they turned
it in their language to Valencia, which was all one; for Rome in Greeke, and Valencia in old
Latine, is power and force.

In this kings time there came a pyrat into Spaine, well followed by men of his owne sort,
who spoyled the whole countrey adjoyning vnto the sea, and then hee returned with his
spoyles,False Denis. leauing an opinion of him, that hee was the father Liber Denis, or Bacchus: for the
custome of those obscure times was, That great pyrats and heads of vagabond people (whereof
the world did then abound) did take vpon them the names of great personages and famous
men, who had gone before them, and whom foolish superstition had deified; giuing
the people where they came to vnderstand, That they were gods, which came to visit them,
to deliuer them from tyrants, and to doe them good; so as they were often deceiued. By such
fained deuices these Harpies found lesse resistance in their enterprises. It may be this Denis
was the sonne of Semele, and nephew or grand child to Cadmus king of Thebes in Beoce, but
not that great Denis, Conqueror of the Indies, who was much more auncient. They say, that
he built the towne of Lebrissa (the which he called Nebrissa) vpon one of the chanels of the
riuer Betis;Lebrissa, and the beginning. the which in those dayes fell into the sea with two gulfes. Nebros in Greeke is a
Hynds calfe, with the skins whereof they did attire those that did celebrate the Bacchanalia.
It was at the same time when as the Phoenicians began to encroch much vpon the Spaniards,
and to come with whole armies into their countrey,Phoenicians spoyle Spaine. and to make their prey, as the Grecians,
Aegyptians, and others of Affricke did.
To Remus they make Palatuus his sonne to succeed him;Palatuus, Palenza. who as they say was founder of the
towne of Palenza: but there did rise a petie king or captaine against him, out of the mountaines,
neere vnto the riuer Ebro, called Cacus Licinius, who in the end became master thereof,
and Palatuus was forced (being yet young) to flye out of the countrey,Cacus Licinius. and to sue for succours
in vaine, begging his bread in a manner for many yeares, of forraine princes and potentates.
This Cacus was industrious, and the author of many subtile inuentions; to purge and
forge yron, and to fashion it to diuers instruments fit for the warre: for hee taught how to
make breast-plates and other furniture for the defence of the bodie: and some beleeue, that
he had the art to make that infernall pouder, which they vse for artillerie. For these inuentions,
wherein he was very expert,Gunpouder an auncient inuention. he was celebrated by the Poets, as the sonne of Vulcan, the
god of Forges. Palatuus after that he had long sued in vaine to princes and townes, whereas
hee expected some succours, to recouer his estate, hee resolued in the end to returne into
Spaine, and to obserue, if the inconstancie of humane things had not prepared him some
meanes to recouer his dignitie, and to chase away his enemie: whereas he arriued so happily,
as the Spaniards, whether mooued with pitie of his calamitie, or wearie of the others commaund,
they receiued Palatuus, and gaue him men and meanes to recouer his kingdome. So
Cacus being dispossessed of that which he had held, fled into Italie, where they say that Hercules
the Grecian slew him (whereof we will make mention) although that the author thereof
doe not agree well vpon this point. There Cacus bred discord betwixt all the people and
townes of Italie by his lend practises.
Palatuus being dead, the Tyrians of Phoenicia, who had now learned the way to Spaine,
came with their king Erythree,Erythree. and good store of ships, who giuing them to vnderstand, That
he had beene commaunded by the Oracle to come and build a Temple to Hercules Libique, in
the Island of Tartesse, that is, Calis; they were not onely receiued, but Erythree was also
chosen king of that part of Spaine; who built a stately Temple in the Island to Hercules, changing
the name thereof,Gadir called Erythree. and causing it to be called Erythree, or else renewed that name, which
it might haue had from the sister of Oris aboue mentioned, or of the Erythreans of the East,
who followed Hercules Orus, which had dwelt there. To this Temple, which some hold was
built vpon the maine land, where at this present Medina Sydonia stands, was due the tenths
of all the thefts and spoyles of the West, by a perpetuall decree, the which was long obserued.
Of this king Erythree there is nothing more spoken: to whom they giue for successour
Gargoris,Gargoris. a Spaniard: he taught the people the vse of honey, and was therefore called Mielle.
The chiefe force of this kings estate and others his predecessors, were the Curetes, a brutish
and sauage people, dwelling in the forrests of Tartesse, which contained a great part of the
Ocean shore, from the holy Promontorie, or Cape S. Vincent, vnto the Island of Erythree.
In his time Hercules the Grecian,Hercules the Grecian. sonne to Alcmena, passed into Spaine, to whom the
Greek Poets, and others that haue followed them, did attribute such prowesse, but falsely: for

this Hercules was but an insolent man, yet well beloued of the Grecian princes, by reason of
his boldnesse and his strength of bodie fit to rob and steale,Theeues countenanced by princes in old time. whereunto the nobilitie of that
age was commonly addicted. The wealth of Spaine, which was so much spoken of in Greece
and Asia, made him affect this voyage, after the first Trojan warre, against Laomedon. Hauing
then gathered together all the pyrats and theeues he could, as well in Europe as in Asia, hee
set sayle, and coasting along Italie, he landed in the place of Tuscane, which since hath beene
called Port Hercules. From thence he arriued in Sardinia, where he found some few inhabitants,
where he left one Sardus, with some of the idle multitude that was in his armie. Of this
Sardus, Sardinia tooke the name. Before he passed on, he made a great sacrifice vnto the gods,
in a little Island, betwixt Corsica and Sardinia, the which for that cause doth still retaine the
name of Isle Hercules.Baleares called Gymnasies. Then he directed his course towards the Islands of Baleares, then called
Gymnasies, whereas the inhabitants made some weake resistance with their slings: in the
least of which Islands he dedicated a Temple to Ianus, whereas since the towne of Ciuitella
was built. Then continuing his voyage, he toucht the Islands of Pituyses, and gaue the name
of Ebusa to the greater. In the end he arriued vpon the maine of Spaine, whereas Dianaes
Temple was built, the which he enriched with gifts, and did reuerence with sacrifices, for his
prosperous voyage; and for that Diana was held to be the goddesse which had care of trauellers.
Then sayling along the coast, hee came through the strait into the Ocean, and to the
Island of Erythree, where he landed his armie vpon the firme land, and stayed there some few
dayes to refresh his men; he in the meane time honouring his Temple (whose name he carried,
and did challenge his acts) busied himselfe in making of playes and sacrifices. Hearing
then that the Curetes and other Spaniards had put themselues in armes to fight with him, he
went to meet them, gaue them battaile, and did easily defeat them, repulsing them into their
forrests,Hercules defeats the Curetes. out of the which they durst not fally like enemies. This combat is supposed by the
Poets for that of the Titanes against their gods, faining, that the Herculeans were gods, and
the Curetes and Spaniards the Titanes.
After this victorie, the whole countrey was at Hercules deuotion: who imitating the auncient
Hercules of Lybia, planted pillars in the straits; the one in Europe, the other in Affricke;
enlarged the towne which was in the Island of Erythree, and left many Tyrians and Sydonians,
which had followed him, there: and it may be it then tooke the name of Gadir, or Gades,
which in the Phenician tongue signifieth a Terme, or Limit: and tearming himselfe a god,
would haue all diuine honours done vnto him. And some hold, That it was he which made
a law, to pay the tenth of the enemies spoyle, and to offer them to Hercules Temple: at the
least he did exact it being in Spaine, that he might haue part of other mens spoyles, and know
the greatest theeues. This done, he marched towards the Pyrenee mountaines, spoyling the
coast vpon the Mediterranean sea, and drawing after him a great traine of all nations, which
came at the bruit and fame of this great theefe, and the treasures of Spaine: He passed into
Gaule, and from thence into Italie, polluting all good families where he passed, as hee had
beene accustomed to doe all his life time. The cause of his suddaine departure, was the news
he heard of the great preparation which the Grecian princes made, to warre against the Trojans,
for the rape of Hellen, whither he was inuited by his friend Telamon of Salamine. Thus
was Spaine in a short time beaten, and deliuered from a great scourge. Of this Hercules the
Poets haue fained all that is written, of the conquests, prowesse, and trauels of many other
Hercules, more auncient and better men than he: he was a Grecian, but not of Greece it selfe,
but of that part of Italie which they call the great Greece, and of Tarentum, conceiued in adulterie
by Alcmena,Hercules Tarentina bastard. the wife of Amphitrion, a priuat man, and an vnknowne father, bred vp
at Thebes in Beoce, and nourished in theft, fornication, and execrable murthers: a companion
and counsellor to Iason, in the voyage of Colchis, at the spoyle of the treasures of Aeete,
and the rape of his daughter Medea: the author and executioner of the ruine and death of
Laomedon king of Troy; whose daughter Hesione, a noble and innocent virgine, he did prostitute
to his companion Telamon, bold and hardie in all bad actions: so as hee purchased the
name and reputation of a valiant captaine, and was readily followed into Spaine by men of
his owne sort, whereof there were store, and finding nothing left to steale in Asia.
As he carried away many bad persons when he went into Spaine, so he left others of diuers
nations behind him, who built cities and townes, or finding some of their countreymen

alreadie seated,Calpe. (...) planted themselues among them. Calpe, which was called Heraclea was then
built. In this passage also, Barcino, so named of fishermens Cabbins, made of oyziers, which
were first there, was enriched with a Temple, which this Hercules caused to be built to Iupiter.
Turiasso neere vnto Montcaio,Ausonia. was the Tyrians worke; Ausonia the Italians, it is now called
Vic: Ilerda, now Lerida, the Illyrians, and others of other nations, whereof Hercules army was
composed.Lerida. To Dianaes Temple (which the Zacynthians had begun before his comming) there
were (by him, or by the Zacynthians of his companie) great beames of Iuniper set; the which
were spared by Hanniball when as he ruined those places, and continued vnto the time of the
Roman Emperors. There remained many other marks of this passage long after in Spaine.
As for Gargoris, who was king, he recouered his authoritie with great difficultie, and kept it
with more paine; yet he reigned some yeares, and left the realme to his grand child, which his
daughter had by stealth; wherewith Gargoris was so much offended, as he caused this child to
be left in the fields,Crueltie of a grandfather. to be deuoured of wild beasts; the which, by the will of God, did not only
leaue him vntoucht, but did also nourish him with their vrine: whereof the old man being aduertised,
he commaunded him to be laid in the high wayes, that oxen, horses, hogs, and such
like going and comming, might tread him vnder their feet: yea, he caused him to be presented
to famished mastiues, which had bin kept hungry of purpose: but he was still preserued by the
fauor of heauen; and the brute beasts (more kind than his grandfather) turned from the infant,
and did not hurt him. In the end, this cruell man not content to put the poore child to an ordinarie
death, he caused him to be carried far into the Ocean sea; yet could not his desire succeed:
for the infant was cast by the waues vpon the sands, wheras a hynd hauing newly calued,
was so farre in loue with it, as she forgat her own fruit, and nourished the child, vntill he grew
great, and got his liuing in the woods and rocks, feeding vpon wild fruits; who in the end grew
strong, and so actiue, as he ran as swiftly as any stagge. He was often seene, and pursued by the
huntsmen of the countrey, who could not conceiue what it was; yet they layd so many ambushes,
as in the end they tooke him, and presented him vnto Gargoris their king: who hauing
carefully considered and viewed the countenance of this sauage prisoner, he was of opinion,
that it was his grand child: whereof he was the better assured by certaine marks which he had
made vpon his bodie, and caused him to be attended on as his Estate required; then dying, he
left him heire of his realme of Spaine: where he shewed himselfe wife, vertuous, and a louer
of the good of men, notwithstanding that he had bin bred vp among wild beasts in his youth.
For they say he made politicke lawes, and taught them to tyll the land; accustomed the barbarous
people to a more ciuile life, and sought the meanes to better the fruits of the earth by
manuring, remembring his hard and rough breeding in his younger yeares. Hee is called by
some Albius,Albius, Habidus, or Habis. by others Habidus, or Habis. He appointed exercises for the Spaniards, and diuided
the people into seuen townes or cantons.
8 After him there is no mention of any kings in Spaine for many ages: which giues some
occasion to conjecture, that they erected many Commonweales; or that this region lay open
to the inuasion of many strangers, which came from diuers parts; namely, after the destruction
of Troy,The Celtes passe into Spaine. which happened in the time of this Habidus; in whose life time certaine Celtes comming
out of Gaule, came into Iberia, where they had long and sharpe warre against the inhabitants
of the country, with whom they would share their lands; and in the end forced the Iberians
to receiue them, and to contract alliances with them, giuing them their daughters in mariage:
and so communicating both ayre, country, and names with them, they made of two nations
one,Celtiberia. which was called Celtiberian, and the countrey of Celtiberia; which is, all that lyes
betwixt the Pyrenee mountaines and the riuer of Ebro. Other Celtes and Gaules had passed
farther into Spaine, it may be, before the Iberians came there, and had run beyond the riuer of
Ebro, vnto the West Ocean, where they had held a part of Portugal and Betica; in which prouinces
they did also carry the names of Celtes, Celtiques, Galates, and Gallicians, and there
did build townes. Ephorus (for that the Celtes did hold all that North part of Spaine, and part
of Portugal) extended Gaule vnto the Island of Gades. Habis reigned yet, when Elna, a towne
in the countie of Rossillon, was first founded; the which some haue ignorantly written, was
named by Helene, mother to Constantine the Great, or built by her grand child Constans.
Many Grecians in those times came into Spaine, among the which (as they say) was Teucer
the sonne of Telamon, who (hauing beene chased away by his father, and after his death excluded

from the succession) landed whereas new Carthage now stands, and so passed on into
Galicia. They attribute vnto him the foundation of the towne of Salamanca;Salamanca. a name which
commeth neere vnto that of Salamina, where Teucer was borne: yet some affirme, That in
auncient time it was called Elmantica, and more properly. Diomedes also came into Spaine
with certain Aetolians, and they hold, that the towne of Tude vpon Mynio was his worke,Tude. for
that this name hath some affinitie with Tydeus, the father of Diomedes. Astur, who was coach-man
to king Memnon (no small office in those dayes) being come with the Grecians into this
Region,Asturia. gaue the name vnto the Asturians, and to the towne and riuer of Astroga. Some
maintaine,Lisbon. That Lisbon, Olyssippo or Vlyssippo, hath beene built by Vlisses, and in it a Temple
to the goddesse Pallas. Of Mnestheus of Athens (to whom there were diuine honours conferred
after his death) was named the port of Mnesthee, neere vnto Gades. Finally, infinit Grecians,
which could not or would not returne into their country, after the destruction of Troy,
came into Spaine, and erected many pettie Estates: and among them there were many other
nations, who had some strength at sea, and were expert in nauigation, but at diuers seasons,
and very vncertaine;Almerie. as the Thracians, whereof the towne of Veta, or rather that of Almerie,
giue some testimonie: for in old time it was called Abdera, as another which was in Thrace.
The Rhodians did build the town of Roses,Roses. now desart, at the foot of the Pyrenee mountains,
whereas the Consull Cato first landed, when hee came to make warre in Spaine. These men
taught the Spaniards the vse of hand-mylls, and to coyne money. The Phocians of Asia did
build Marseille,Empurias. and founded the towne of Empurias, which in like manner is now ruined. It
was in auncient time inhabited by three kinds of people, of diuers manners and languages, diuided
by wals, and liuing in continuall jealousie one of another, which were naturall Spaniards.
These Phocians, and afterwards Romans, which were added by Iulius Caesar, who hauing
reduced Spaine vnder his obedience, and chased away Pompeyes children, and their faction,
made one bodie of these three nations, and a towne well vnited. The Milesians and the Carystians
came also to inhabit there; and the Lesbians issued from the Massegetes, to whom they
attribute the foundation of Concauo,Concauo, Caslona, called Parnasia. Castulo, at this present Caslona, in old time a great
towne, and the limit of two gouernments of Spaine: vnder the Romane Empire it was called
Parnasia; which maketh some thinke, that they of Phocide in Europe were the founders, for
that Parnassus hill is in their country. Then came the Phrygians, which were extract (as some
say) of Spaine and the Aegyptians, vnder the leading of a captaine called Tarracon, of whom the
towne of Tarracone tooke the name.Tarracone. Hauing taken great spoyles along the Mediterranean
shore, he went and payed the tenths of his thefts to Hercules temple at Calis, according to the
auncient order. He had a nobleman of the country, whose name was Teron, that opposed himselfe,
but he could not hinder him from spoyling of the countrey: For in truth the Spaniards,
vntill the warres betwixt the Romanes and the Carthaginians, had no commendation to bee
good warriors, in regard of other nations. When as the Aegyptian was gone, Teron demaunded
of the Gaditanes the offerings which this theefe had made vnto their Temple, as taken away
by violence and injustice: whereunto the Gaditanes opposed themselues, and did so well
defend the rites of their god, as they slew Teron, and defeated his men in a battaile at sea.
Some Cipriots came also to dwell in Spaine, and moreouer they beleeue, that the towne of
Biana,Biana, Madrid, sometimes Mantua. in old time Alba, and of Madrid, first called Mantua, be the worke of the first Latines
and Italians.
The reason why so many nations came into Spaine, was the aboundance of mynes, and the
ignorance of the Spaniards, which made them lesse couetous, and by consequence lesse giuen
to armes, and therfore they were a prey to all these theeuish nations: whom (as all things haue
their changes and reuolutions) they haue in this last age not only imitated, but exceeded them
farre in crueltie, couetousnesse, and insolencie, to simple rude nations discouered by them, as
will appeare by the discourse of the Historie.
About 880 yeares before the Natiuitie of Iesus Christ was that memorable fire in the
Pyrenee mountaines (I speake it according vnto the Spanish Authors) the which discouered
more plainly the treasures of Spaine:A fire, from whence the name of the Pyrenee came. For the heardsmen hauing set fire of the woods (whereof
the mountaines were full) and it continuing many dayes, the veines of the earth were so
mooued with this violent heat,The treasure of Spaine casually discouered. as the siluer melting ran downe by streames: whereof pyrats
and strangers which did traffique there, being aduertised, they came running to this booty.

The Phenicians among others, vnder a kind of traffique, and with the exchange of certaine
trifles of small value, laded their ships aboue once, being conducted (as some write) by Sichee,
husband to Elisa Dido; yea, in so great abundance, as they made the anchors of their ships of
siluer; so as Sichee grew so rich, as his brother in law Pigmalion through enuie and couerousnesse
slew him: who afterward bent his course for Spaine; but running vp and down the seas,
he died: wherefore his companie wanting a head, came to Gadis, to their brethren and countrymen,
which were planted in this Island;Tyrians did first people Cali^. who entertained them courteously, and the towne
was better peopled by them: so as in the end it became a mightie Commonweale, inhabited
first without all doubt by this nation of Tyr.
9 Tyr was at that time, and long after, one of the most famous cities in the world, and
and most abounding in people and wealth; which the townes that haue taken their beginning
from her, in diuers parts of the earth, doe witnesse. And although it had in a manner no territories,
and that it was often taken and spoyled by the kings and potentates of Asia, and by Alexander
the Great, yet did they easily recouer their first happinesse, by reason of the industrie
of the inhabitants,Tyrians great seamen. and the commoditie of the sea; the which they did frequent with more experience
and knowledge than any other nation of that age. It was the mother citie of that
mightie Commonweale of Carthage, which for so long a time did contend for Emperie with
Rome; the first foundation whereof was layed by one Carchedon a Tyrian: it was afterwards
enlarged by Dido, sister to Pigmalion, about 135 yeares before the foundation of Rome, and
did encrease daily both in people and wealth. The citizens whereof some 562 yeares before
the Natiuitie of Christ, bent their course for Spaine, to spoyle as others had done, by reason
of them of Gades: who hauing gotten a great territorie in Spaine, which made them to bee
feared and honoured of their neighbours, yet not contenting themselues with their owne,
they sought to take from others:Tyrians made profit of all things. yea, being right merchants, and seeking to make their profit
of all things, they tooke away men from the neighbour townes and villages, and caried them
to sell as slaues in strange countries: a traffique which had beene alwayes vsed by the Phenicians
of Syria, their progenitors, to the prejudice of the people of Palestina and Iudea, who
bordered vpon them. These inhumane fashions did in the end stirre vp the other people of
Spaine against the Gaditanes, whereof followed much warre of small fame, by reason of the
weakenesse of the Commonweales and Potentates which did manage them, if wee will compare
them with others of those times.
Onely there is an honourable mention made of a noble man commaunding vpon the coast
of the Ocean,Arganthon. neere vnto this Island of Gadis, called Arganthon, happie in wealth and
long prosperitie of his affaires; for they say he liued 155 yeares, and reigned 80, and withall
loued justice: whose time is conferred with that of Ancus Martius, reigning in Rome about
150 yeares after the foundation thereof. The Gaditanes were kept somewhat in awe by him
and others; yet not so subdued, but they tooke armes vpon all occasions; so as the people
round about conspired against them: who finding not themselues strong ynough to oppose
against so many enemies, they resolued to call the Carthaginians to their aid; who in the end
became masters of Spaine,Carthaginians called into Spain by the Gaditanes vntill the Romanes stayed the course of their victories and conquests:
the which shall be related in the following Bookes with more delight, for that we are
better assured than of these things.
Hitherto we haue discoursed of the beginning and antiquitie of those nations which came
first to inhabit Spaine, following the obscure steps of those that haue left any thing in writing,
or read or conjectured, hauing scarce obserued any order of times, being without any sure
grounds: for euen the places, whereas euery one of the Gouernors, Captains, or Kings, wherof
we haue made mention, did reigne, is not very certaine. Yet it is most apparent, that the
Isle of Gades hath been the most famous place of all Spaine, and that the superstition of idolatrous
people hath preserued it from the inuasions and spoyles of strangers,Religion whatsoeuer it be, is ^aturally re^ere^ed. by reason of the
famous Temple of Hercules, which was built there: and that the maine land which is about
this Island, and the strait which is neere vnto it, haue beene sooner and more particularly
knowne than other places within the heart of Spaine, by reason of the commodious landing
for Armies, and the abourd of merchants strangers, which came thither by sea. And it is credible,
that within the countrey there were many pettie kings, heads of people, without fame
and it may be without any good and lawfull policie; and it is not impertinent, that some

townes, famous in after ages, and euen in our times, whose beginning is not known, haue had
their first foundations from these vnknowne people.
Wee haue willingly omitted many discourses written by others, for that wee haue held
them fabulous, or at the least very doubtfull: as the comming of Noe into Spaine, and the voyage
and conquest thereof by Nabuchodonozor, and such like, which we may read in counterfeit
Berosus, or in Iosephus, being deceiued by the memorials of the Chaldeans, who put this last
Nabuchodonozor aboue all the Hercules that euer were, to whose acts (the which in truth were
great, as we may gather by the holy Scriptures) wee doe not any way derogate, by calling in
question his comming into Spaine, for that Asia, Aegypt, and Africk, which were neere, might
furnish him wherewith to erect his trophies.
The great drought (whereof some haue left remembrance) seemeth as incredible vnto vs;A prodigious drought.
the which continued six and twentie yeares, and burnt all the trees and plants in Spaine, except
some Oliue and Pomegranet trees, as they say; as if these trees could not be hurt by
the extreame heat, as well as the rest: it dried vp all the riuers, except Ebro and Guadalquibir,
which became small vnprofitable riuers; so as the people were forced to goe out
in great troupes, to seeke for other dwellings. These things, for that they haue not beene
written by any auncient and good Authors, who would not haue passed ouer so memorable
an accident with silence, and for the absurdities which follow, they are with reason
rejected.
And for as much as in that which we are hereafter to treat of, we shall find Spaine more
manured, better peopled with men, townes, and burroughes, limitted and distinguished by
more apparent bounds, and hauing some better forme of gouernment and policie than it
hath hitherto had, we haue thought it expedient (for the Readers ease) before we enter into
the subject, to make a particular and briefe description thereof, making some mention of
the fertilitie of the soyle, qualitie of the ayre, and nature and manners of the Spaniards,
both auncient and moderne.
10 Spaine in generall,Description of Spaine. and in regard of other countries, had from the beginning naturall
limits, as they are at this day; vnlesse they will say, that the continuall beating of the
waues of the sea hath made some breaches, or hath diuided it from Africke, to the which
some beleeue it was joyned in the beginning, or that the forme hath beene changed by some
other accident. There may well be some diminution: for in Islands, the which (for that they
are little) are better comprehended and measured by the sences, we find without all question,
that some at this present are much lesse than they were in former ages, and others that haue
beene famous, are now perished, and are no more, hauing beene vndermined by the waues,
and swallowed vp in the sea. But whatsoeuer hath happened since that Spaine had any fame
vnto this day, it doth not appeare that there hath beene any great portion cut away, or that it
is much altered or changed.
This Region hath beene very fitly compared by the Auncients to an Oxes hyde spread
abroad:Spaine like to an Oxes hyde. for beginning by the necke somewhat narrow (which is the passage of the Pyrenee
mountaines, by the which it is joyned vnto Fraunce) it extendeth it selfe to the right and
to the left, going towards the West: so as making in a manner a square forme, the Promontories
or heads which thrust into the sea, on the one side vpon the coast of Biscaye, and
at Finis terrae, and on the other at Cap de Gates, and at the strait of Gibaltar, represent
the legs; then the point of Cap S. Vincent, stretcht forth behind towards the West,
makes the tayle.
That which is taken for the East part of Spaine, runs along the Pyrenee mountaines, beginning
neere vnto the towne of Bayonne, vpon the limits of Fraunce, where was nerctofore
the Promontorie Easo, and runs vnto Cap de Crux, whereas Venus Temple was in old time;
that is, from the Ocean to the Mediterranean sea, being 80 leagues, or thereabouts, taking the
way by Fraunce: for these mountaines haue no strait course, but bend much towards Spaine,
and hold a great part of that countrey: so as he that would goe from the Ocean to the Mediterranean
sea within the countrey of Spaine, on that side of the mountaines, should find it
much more than 80 leagues. Although that this coast of Spaine be called the East,The East part of Spaine. yet all this
passage of the Pyrenee mountaines turnes much towards the North, and is subject to that
wind which the Italians call Gree, and by our mariners Northeast.

From Cap de Crux, or Venus Temple, along the Mediterranean sea, and passing by the strait
into the Atlanticke Ocean, vnto the holy Promontorie, or Cap S. Vincent, is the South part
of Spaine; the which notwithstanding turning towards the East, is for the most part subject
to the wind which the Italians call Siroco,The South coast of Spaine. and we Southeast, and contains about 275 leagues;
that is, 202 leagues to Gibaltar, and 73 leagues from thence to Cap S. Vincent, the which are
distinctly measured after this manner.

From Cap Crux to Barcelone 30 Leagues
From thence to Tarracone 16 L.
From Tarracone to Valence, by the mouth of
the riuer of Ebro and Tortosa 30 L.
From Valence to Denia 17 L.
From Denia to Alicant 18 L.
From thence to Carthagena 17 L.
From Carthagena to Vera 18 Leagues
From Vera to Almerie 13 L.
From Almerie to Malaga 20 L.
From Malaga to Gibaltar 23 L.
From Gibaltar by the strait to Calis 20 L.
From Calis to the mouth of Guadiana 26 L.
From thence to Cap S. Vincent 27 L.
All which together are 275 Leagues.

The West part of Spaine is directly towards the Equinoctiall,West part of Spaine. and containes 126 leagues,
or thereabouts, along the Ocean sea, from Cap S. Vincent, vnto that which the Ancients called
Nereum, and we Finis terrae; whereof the distances are these.

From Cap S. Vincent to the mouth of Tagus or Tayo 38 Leagues
From thence to the riuer of Munda 25 L.
From Munda to Duero, a riuer, and where it fals into the sea 25 L.
From thence to Ponteuedra 19 L.
From Ponteuedra to Cap Finis terrae 18 L.

All which together make 125 Leagues, whereof there are about 100 of the jurisdiction
of Portugall.
From Cap Finis terrae vnto the Promontorie Easo, neere vnto which is Bayonne, a
frontier towne of Fraunce against Spaine,The North part of Spaine. is the North part thereof, running some seuen
score Leagues along the Ocean, sometimes called Britannicum. For

From Cap Finis terrae vnto Ninerio, or S. Marthe, they number 40 Leagues
From thence to Hianeo or Cap Stationes 30 L.
From thence to S. Ander 30 L.
From S. Ander to the last bounds of the Pyrenees 40 L.
All which makes 140 Leagues.

All the circuit then of Spaine shall be of 620 Leagues, counting foure Italian myles to a
League,The circuit of all Spaine. that is, 80 Leagues by land, and 540 by sea, sailing round about it, where it is washt
with the two seas, which makes it almost an Island.
We are not ignorant, that in old times was comprehended vnder the jurisdiction of Spaine,
on the one side the Prouince of Gaule Narbonoise, which is now called Languedocke, and
on the other side a portion of Mauritania in Africa,Prouinces out of Spaine vnder the iurisdiction thereof. beyond the strait, as well in the times of
the Romane Emperours, as of the Gothes: but for that it was an accessorie onely for a time,
and vpon extraordinarie occasions, and that it is most certaine that these people are by nature
excluded out of the limits of Spaine, and haue alwaies had diuers humors and manners
to the Spaniards, wee will containe our selues within the compasse which wee haue described
and measured, in the whole course of this Historie; and if we be forced to goe out of it, wee
will hold our selues there as strangers. Hauing turned round about Spaine, let vs now come
into the heart of it, and before we speake of the particular Prouinces, let vs see what mountaines
and riuers are famous in the whole country, the better to distinguish euery nation, both
auncient and moderne.
The Pyrenees, which haue taken their name either of the great fire, whereof mention hath
bin made (for Pyr in Greeke, is fire) or from the ordinarie lightening which fals vpon the tops
of the hils,Pyrene^s, why so called. or else (if we will receiue fables) of the nymph Pyrene, daughter to Bebrix, whom
Hercules did get with child as he passed that way, extend their greatest masse from Venus Temple,
or Cap Crux, vnto Bayonne, that is to say, from the one vnto the other sea, stretching
farre into Spaine, where they doe hold a great part of the countrey, which lyes betwixt them
and the riuer of Ebro, casting moreouer many braunches along and crosse this Region, from
whence doe fall many riuers and small streames, the which some haue numbred to be 150,

meriting the names of riuers. The front of these mountaines, which stretch vnto the Ocean
neere vnto Bayonne, bending in that part, runs along the Cantabrians, Asturians, and Gallicia,
vnto the last Westerne limits, extending it selfe far into the country, and making almost halfe
Spaine crooked and hilly, whereas the riuer of Duero doth passe, and further. These hils were
heretofore called Cantabres and Vindius, and since they took diuers names, which were giuen
them by the people which dwell thereabouts, and in the vallies thereof. At this present they
be the mountains of Biscay, Nauarre, Sentillana, the mountains of Oca, Asturia, and Gallicia.
Out of them doth flow the riuer Ebro,The spring of the riuer Ebro. in old time Iberus, neere vnto a place which they call
Fuent Ibre, and hauing run a little towards the East, she turneth her course to the South, by the
ancient country of the Autrigones,The course of Ebro. Vardules, Vascons, Ilergetes, Edetanes, and Ilercaones, the
which are in our time the Nauarrois, Arragonois, and Cattelaunians, and hauing run aboue
120 leagues through the country,The spring of the riuer Duero. it fals into the Mediterranean sea, beneath Tortose. Duero
doth also take her beginning in these mountains, a great riuer, and the auncient limit betwixt
Portugall and Tarraconese, two of the principall Prouinces of Spaine, neere vnto a Bourg
called Aquilar, not farre from Soria, bending in the beginning towards the South, but afterwards
she takes her course to the West Ocean, into the which it dischargeth it selfe neere vnto
the towne of Porto Galego, hauing run about 120 leagues by the Areuaces, and betwixt the
vallies of the Galliques and Lusitanians, which in our time are those of Castille the old, Leon
and Portugal, towards the North. Into it fals the riuer Auia,Auia. vpon the banks whereof they say
that no tree that is pricking will grow; although that all the countrey thereabouts is full of
Pomgranets, Oranges, Cytrons, and such like, the which it hath common with another riuer
in Galicia, called Aleste.
From the same Pyrenees,Mountaine of Idubeda. as from a common stemme, parts the mountain, called in old time
Idubeda or Iubalda, the which thrusts forth into two other branches, the which diuides Spain
from the East vnto the West, and passing by diuers people, gets also diuers names: for in the
beginning they call it Sierra, or mountaine of Acienca, by reason of the auncient towne of
Auca, the ruines whereof are yet to be seene, aboue the towne of Bourgos: then it is called
Sumo Sierra, Puerto de Tablada, of Palomera, of Abilo, Pico, of Tornauacas, and in the end enters
into Portugal, making a great front neere vnto the Ocean, the which they call the mount
of Strella,The mountains of Strella in Portugall, and the wonders thereof. vpon the top of which is an admirable lake: for they doe often find in it pieces of
ships which haue suffered shipwracke vpon that coast, notwithstanding that the mountaine is
very high, and a good way from the sea: and they say moreouer, that when the sea is troubled
with tempests, they doe heare the waues beat, and all that lake and mountaine make a noyse,
with the horrible sound of the winds and tempest, as if they were in full sea.
This course of the mountains running betwixt the riuers Duero and Tayo, doth now cause
a distinction of the people of the Prouinces of Spain;Distinction of Spaine within the countrey. for which reason they are called, on this
side, or beyo^d the mountains. The other branch of this mou^t Idubeda runs towards the South,
neere vnto the towns of Siguensa and Cuenca, keeping in the riuer Ebro, that it bend not towards
the West, the which in our time hath also gotten diuers names, that is, Solorio, Sierra
Molina, Sierra d'Alcarras and Sigura, in old times, Mons Argentum; and sometimes rising high,
and sometimes falling and opening in some places, it is in a manner plain neere vnto Valence:
then it riseth againe, and passeth to Carthagena, and to Cap de Palos, in former times called
Scombraria, the ancient limit of two gouernments of Spaine, at what time this mountain was
called Orospeda or Ortospeda.Orospeda. Mo. Illipula. M. Passing on by the sea shore riseth the mountaine, in old time
called Illipula, and now Sierra Vermeia, Sierra de Rondas, and other hils of the kingdome of
Granado,Calpe. M. which is Gibaltar. which extend vnto the strait whereas they make Mont Calpe, called at this time Gibaltar;
the which should properly be called Gibal Tarif, a name gotten by the discent of a captaine
Moore, called Tarif, who landed in this place with the first armie of Moores that came
out of Africke into Spaine, when as the Gothes kingdome went to ruine. Other mountaines
diuiding themselues from this, and going far from the sea, run aboue Cordoue and Seuille, the
which in old time were called Mariani Montes, and Castulonensis Saltus, now Sierra Morena.Mariani. M.
Out of these aboue named mountaines, which keepe in the riuer Ebro, bending from the
North to the South,Tayo, Tagus, Guadiana, Anas, Guadalquibir, or Betis riuers. there flowe three great flouds or riuers, Tagus, Anas, and Betis, according
to the ancients, but now called Tayo, Guadiana, and Guadalquibir, besides many others
of lesse fame, which these doe receiue and carrie into the Ocean.

Tayo hath his spring at a place which is now called Sierra Molina,The course of Tagus. neere vnto the towne
of Cuenca and Toralba, the which passing almost through two parts of Spaine, runneth by
Toledo, the country of Estrema Dura and Portugal, towards the West Ocean, where it enters
by a large and spacious channell beneath the royall citie of Lisbone. This riuer was famous
among the Auncients, by reason of the little graines, and as it were scrapings of pure gold,
which they did often find in the grauell and sand, which the torrent and streames of water had
brought from the mountaines.
Guadiana commeth out of the countrey which in old time they called Campus Laminitanus,The beginning and course of Guadiana.
and now Campo de Montiel, a place which is otherwise drie and wanting water. This riuer
directeth her course in the beginning towards the West, neere vnto the towne which was
called Pax or Pezaugusta, but now Badaios: turning there to the South, it dischargeth it selfe
into the Atlanticke sea, bounding in at this day the kingdome of Portugal on the South side,
as in old time it diuided the prouince of Betica from Lusitania. Towards the Spring they
call it Rodiera,A singularitie of Guadiana. and from thence (which is admirable) hauing run some leagues in the countrey,
it hides it selfe vnder the ground, neere vnto a place called Argamasilla, and runneth so
hidden aboue eight great leagues: then it comes forth againe into certaine moores, continuing
her course in that manner, neere vnto the auncient townes of Cecilia, Gemela, Emerita,
and Pezaugusta, towards the sea; by reason whereof the Spaniards breed admiration in strangers,
bragging, that they haue a bridge in their countrey, vpon the which aboue ten thousand
cattell feed daily.
As for Guadalquibir,Guadalquibir, the name, spring, and course. so named by the Moores, which is as much to say, as a great floud,
and in old time Betis, her beginning is vpon Mont Argent, called now Sierra d'Alcarras, and
runneth towards the West into the Atlanticke sea, beneath Seuille, by a large channell; although
in old time it had two: whereof the one passed along the wals of Nebrissa, which at
that time was Lebrissa; the which is at this day aboue two leagues off, for that the channell
is filled vp: vpon the which Asta did also stand, which in those times was also called Zeres de
la Frontera.
There are other mountaines in Spaine of lesse fame,Cayo. as Mont Cayo,Iui. neere to Tarrassone in
Arragon,The ladders of Hanniball. in old time Caunus; M. Iui or Mons Iouis, neere to Barcelone; the ladders of
Hanniball, called in that time the coast of Garaph, and others. Moreouer, there are many riuers
besides those which we haue described, giuing the names or bounds to Prouinces: as
the riuer of Ruscino, whereof the towne and countrey was named; of the ruines whereof
Perpignan was built: Astorga, which seemeth to giue the name vnto the Asturians: the riuer
of Calybs, which passeth according vnto some, neere vnto Tarrassone, and in his name
carrieth the marks of the beginning of the Spaniards, the water whereof is excellent to steepe
yron: Sicoris, or Sigro, which passeth at Lerida; about the which were the Sicanians, which
passed into Sicilie, Cinpa or Senga, and the greater and lesse Arragon; flouds whereof the
kingdome of Arragon is named, with others which are obserued by the curious. But it shall
be easie for vs, among these great mountaines and riuers which we haue described, to find
out euery people and prouince, and the particular places of Spaine, as well according to the
distinctions of the Auncient, as their limits and diuisions, since the euersion of the Romane
Empire.
Beginning then with the Westerne point, we say, That from Cape S. Vincent vnto the
Island of Gades or Calis,Turditanes. did dwell the auncient Turditanes, vpon the sea, and within the
land, holding both bankes of the riuer Anas, and the countrey which lieth betwixt it and Betis,
beyond the which they did occupie some leagues of the countrey towards the South.
This Region was in the beginning full of woods and forrests, which they called Tercenians
and Tartessians, but being cut downe, it hath beene alwaies very fertile and abounding in all
things. The towne of Hispalis, called after Sepila, and since Seuille, was of this nation, being
also called Romulensis Colonia, situated vpon the bankes of Betis, a great and nauigable riuer,
and lower towards the sea, Nebrissa, and Asta Colonia, and within the countrey Italica,
whereas the Emperours Traian, Adrian, and Theodosius were borne, with the Poet Silius, and
Carmon retaining still the name, Pax Iulia and Beia, at this present Portugall.
Neere vnto them towards the East were the Turdules,Turdules. whose countrey is also bathed
by Betis,Cordoue. and vpon this riuer is the towne of Cordoue, called Colonia Patricia, built by the

Consull M. Claud. Marcellus, about the yeare of the foundation of Rome 602. Which
countrey of the Turdules did extend to the Turditanes and the Bastules, from the Isle of
Gades, vpon the Ocean, vnto the Mediterranean sea, neere vnto the Promontorie Charidemum,
or Cap de Gates. The places which the Turdules did hold lying vpon the
Ocean shoare, towards the strait, were the port of Mnesthee, the Temple of Iuno built by
Hercules, and the citie of Belon, on which side there are at this day S. Marie, Trafalgar,
and Tariffe: and within the countrey the mountaine Ilipula, and Ilipula Magna, at this
present Ilpa; Illiberis, or Liberia, which some thinke was Granado in those times; and
Astigi, one of the judiciall seats of Spaine, which may be Eccia at this day, although
there were another of that name vpon the sea shoare. Among this nation it may well be
the Melessians were, and their towne Oringe, taken by L. Scipio, which they say was
Aryona.
After were the Bastules,Bastules, and their townes. within the straits, and along the Mediterranean sea, who were
surnamed Poeni, continuing vnto the Promontorie of Charidemum, or Cap de Gates, and
to Balaria, now Bara, or Vera, next vnto the Turdules, of which nation Calpe was, otherwise
called Heraclee,Gibaltar. the which at this day they name Gibaltar, neere vnto the which in
old time was the towne of Carteia, called also Tartesse; the which was a common name
in old time for the riuer Betis, the Island of Gades, and all the neighbour countrey. It
is likely,Algezire. that this towne of Carteia was situated whereas Algezire now standeth. Titus
Liuius setteth it without the strait, vpon the Ocean. Then Malaga, a port which retayneth
his name; and Abdera, which is Almerie, vpon the Mediterranean sea, belonging vnto
the Bastules; and it may be Munda, whereas Pompeyes eldest sonne was defeated, if it
be that Ronde which is at this day, as some will haue it. The countries inhabited by
these three nations, are at this day comprehended in Granado, Andaluzia, and a part
of Portugall, and made the Betique Prouince one of the chiefe members of the kingdome
of Spaine.
Next vnto them,Bastitans. Contestans. and continuing along the coast of the Mediterranean sea, were the Bastitanes
and Contestanes, whereas in our time lyeth Murcia and Valence, seperated by the
mountaine Orospeda. The towne of Basa was in old time the chiefe mansion of the Bastitanes,
otherwise called Basitanes, to whom Acci did belong, now called Guadix, and
vnto Beiar and Origuela, in old time called Bigerra and Orcelis. But Murcia, then called
Menlaria, Saetabis, which is Xatiua, and towards the Promontorie Scombaria, now called
Cap de Palos, new Carthage, Alone, which at this day is Alicant, Illici, it may be Elches
in our time, and the citie of Valence, were belonging vnto the Contestanes, among
the which it may be Illiturge was, lying farre from the sea, or else among the aboue named
Bastitanes.
Then followed the Editanes and Ilercaones,Editanes, and their townes. from Valence vnto the mouth of the riuer
Ebro. The townes and places renowmed among the Editanes, or, as others tearme
them, Seditanes, were Dianium vpon the sea, and Sagunt higher, destroyed by Hanniball,
whereas now Moruiedro standeth, Caesar Augusta, farre off from the sea, is Saragossa, in old
time Salduba.
Among the Ilercaones were Dertosa,Ilercaones, a people. in these times Tortosa, and old Carthage, ruined by
the two Scipios brethren.
Ioyning vnto them, and still coasting along the sea shoare, and on this side the riuer
of Ebro,Acetanians. were the Acetanians, Laetanes, Castellanes, and Indigetes, all which are comprehended
at this day in Catelogne, vpon the sea. To these Acetanians (who were also
called Cosetanians) belonged Terraco; of the which, the greatest part of Spaine
was named; a towne peopled by the two brethren Scipios, to oppose it against new
Carthage.
Barcelone growne great of a small beginning,Barcelone. by the ruines of Rubicata, a Colonie of the
Africanes, situated vpon the riuer Rubricatus,Laetanes. at this present Lobregat, was of the Laetanes
or Laletanes.
The Castellans (who,Castellans. according vnto some, haue left their name to our Catelogne) were
whereas it may be the Duchie of Cardone now is.

Vpon the declining of the Pyrenee mountaines,Indigetes. were the Indigetes, or Endigetes, whereas
the towne of Empurias or Emporium now is, and Rhoda, or Roses, now ruined, and in old
time the Temple of Venus, whereas now Coelibre stands, a name taken from Illiberis, which
was at the foot of the Pyrenees, as some suppose.
For a frontier to Spaine on that side,Ruscino Rossillon. we will place Ruscino, which is the Countie of
Rossillon, although it were in old time of the Prouince of Gaule, but it hath of long time
beene annexed vnto Spaine: there was Elna, which hath not changed her name, and Ruscino,
both riuer and towne, of whose ruines Parpignan was built. Neere vnto it is a small
riuer, called Illeris, and since Tetrum, that is to say, filthie, for that the water thereof
is blacke, by reason that it passeth among the mynes of mettall, whereof those mountaines
are full. In this countrey there was also a towne called Illiberis, as that of Grenade,
whereas the first Councell of Spaine was held: but at this day there remaineth no
marke of it.
Comming now to the holy Promontorie, or Cape S. Vincent, from whence wee are
parted, we will describe the people dwelling along the Westerne and Northerne Ocean,
vnto the other end of the Pyrenees, neere vnto Bayonne; whereof the first were called Celtiques,
who came without all doubt from Gaule,Celtiques. after that the Celtes and Iberians were
mingled together, comprehended partly vnder the Lusitanians, who held a great Continent
of the countrey, as well by the sea side, as within the land, and gaue the name vnto one of
the chiefe members of Spaine, containing the Vergons, of whom wee will make mention
hereafter.
These Celtiques and Lusitanians comprehended a great part of our Portugall,Lusitanians. of Estrema
Dura, and Castille the new, and entred as farre as Andelouzia into the Celtiques
countrey. The auncient townes which they had, and the places most renowmed, were
Vlysippo or Olysippo,Lisbone. now Lisbone, at the mouth of Tayo, the mouthes of the riuers
of Monda and Duero, and within the countrey Scalabis, or Turris Iulia, now Trugillo,
Talabriga, Talauera now, Ebura, Norba Caesarea, at this time Alcantara, Augusta
Emerita, now Merida. These two last were betwixt Tayo and Guadiana, and Norba Caesarea
was ruined by Pompeyes faction, for that they had beene two faithfull vnto Caesar: of
the ruines whereof, and the remainders of which people, Emerita was afterwards built, in
Augustus his time. There were also Euandria, Cecilia Gemellina, now called S. Marie of
Guadalupe: Aronda among the Celtique Betiques, called also Munda, not that whereas
Pompeyes eldest sonne was defeated. Beside these townes, there were vpon the marches of the
Lusitanians, Ilipa, which it may be is Niebla at this day; Oxtraca, Carmel, Ituca, and others,
whereof there remaine no markes.
Beyond the riuer of Duero were the people called Callaiques or Galliques,Callaiques or Gallegos. now Gallegos,
so named of the Gaules, Galates, or Celtes, holding a great countrey, which was
barren and hillie, for the most part, but where it joyneth vpon the Lusitanians; which is
that which is contained betwixt the riuers of Duero and Minio, belonging at this present
to the realme of Portugall; the which hath taken this name since the comming of the
Moores,Portugall whence it was so named. of the towne of Porto, right against the which, they or the Gaules pyrats built
a fort, which was called Gal: it may be it is that which is called the tower of Gaya, the
which is in this countrey, whereas Duero falleth into the sea. These people of Callaiques
were diuided into two; those which were called Brecaires, by reason of the towne of Brecar
Augusta, which was among them (the which is now Braga, Metropolitane of Portugal,)
and the Callaiques Lucenses, by reason of the towne called Lucus Augusti, now
Lugo.Brecaires. Of the Brecaires was the riuer Lemia, called Lethes, for that the Celtes inhabiting
about the riuer of Guadiana, comming with other of their neighbours into this countrey,
after some tumults, and the losse of their captaine, being vagabonds, and without
counsell, they wandered vp and downe without conduct, and without any care to returne
from whence they came, as if they had forgotten their first abode. The Brecaires and their
towne Brecar tooke their name from certaine souldiors of Affricke, which were leuied about
the riuer of Bragada, in the Prouince of Carthage, and then mingled with the Celtes, or
Gaules, were called Callaiques, or Galliques Brecaires.

Among the Lucenses were the Artabres,Artabres. about the Promontorie Nereum, which is now
Finis terrae: there were the altars of the Sunne, and Flauium Brigantium, it may be Compostella
at this day, or Betauzos, or rather Corunra, and Trileucum, a Promontorie, and Iria
Flauia, at this day S. Marie of Finis terrae, or Padron, and Aquae Calidae, now Orense.
Asturia joyned to these Callaiques,Asturians. at that time diuided into many jurisdictions: there was
Lancia the chiefe towne, taken by Augustus captaines, Legio Germanica, or Gemina, at this
time Leon, a royall towne: Bregetium, called since (according vnto some) Ouiedo, an assured
refuge for Christians, when as the Moores did ouerrun Spaine: Asturica Augusta, at
this day Astorga: Forum Egurrorum, Medina of Riosecco, and towards the sea Flauionauia,
neere vnto the which began the Cantabrians,Cantabrians. which are now the Biscanes, those of Guipuscoa,
and part of Nauarre. Their sea townes were Flauiobriga, now Bilbao, Easo, S. Sebastian,
neere Fonterabie, the furthest limit of Spaine, where as in old time was the Promontorie Olarso,
or Oeoso. Among them was the towne of Segisama, taken by Octauius Caesar. They
did comprehend the Antrigones, Caristes, Bardules, and Vascons, the which extended themselues
farre from the sea into the countrey, on this side the riuer of Ebro, and coasted the Pyrenee
mountaines. The neerest vnto Asturia were properly called Cantabrians, to whom Vellica
did belong, about the place where as now Victoria stands, the chiefe towne of the Prouince
of Alaua, Iuliobriga, at this day Logrogne. The riuer of Ebro did run through the
middest of the Autrigons.Vardules. Alba was among the Vardules, since called Viana: and to the Vascons
belonged Pompelon Martua, which is now called Pampelone Iacca, which according
to Ptolome hath held the old name: Calagorina, now called Calaorra, or Calahorra: Basconton,
of the name of Basco, or Vasco: Suessa, which may be Sanguessa, and others.
Hitherto we haue briefely described the people and prouinces of Spaine, which joyne vpon
the seas, and obserued the chiefe places thereof, applying them as neere as might bee to
these times: Let vs now enter into the countrey, beginning with the confines of the Callaiques,
Asturians, and Cantabrians, towards the North, and comming to the South.
The Vacces did joyne vnto the Gallicians Brecaires of the West,Vacces. to whom the Murboges,
Areuaces, those which were called Belli and Titthi, confining with the Celtiberians, the
Pelendones, and Berones were neighbours, approching neere vnto the riuer of Ebro, which
was to the East of them, and that of Duero vpon the South. All this compasse is comprehended
in our time within Castille the old, and the realme of Leon.
The townes of Viminacium, Auia, or Liuia, which is now Villalon, Segisama Iulia, at
this present called Tordesillas, which they call otherwise Turris Sillana; Palantia, which hath
preserued the name of Palence; Pincia, which is Vailledolit, Septimance, or Simanca; Sentica,
or Sarabris, at this day Zamora, and Cauca, where as Lucullus committed great crueltie,
and Intercatia. These townes I say were among the Vacces: But Branum, or Auca, of
whose ruines the towne of Burgos hath beene built, belonged to the Murboges.
Among the Areuaces,Areuaces. whose country is washt with the riuer Duero, running through the
middest thereof, were the townes of Clunia Colonia, Segortia Lacta, at this present Sepulueda,
Ocilis, Segobia, which keepes his name, Termantia, and the old Numance, whereas at
this day Soria stands.
Vnder the said nation were the Vergones or Vectons,Vergones and Vectons. confining vpon the Lusitanians, and
making a part of that prouince: which countrey is now comprehended betwixt the frontier
of Portugall, towards Cite Roderigo, the kingdome of Leon, Castille the new, and Toledo.
To these people Elmantica did belong, now called Salamanca, a famous Vniuersitie. On
the East side were the Carpetanians,Carpetanians. there stood Toledo, which retaines the name, called also
Serezola, Aebura, Hippo, Complutum, now called Alcala Enares, Mantua, now Madril:
and it may be among them were the Olcades, and their townes Althee.
Towards the South were the Oretanes,Oretanes. confining on the East with the Celtiberians, and
on the West with the Beturians, neighbours to the Lusitanians, which are those of Estrema
Dura. The countrey of the Oretanes makes at this day a part of the realme of Toledo; it
comprehends the fields of Calatraua, the passage called the fields of Alcocer, and part of
the mountaines Marianes, at this present Sierra Morena, vnto Iaen, and to the frontiers of
Granado. Oreton of the Germanes, which some thinke to bee Calatraua, Castulo, then a
great and mightie towne, and now a small burrough, called Caslona, vpon the riuer Guadiana,

where Himilca the wife of Hannibal was borne, issued from the race of Milicus, who built
it: Mentisa, which is Iaen, according vnto some, and Astapa, a famous retreat of desperat
theeues; Nobilia, Cusibis and Illusia, were of the Oretanes.
Among the Celtiberians were Ergauica,Celtiberians. Alce, Turiasso, (that is Tarassone) Bilbilis, at this
present Calataiub (whereas the Poet Martiall was borne) Saguntia, now Siguenza, Contrebia
and Valeria, which is Concha.
Betwixt the Celtiberians and the riuer Ebro,Lobetanes. were the Lobetanes, and on this side Ebro, vnder
the Vascons and mount Edulius, dwelt the Ilergetes, and towards the Pyrenee mountaines,
and at the foot of them,Suessetanes. Lacetanes. ^usetanes. Cerretanes. the Suessetanes, Lacetanes, Authetanes, or Ausetanes, and
Cerretanes, being all contained partly in Nauarre and Arragon, and part in Catalogne at this
present. Suessa the chiefe towne of the Suessetanes, may be Sanguessa in Nauarre: and Iacca
at that time was of the auntient Lacetanes. The towne of Ilerda, which is Lerida, gaue the
name to the Ilergetes: to them there also belonged Osca, Huesca at this day, and Bergidum,
which is Vrgel, and Anitorgis, or Athanasia.
As for the towne of Iliturgis, it is obscurely limited by the auntients. Some of the later
will haue it among the Ilergetes, others place it in the Oretanes countrey, and others in the
Betique prouinces, places farre distant one from another.
The Authetanes, or Ausetanes, did possesse Geronda, in our time Girone: and among
the Cerretanes, were Ausonia the auntient, and Iulia Libica, which some hold to
be Linca.
This is all which I haue thought fit to gather of the people inhabiting the firme land of
Spaine, the which were found there, and augmented by the Carthaginians and Romanes,
when as they contended for the possession thereof, whereof some markes appeared at
that time, and that they had immutable limits, the which doe now assure vs of their habitations.
11 There is mention made by some authors,Islands about Spaine. of many islands about Spaine, whereof
some are no more, others are yet famous. The Cassiterides, fertile in tinne, were placed by
the Cosmographers neere vnto Cap Finis terrae:Cassiterides, lost islands. but there is no more any mention of them;
whereby it seemes they haue been swallowed vp in the sea, vnlesse they will say, they be those
of the Axores, which are too far from Spaine.
The islands of the gods in the West Ocean,Islands of the gods. may be those of Bayone, neere vnto Ponteuedra
in Gallicia.
The island of Gades was in old time called Tartesse Erythrea,Calis and the antient names. or according vnto some Erythie,
Cotynusia, Aphrodisia, Gadira, Gadir, and Gaddir (although that Gaddir in the opinion
of some, is a common name to the island, and to other places of Betique Spaine, neere
vnto it, as well as Tartesse) and now they haue named it Gadiz or Galis. It hath beene the
most famous of all others about Spaine, and is yet renowned and rich, but much more in
auntient times. For although that in the Romanes time they had scarce any territorie, yet
was it one of the greatest, the richest, and best peopled townes in Europe. It appeares by
the description of Censures at one time, That there were fiue hundred heads of families, of
the order of Knights, among the inhabitants thereof. One Balbus a Gaditane enlarged the
towne almost halfe bigger than it was, and called his new worke Neapolis.
In this island there was a fountaine flowing and ebbing dayly with the sea. Ioyning vnto
it there were two other small islands, whereof the one was called Didima. They write,
That in old time the island of Gadis was much greater than it is now. It hath in length
from the South to the North, some ten or twelue miles, and is seperated from the maine land
by a narrow channell, and distant from the strait of Gibaltar some threescore miles, or fiftie
leagues.
In the Iberique,Islands Baleares Maiorca, Minorca. or Mediterranean sea, are the two islands Baleares, called in these
times Majorca, and Minorca; for that the one is bigger than the other. Their first
name was Gymnasies, for that the inhabitants thereof went all naked: Gymnos in Greeke,
is naked in our language. But for that the men of this island were good Archers, they
were called Baleares, vnlesse wee will beleeue that this name was giuen them by one
Balee, whom Hercules gaue them for their Gouernour, as some write. In those dayes
great Commonweales drew good souldiours from thence, who did commonly vse slings,

and did euer carie three; with the one he did bind his head, with another he did girt himselfe,
and the third he held in his hand: and with these armes they wrought great effects, and did
much amaze their enemies;Maiarquins expert in slings. for they were practised in it from their youth by their mothers,
who set their breakfast bread vpo^ the top of a post, the which they must beat down with their
slings, or else they fasted. These islanders were long before they would vse either gold or siluer,
remembring the great calamities which Spaine had suffered, by reason of these mettals: wherfore
they held themselues to bee well assured in forbidding the vse of it.Gold and siluer forbidden by the antient Maiorquins. They did sometimes
capitulate with the Carthaginians, who often imployed their souldiours in their warres,
that they should guie them wiues and wine for their pay, and no siluer.
These are two fertile islands, hauing this benefit moreouer, that they doe not breed any
hurtfull beast, although the warre which they had with the conies be no fable; but they were
brought from other places, and of one bucke conie and a doe, they did multiplie in such great
numbers, as with the working of their holes and burroes vnder ground, they vnrooted trees,
and vndermined the foundations of houses, so as the inhabitants sent embassadors to Rome,
to demaund helpe and succour of the Senat against these beasts (a certaine argument of their
simplicitie) but afterwards they learned to take them. The greatest of these islands is about
fifteene leagues long, and verie narrow. The lesser yeelds nothing to the other in bountie
and fruitfulnesse.Cabrera and Dragonora. Pityuses. About them are the little islands of Cabrera and Dragonera. Neerer vnto
the maine land, and more Westerly, are the two Pityuses, whereof the greater was called Ebusus,
which hath about twentie miles circuit of hard accesse, hauing a port vpon the South
side: It is now called Yuica, the which they say hath no serpents, and, if they bee brought from
any other place, they die. But the other, Ophiusa in old time, and now Fromentaria, is so full
of them, as the island hath remained desart and not inhabited. In Yuica they make excellent
salt. These islands are right against the shore betwixt Barcelone and Valence.
The islands of Sardinia and Corsica were in old time giuen by the Popes in fee to the kings
of Arragon, who haue contended by armes for the right thereof, against the Geneuois and
Pisans, for many yeares, till that in the end the Arragonois got the quiet possession of Sardinia;
of which conquest we shall speake often; wherefore wee will describe it briefly, without
making any particular mention of that of Corsica, which the Geneuois hold.
The isle of Sardinia lies in the Mediterranean sea,Description of Sardinia. hauing that of Corsica neere vnto it vpon
the North. It runs out in length from North to South, neere threescore leagues, accounting
foure miles to a league. It is held to be about an hundred and fiftie leagues in circuit: It is fiue
and thirtie leagues from Africke, the neerest place vnto it is Tunes or Bizerte. Betwixt it and
Corsica are but foure leagues, and in some places but three: in the which there are many
smal islands, which they cal Businares. This island was in old time called Ico, Ichnusa, and Sandaliotis,
for that it hath the forme of a sole, or of a mans foot. The first inhabitants were Tuscanes,
and then Grecians, led by Iolaus and Sardus, companions to Hercules. After which there
arriued some Troianes, and then Athenians. After them the Carthaginians seised vpon this
island, who were dispossest by the Romanes, which was the cause of the third warre betwixt
them.
Hauing beene long vnder that commonweale, and consequently vnder the Romane empire,
the Sarasens got footing there, against whom the Geneuois and Pisans, then mightie
commonweales, did arme, by the Popes persuasion; conquered it, and planted themselues
there. But for that it was a subject of their warre and quarels, and withall the Popes bearing
a spleene against the Pisans,Fertilitle of Sardinia. it was giuen in fee to the kings of Arragon. It was heretofore a
store-house for the Romanes, it was so fertile, and would be so still, if the people were industrious;
much better for tillage than Corsica, especially that part which lies towards Africk,
which is a plaine, and lyes lower than the other towards Corsica, which is hilly. In it there
grow vines and all sorts of fruites, as in Corsica, except oyle, by reason of the negligence of
the Sardinians: for nature bringing forth in the woods and mountaines, infinit-store of wild
oliues, shewes it is their owne fault if this plant be not made good. The island abounds in cattell
of all sorts, as it appeares by the great quantitie of hides and cheese which they transport
into Italie and other places. There are great store of wild goats, called by the countreymen
Musines, or Mu^les, which haue their haire like stagges, and their heads like rammes, but their
hornes bending backwards: they are verie light and nimble, and liue in the mountains, whereof

of the Sardinians (who are better huntsmen than the Corsicans) take three or foure thousand
at a time, the which they flea to sell their skinnes, whereof the Cordeuan leather is made,
leauing the carkasses in the fields, notwithstanding that the flesh be reasonable good to eat;
wherewith it may be the ayre is impaired,The a^re in Sardinia corrupted by nature and by accident. the which doth naturally infect that countrey, by
reason of certaine South windes which blow in Summer. The horses of Sardinia are hot,
strong headed, and hard to be broken, but they last long; and there are many wild. Among
their tame cattell there are certaine small bullockes, which amble naturally, which the countrey
men vse like Asses and Mules, to goe from one place to another. Heretofore there
haue beene mynes of sulpher or brimstone,Mynes. alume, siluer, and salt; and it is but the negligence
of the people, that they are not found at this day, and with good profit. Neither
doth it want bathes which are good for many infirmities,Bathes. especially betwixt Montreal and
Saint Iohn. In Sardinia (as some maintaine) there are no wolues, nor any venimous nor
hurtfull beasts, the which they haue common with many other islands: yet they haue verie
great foxes, fierce and cruell, which easily kill a sheepe or a goat. There growes the hearbe
Sardonique, which causeth death, with such a contraction of the sinewes, as they seeme to
smile when they are dead.
This island hath in former times beene better inhabited than it is at this day, and they
haue beene more warlike than now they are. When as the Geneuois and Pisans did hold
it, they distinguisht it into two prouinces, that of Cap Caillery which lookes towards Africke,
the which was the Pisans part, and the greater; and Cap of Lugodori, joyning vpon
Corsica, which the Geneuois held for them. Then the Sardinians had their rulers and Gouernours,
whom they call Iudges,Iudges is foure ^urisdictions. diuided into foure jurisdictions or prouinces; one at Caillery,
another at Arborea, since called Oristagny; one at Turrita, or Torre, and the fourth
at Galluri. This kind of gouernement was entertained vntill the conquest of the island by
the Arragonis, and the Spaniards rule. At this day there is a Viceroy resident at Caillery,
with absolute authoritie, who of necessitie must bee a Spaniard, and is assisted by a
Councell, or royall audience, consisting of a President, and a certaine number of Counsellours.
The two prouinces aboue mentioned, into the which the islands is diuided, haue
either of them a Gouernour, who is a Spaniard, or of the island indifferently, which doe
gouerne and haue authoritie in the absence of the Viceroy, but hee beeing present, it
ceaseth.
The townes and chiefe places of this island,Chiefe townes in Sardinia. bee Caillery, commonly called Calger, a
towne seated vpon the side of a hill towards Africke, hauing a goodly port, haunted by
merchants and saylers from all parts: it is well built, and enriched with diuers towers, and a
stately temple, built by the Pisans, and an Archbishops seat. This citie hath by priuiledge a
jurisdiction apart, besides the Viceroyes authoritie, and is gouerned by the citizens themselues.
Next is Oristagny, in old time called Arborea, the which is also a bishopricke, and
was sometimes a marquisate with a particular lord: but one of them rebelling, the kings of
Arragon haue vnited it vnto their demaines. There is a port also towards the West. Arghero,
or Alguero, followes on the same West part, the which hath no port, but onely a
road. Bossa vpon the Sea, the tower in old time was called Libisson, a Colonie of the Romanes,
and afterwards called Torre, or Turrite, the which is now ruined. Sassari, ten or
twelue miles from the sea, where there is an auntient conduit of water, the which continues
about twelue miles, vnto Saint Gauins temple. Then castle Arragonois towards
Corsica.
There are many other burroughes and castles in the island, of small fame. The ruines of
old buildings which are to bee seene in many parts of the island, shew that in auntient
time there were many cities and great buildings. In places not inhabited there yet are many
towers to bee seene of a round forme, built of a verie hard stone, hauing the doores and
entries narrow, and the stayres in the maine walls. Those buildings are called by the inhabitants
Noracs, a marke of great antiquitie, some thinking that Norac sonne to Erithree
did first inhabit this island, by whom the buildings were so called. The islands which are
about Corsica and Sardinia, are few, and of no fame. Asinara and Tolaro, are towards
Cap Logudori, the one of the East side, the other of the West, the rest are rather shelfes
than islands.

The Sardinians had in old time a proper language, but the often change of their lords,The Sardinians language. and
the accesse of diuers nations, hath corrupted their speech: The most ciuile at this day speake
Spanish Cattelan: the vulgar sort haue a language mixt of the Cattelans, Italians, Moors,
and other strange and barbarous words. Among the ruder sort, there is not in a manner any
religion, and not much in townes; for in all Christendome you shall not find Churchmen
more ignorant than in Sardinia. Their religious exercises are to heare masse on Sundayes,
and on some Saints daies, and then they feast and daunce euen in their Churches, men
and women together, with immodest songs and jestures.
In townes their apparell is verie stately,Their habit. especially of the women; but the countrey
peoples is simple and grosse. The men are of a small stature, but strong and rough, and
great huntsmen with crossebowes: quiet and peaceable among themselues, and courteous
to strangers.
Spaine,Diuisien of Spaine according to the auntients. as wee haue described it by the prouinces and particular people, was diuided
into three principall members, or three great prouinces; that is, Betica, Lusitania and
Tarraconoise. Betica was so named of the riuer Betis, that is, Guadalquiber, which passeth
through the middest of it. It did containe that which is inclosed by the riuer Anas, or
Guadiana, on the one side, and by the Ocean sea, from the mouth thereof stretching towards
the strait,The confines of Betique. and then running along the coast of the Mediterranean sea vnto Carthagena,
or the Promontorie Charidemum, called Cap de Gates: From whence going by
land to Castulo, or Caslona the old, it was bounded in on that side by the mountaine Idubeda,
which is at this day called Sierra of Alcarras, and others, as if they would draw a
direct line from Muxacra, which is neere vnto Cap de Gates, vnto Almagra. This prouince
was the best and most fertile of Spaine, and the first affected and vsurped by the Phenicians,
Africanes, and other strangers.
From the riuer Anas,Iusitania and the confines. or Guadiana, and his entrie into the sea, mounting to the place
whereas Duero falls into it, was the West part of Lufitania, the second member of Spaine,
the which did lye betwixt those two riuers, on the North and South sides, and within it
had for the Easterne limits, the Carpetanes and Oretanes, going from Castulo, or Caslona,
vpon Guadiana, vnto Septimanca, at this present Simanca, in Castille. The riuer
Tayo passeth through the middest of this region, where in some places there are store
of all sorts of fruits.
All the rest of Spaine,Tarraconoise and the limits. from the mouth of Duero along the shore vnto Fonterabie, or
Easo, and from the Promontorie Charidemum, or Cap de Gates, or else Bara, or Vera, or
Muxacra on the Mediterranean sea, vnto Venus Temple, or Cap de Crux, and all the
people which are betwixt the Pyrenees and the limits which wee haue giuen to the prouinces
of Betica and Lusitania, made the third member of Spaine: yet if wee shall beleeue Mela,
the Calaiques,Gallicia the fourth member. that is, the inhabitants of Gallicia, were comprehended among the Lusitanians;
and that others haue made a fourth prouince of them during the emperours: accounting
also the Carthagenoise for a fift,Carthagena the fift. and adding the sixt in Africke: for as much as all that
which the Romane Emperours did possesse beyond the strait in Mauritania, was subject to the
justice of Spaine.Mautitanta the sixt member. But this tripartite diuision of Spaine, is the most auntient, and is not
entertained by the Romanes, during their great exploits of armes, and conquests thereof;
especially for the gouernement of justice among those nations, hauing wholly subdued
them: for they erected Courts, which they called Conuents, appointing to euerie prouince
his jurisdiction. In Betica there were foure established, at Gades, Corduba, Astigi,
and Seuille. In Lusitania three, at Emerita, Pax, or Pezaugusta, and at Scalabita, or S. Iren.
And in Tarraconoise seuen, at Carthagena, Tarracone, Caesar Augusta, Clunia, Astorga, at
Lugo, and at Bracar.
12 As for the diuision of Spaine into the hither and further,Another diuision of Spaine in regard of the war. that happened in the beginning
when as the Romans came to make war against the Carthaginians, who held it in a maner
all, or at the least had reduced it vnder their obedience. The riuer of Ebro made this seperation,
and the Romans called that part of Spaine where they first entred, the hither part, and
the other beyond Ebro, the further: for they came first by sea vpon the coast of Cattelogne, to
Roses, to Empurias, or to Turracon, notwithstanding after they had enlarged their command
on the other side Ebro, they did also extend the limits of Spain by little and little on that side, so

as in the end it was bounded by the Promontorie of Scombraria, or Cap de Palos, neere to
Carthagena, and the descent of the mountaine Idubeda, and so through Castille, by the
townes of Cuenca and Seguenza,Spaine reduced to one gouernment. vnto the Cantabres, or Biscanes. And this distinction continued
in two principall gouernments, for matters of warre and state, till Augustus Caesar, the
Romanes sending sometimes Consuls, sometimes Proconsuls, or Pretors, euerie one to gouerne
in his jurisdiction. Afterwards Augustus reduced Spaine into one prouince, the which
was entertained by his successours in the empire, at the least vnto Constantine the Great, who
changed the Courts of justice into another forme,Fiue seats of iustice estaclished in Spaine by Constantine the Great. making fiue chiefe towns, and as many prouinces,
that is, Tarracone, Carthagene, Seuille, Merida, and Bracar; the which was afterwards
entertained by the Gothes, vpon the declining of the empire, who notwithstanding made it
but one kingdome while they enjoyed it.
13 But after that the power of the Arabian Mahometists,Many kingdoms erected in Spain by the Arabians and Christians. who had subdued the empire of
the Persians, and extinguished the name of other Potentates in the East, had extended it selfe
vnto the farthest bounds of Africke, and into the prouinces of Europe, which lay neere vnto
it; Spain which was not without vices and defects in the chief members therof, being suddenly
inuaded and ouerrun by this nation, being euer an enemie to peace and good gouernment,
was dismembred, and diuided again into diuers principalities, the names wherof we retaine vnto
this day; that is. Ouiedo and Leon, Nauarre, Arragon, Cattelogne, Valence, Murcia, Granado,
Tolledo, Castillia, Gallicia, and Portugal, which for the most part had distinct titles of
kingdomes, some being held by the Moores, and others defended by the Gothes and them of
the countrey. Of euerie of which kingdomes we meane to make mention in this historie, and
to continue it, with the helpe of God, vntill that all Spaine was reduced vnder the command
of one king, although it hold still the former diuisions, and their limits, as they were set downe
in the time of the Arabians and Moores.
For Cattelogne,Cattelogne and his limits. which comprehends the auntient Indigetes, Castellans, Leetanes, and
Acetanes, runnes along the Mediterranean shore, from Cap de Crux, vnto Alfaques, to the
mountaine of Moncia, and S. Peters fountaine, where there is a little brooke called Cinia,
which makes the limits.
Hauing past this riuer, the Bourg of Vimero is the beginning of Valence, which holds on
to Alicante,Valence. and in this realme in old time were comprehended the Edetanes, Ilercaones, and
Contestanes.
Then they enter vpon the borders of Murcia and Carthagene,Murcia and Carthagena. which extend as farre as
Almerie, by the Contestanes, Bastitanes, and some part of the Bastules.
From Gibaltar to the mouth of Guadiana,Andelusia. are the bankes of Andelouzia, which some say
was so called, for that it is before Lusitania, as if they would say, Ante^Lusitania. Others deriue
the name from the Vandales, which haue held it, and cal it Vandalusia: There did the Turditanes,
and a part of the Celtique people dwell.
After which they enter into Portugall,Portugal. which runs on vnto the riuer Minio, where it fals into
the sea, the auntient limits of the Lusitanians, and of the Gallique Brecaires. This realme
according to the suruey which king Sebastian caused to bee made in our time, containes 260
leagues in circuit, whereof there is an hundred and twentie towards the sea, and an hundred
and fortie to the land.
Gallicia follows from Minio,Gallicia. Bagone, and Ponteuedra, vnto Ribadeo; they were in old time
the Lucenses.
Then they come to the Asturians of Ouiedo;Asturie and Ouiedo. from Castropol to Llames, from Llames
to Castro Deordiales, are the bankes of the Asturians of Sentillana. These people alone haue
retained their auntient name. After which followes the coast of Biscaie, where is Portugalette
and Bilbao, and stretcheth vnto Ondarroa. Then they come to Guipuscoa at Montrico,
which ends at Fontarabie. These were antient Cantabrians, and part Autrigones, Caristians,
Vardules, and Vascons vpon the sea.
Nauarre lyes for the most part vpon the sides and vallies of the Pyrenes,Nauarre. which enter into
the countrey of Spaine by Romseual, by the valley of Salesar, and the valley Roncal, vnto
Hisana, which is the limit of Arragon, and passeth vnto Logrogno, where it confines with
Castillia the old. It was the countrey of the Vascons, Vardules, Caristians, and other their
neighbours.

Arragon of a small beginning hath imbraced part of the Vascons and Ilergetes,Arragon. on this side
Ebro, and on the other side a part of the Celtiberians country. And it was determined in the
time of king Iaques the first, from the riuer Cinga at Farisa, and of S. Christine, to the top of
the Pyrenees at Aluentosa.
Leon was in old time part of Asturia.Leon.
Castillia the old and new,Castillia. comprehended all the middle countries of Spaine, betwixt the
nations aboue named.
As for the passage of the Pyrenees, if these hills went in a direct line, the passage would bee
short betwixt the two seas, for they say, that both the one and the other may be easily seene in
a cleere day from the tops of some of them, yea from that of S. Adrian.
Spaine is then both in generall and in particular, as we haue described it: and if we consider
well the situation of this region,Spaine rampared vp by nature we may rightly say, that it is rampared and defended by
nature against all the attempts and enterprises of strangers, as much as any countrey in the
world, being compassed in with the daungerous gulfes of the two seas, and walled vp behind
with the hard passages of the Pyrenee mountaines: being moreouer of a temperat and wholesome
ayre,Spaine a temporat ayre. and hauing a soyle fit to nourish all things. For there are neither violent winds, nor
thicke foggie vapours, nor any insupportable heat of the Sunne: but the aire is sweet
and calme, being continually refresht with the North and Westerne winds which come
from the sea.
14 Of the fertilitie of Spaine,Fertilitie of Spaine. and the great diuersitie of good things which it produceth,
the auntients haue left vs ample and true testimonies, whereof the most autentique are,
That the Romanes hauing made warre in the heart thereof, both against the Carthaginians
and them of the countrey for aboue two hundred yeares, it did in a manner continually feed
these great armies on either side, with that which it did bring forth, and did not onely supplie
them with victuals, but also with treasure to entertaine their souldiours, and to satisfie the
greedie desire and couetousnesse of their commaunders and captaines; and moreouer hath
filled their treasuries full of spoiles both at Rome and Carthage, as shall appeare by the
particularities in the progresse of the Historie.
It was Spaine which gaue courage to the Carthaginians to attempt those high enterprises
which wee read of them, and did furnish them with meanes to entertaine so many mercinarie
souldiours, wherewith for so many yeares they did trouble and annoy the Romane empire,
and other nations, without cost or daunger to their owne citizens, who in all these wars
did hunt after nothing but honour and profit, to the prejudice of Spaine, and with the bloud
of other people.
Wee haue before made some mention how rich it was in mynes of gold,Riches of Spaine. siluer, and all
other kinds of mettall: let vs now say boldly, that nature had heapt vp mountaines of treasure
there, and that the auntients did rightly say in tearmes befitting their Idolatrie, That
Pluto dwelt vnder the couering of this earth: the which was the cause of infinit calamities
to the Spaniards. For these greedie robbers came from all parts, being drawne thither
with the desire of gaine: so as the best aduised were forced to forbid the vse of gold and siluer
among them by an expresse law. Among others the Betique prouince, which now
hath the name of Andalusia, Granado, and thereabouts, was exceeding rich of mines
of gold and siluer, and yet the soyle was verie fertile in fruits, the which seemes to bee against
naturall reason.
When as the Carthaginians came first into Spaine, vnder the conduct of Amilcar
Barca, they found among the Turditanes, the verie mangers for their horses, and hoggesheads,
made of pure siluer. Then they began to digge new mynes, and did cruelly toyle the
people in those workes;Bebelo a rich myne. and it is said, that out of one onely myne or pit called Bebelo, of
his name that found it neere vnto the frontier of Aquitaine, Hannibal did draw aboue three
thousand crownes profit euerie day.Rich mynes neere vnto Carthagena. The Romanes discouered others neere vnto Carthagena,
where they had foure hundred daily at worke, and did receiue euerie day fiue and twentie
thousand Drachmes, amounting in a manner to two thousand and fiue hundred French
crownes. Yea the plough-men many times in their tillage, raised vp with their ploughshares
crusts of gold: and many times vpon the sands the fisher-men did find great store of

graines of this mettall, verie pure, which had beene brought from the mountaines with the
flouds: yea if they carried water into a drie ground, and watered the earth, the gold would
presently shine: so as there were more found in Spaine gathering vp of gold, than in digging
it out of their mynes and pits.Copper, Irun, and Tinne. There was as great aboundance of copper, yron, tinne, and
all other sorts of mynes, and exceeding good.
Their large and spacious plaines and mountaines did feed infinit troupes of all sorts of cattell:
the forests were full of red deere, wild boares, and other wild beasts, and all sorts of
foule. They say, that in South Spaine there was oftentimes such aboundance of conies,
as they were a great ruine vnto their fruits,Caules spoyled their fruits. spoyling the roots vnder the ground, with
their working, so as they were much annoyed with them, being ignorant by what meanes
to take them, vntill they were taught to vse ferrets, the which were brought them out of
Africke.
If the land did so abound in all things,The sea fruitful what shall wee thinke of the sea? The shore (saith
Strabo) is full of oysters, and of all other shell-fish: yea in the Ocean, whereas all things
exceed in greatnesse and multitude those which are in the other sea, by reason of the flowing
and ebbing thereof. There are to be seene huge Whales, Grampasses, and other such
monsters of the sea, which spout out water, the which seemes a farre off, to bee great pillars
or towers of cloudes. How much shall we say that the Congres and Mullets of that Ocean
doe exceed ours? About Carteia the Pourcelaines are of ten pounds weight, but without
the strait the smaller Mullets and Congres weigh commonly fourescore pounds, the Poulpe
or many feet, threescore, the fish called the Cuttle, are two cubits long: the Thon comes thither
in great aboundance, delighting in the acornes which fall into the sea, from a certaine
kind of small oake which growes along the shore, yeelding such aboundance of this fruit, as
being afterwards cast vp by the waues of the sea, the bankes both within and without the
straits, are exceeding full, but especially the Ocean, wherewith this fish (which is verie
common in that sea) is much delighted, and growes verie fat with it. Many other commendations
are giuen by the auntients to Spaine, whereof they might well judge, that neuer
went out of Italie, by the number of great shipping laden with merchandise and prouision
of victualls, which came daily out of that countrey, to the ports of Ostia, Puzzol, and
others of Italie, wherein Strabo, Plinie, Mela, and other authors, may satisfie the curious. So as
it hath not beene impertinent, if the Poets haue placed the delightful Elisian fields in this part
of the world.
Wee cannot with reason doubt of that which they haue written: for although that the
mountaines of Gallicia, Asturia, Biscaie, Nauarre, and Arragon, which containe a great
countrey, seeme rather to bewray a defect than any great aboundance of fruits; and that
in Castille, and part of Portugall, the drought is not fit to bring forth corne: yet considering
Spaine in generall, and the whole circuit, wee shall find daily by experience, that it is
rich and plentifull of all those things, wherewith it was in old times furnished. For if at that
time they did feed whole armies,Spaine fertile as this day. so doe they at this day great and well peopled cities and
townes, better frequented and inhabited than in those times.
As for rich mettals, we must confesse, that it yeelds now to antiquitie, and no wonder, for
how could the earth supplie the greedie couetousnesse of men, who haue not ceased for many
yeares, and with great toyle to digge into the bowels of the earth? Wee see at this
day the pits and caues, out of the which the Romanes drew their siluer, neere vnto Carthagena,
with great heapes of drosse like vnto mountaines. But yet this countrey is not
so bare and wasted, but that they haue found in our age, at Guadalcanal, a myne as
rich as any at the Indies, which our elders doe witnesse: and there is no doubt, but that gold,
siluer, and copper, are to be found in other places.
Biscaye and Guepuscoa alone can furnish yron and steele ynough for a world,Iron and steels abounds there. and
with workes which are made of this mettall, namely with Armes, beeing the verie storehouse
of Spaine. Vittiol, Brimstone, Alum, Orpigment; minerall salt, and such other
things, are found in Spaine, both for their owne vse and their neighbours. What wanteth
it of the fertilitie and diuersitie of all sorts of good fruits in a good part of Portugall,
Andalusia, and almost all alongst the Mediterranean sea? But who can condemne

euen the montaines of this region, of barrennesse, which beare so good wines, and so many
sorts of fruits?
To conclude, Fraunce, England, and Flanders, are familiar-witnesses of the fruitfulnesse
and delights of Spaine: and if they will not serue, wee will appeale to Asia it selfe.
Their raisins, oliues, figges, oranges, limons, dates, cytrons, pomegranets, sugar, saffron,
and such things, are dispersed into all countries, and are better, and more sauorie
than in any other place.
In what place of the world doe you find mote sorts of good hearbs,Gardens of Valexia. or more pleasant
gardens, than in the prouince of Valence? From thence wee haue the best silkes in the
world, cotton of Murcia, scarlet, crimson, and other precious colours, with sweet and
pleasant perfumes. Finally, all the sences of man are wonderfully pleased with that which
comes from thence, and growes in that happie region.
And as for the hilly countrey, which they hold to be barren, and the plaines to be drie, euerie
one knowes what commoditie those places doe yeeld: and wee find it by experience in
Spaine. There they feed infinit troupes of sheepe, whose wooll is admired throughout
the world: and yeeld vs also infinit store of Spanish leather, necessarie for many vses, and
verie profitable for their neighbours.
They haue timber to serue them as well for the building of houses, as for shipping,
whereof they haue great store. And who can denie, that in Nauarre, Asturia, and Gallicia,
there are goodly and fruitfull vallies?Fertilitie of the country betwixt Duero and Mimo. Can wee desire a countrey more abounding
in all good things, than that which is betwixt the riuers of Duero and Minio, at this
time belonging vnto the Realme of Portugall? the which being scarce a day and a halfs
journey in length, and much lesse in breadth, hath an Archbishopricke, which is that
of Braga, Porto Gallego, a bishopricke, and containes in it aboue one thousand and
foure hundred parishes, fiue hundred Colledges of Canons, and one hundred and thirtie.
Conuents: it hath six ports of the sea, aboue two hundred bridges of stone, and two
thousand and fiue hundred fountaines.
But who doth not admire the Genets of Spaine,The horses of Spaine. which I had almost forgotten, their
beautie, swiftnesse, and easinesse to breake, especially of those of Andalusia, which drinke
of the water of Guadalquibir, whereby, according to the Spaniards opinion, they are
made more nimble and swift? Of this race was the horse which Iulius Caesar esteemed so
much, as when hee was dead, hee caused his image to be set vp in Venus Temple at Rome.
Of them and of the Lusitanians their neighbours,Mares conce^uing by the wind. the auntients would make vs beleeue,
that they were conceiued by the winds which the mares did receiue when they were desirous
of the horse, blowing from the West, namely from the places where the horses feed;
the which some thinke not impossible. Of all these things no man that hath any knowledge
of the world can doubt.
And if any one would object, That Spaine cannot bee so fertile as wee make it, for that
they are supplied with corne from Fraunce, England, Sicile, and Germanie: and that they
carrie great store of linnen cloth, and other merchandise, out of Brittaine, Normandie,
Flanders, Holland, and elsewhere, without the which the Spaniards must of necessitie
perish: Let him consider the great regions discouered by the Spaniards, within these hundred
and twentie yeares: what great fleets Spaine hath continually entertained, rigged,
and victualed, as well for the East as Westerne voiages; and what need they haue to furnish
those countries whith such things as they borrow, whereof without doubt they should haue
sufficient for themselues, but not to furnish a new world: the which doth also wast their
men daily to people these discouered countries:The nature of the Spaniards. And withall let him adde the haughtie and
couetous disposition of the Spanish nation, who doe willingly leaue their labour, to goe
vnto the mynes, or to goe to the warres, and neuer follow any worke, but when they are
forced by necessities.
15 Hauing hitherto discoursed of the situation and fertilitie of Spaine,The manners of the Spaniards. let vs speake
something of the manners and kind of life, which the Spaniards haue from time to time
obserued; that being entred into our discourse, wee may not bee interrupted therewith.
When as the Carthaginians came into Spaine, and long after the Romanes had got some

footing, there were few walled townes in the countrey, but many great burroughes and villages.
The most ciuile were they of the Betique prouince, and the worst souldiours of them
all, giuing themselues to trade of merchandise by sea, and somewhat to letters, and in a maner
like vnto those that liue vpon the coast of the Mediterranean sea. But as for the rest, they
were all rustick and barbarous,The qualities of the mountaine Spaniards. namely the Mountainers, and aboue all the Gallicians, Asturians,
and Cantabrians, whose ordinarie trade was to rob and steale, contemning labour, vntill
that the Romanes taught them to liue more ciuilly and peaceably, ruining their forts and
retreats. They were traitors, spies, and readie vpon all occasions to steale. They carried targuets
two foot long, and a dagger at their sides, clothed in a doublet of linnen cloth stifned and
quilted:Armes of the antient Spaniards. and these were their armes. For there were no cuirasses nor head-peeces among
them, but on their heads they carried high hats made of sinewes, and on their legges boots
of haire, and in their hands many darts: some of them carried jauelins whereof the heads
were of copper. They wore long haire like women. Their exercises were fencing and running
both on foot and horsebacke, and their combates by troupes: They loued libertie aboue
all things,Libertie deere to the Spaniards. which made the Romanes to see many examples of crueltie, euen in the weakest
sex: for there were many mothers among the Cantabrians, which slue their own children, many
daughters who for the like cause murthered their parents: so deere libertie was vnto this
nation; to maintaine the which, and fearing they might be forced in any thing, they did vsually
carrie poyson about them: and if they were surprised and made slaues, they sought by some
notable villanie to giue their masters occasion to kill them. It was often seene, that when
they were tyed to the crosse to be executed, they did sing for joy of their approaching death:
but some haue shewed this resolution vpon good and commendable occasions, as to conceal
the secrets of their masters and friends, or after they had reuenged their death, or the wrong
which had beene done them.
Their religion was infamous,The Spaniards religion infamous. for they sacrificed humane creatures vnto their gods, euen
their prisoners, cutting off their right hands, to offer them vp: Their Priests and Diuines
tooke their conjectures from the intrals both of men and beasts; but aboue all they tooke
their diuination from their countenances, when as they receiued the deadly blow, and fell to
the ground.
As for their manner of liuing,The Spaniards liuing simple and rude. it was simple and rude: they dranke water, lay vpon
the ground, and did eat the flesh of goats which they did sacrifice vnto Mars: they made
cakes of dried acornes, the which they did eat warme. They did willingly banquet with their
parents, and had tables and seats of stone, against the wall, where they did appoint the most
honourable places according to their ages and dignities. They had no vse of siluer coined,
but did exchange ware for ware. They had a beastly and filthie manner of washing and perfuming
themselues, with vrine which had stood long stinking, with the which both men and
women did rub their bodies and faces, yea euen their teeth, imagining that it was a preseruatiue
against many infirmities; the which is not disallowed by the Physitians. This filthie
obseruation was common then in Spaine among them all.
They did seuerely punish malefactors,Their manner of iustice. and especially parricides, whom they did stone
without their confines. If any one were sicke, they carried him into the highwayes, and corners
of the streets, after the manner of the Aegyptians, to take counsell and helpe of such as
had beene troubled with the like diseases.Their manner of beats. Vntill the time of the Romane emperours, they
had vsed boats made of beasts skins; afterwards they began to make them of wood, taking the
bodies of great trees, and making them hollow like vnto troughes.
In this simplicitie and rudenesse did the auntient Spaniards of the mountaines liue,
which were those of Gallicia, Asturia, and Cantabria, and the inhabitans of the Pyrenees,
whose countrey was full of wood and water,Pouertie assures the peoples libertie. but otherwise verie barren, by reason whereof
they enjoyed their libertie long, and were last of all subdued by the Romanes; so as in the
time of the emperour Tiberius Nero, there was yet some contention. The Iberians, and Celtiberians
were somewhat more ciuile, for that they had more commerce with strangers, and
were neere unto the Mediterranean sea, which was more frequented than the Ocean. In the
war they carried round targuets,The discipline of the Celtiberians. fortified with sinewes, short swords, darts, and slings: in their
battails they did mingle some light horsemen with their footmen: they did accustome their

horses to hills and vallies, and by that meanes kept them in breath, and made them swift, yea
they did teach them to kneele when they made a certaine signe. They attired themselues of
blacke wooll and short.Preparation for yron. They prepared yron to forge their armes and harneis, driuing it out
into plates, the which they buried in the ground for certaine dayes, vntill the rust had eaten away
that which was vnprofitable, and then they made their swords and other cutting weapons.
They did commonly carie two swords, and did fight more willingly on foot than on horsebacke:
for when as they found themselues to haue any aduantage vpon the enemie, they left
their horses, to joyne with their footmen, pursuing them that fled with great agilitie, the
which was naturall to all Spaniards. They were reasonably courteous to strangers; but they
did punish them that had done them any wrong verie cruelly. They did liue of flesh and fruits,
and did drinke water with honie, whereof their countrey did abound; and sometimes they
had wine, which they bought from strangers comming from the neighbour coasts. Their
neighbours with whom they had the greatest amitie and commerce, were the Vaccees, and
Areuaces, at that time a part of Castillia the old: they agreed well with them in all sorts of
traffique. Euerie yeare they made a diuision of their lands, and assigned them by portions
and lots to certaine particular persons, who did till and sow for the rest, whilest that others
were imployed in the warres, or about some other affaires: then they diuided the fruits which
they gathered. And if any one were conuicted, that he had embesiled any thing, he was punished
with death. In time of peace they did banquet and daunce, leaping and frisking with
great agilitie: and they went to the warre according to the measure of instruments, singing
rusticke and militarie songs.
Such in a manner were the Lusitanians, with whom the Celtes were mingled, and seated in
their countrey, leading their liues for the most part as theeues, which they learned from them
of Gallicia and Asturia,Manners of the Spaniards in generall. their neighbours. Generally all the most barbarous Spaniards were
nimble and actiue, so as they could easily escape from their enemies, or pursue them when they
had the better; neither were their spirits lesse actiue than their bodies: great vndertakers: of
few words: patient and hardie in trauell, enduring hunger, thirst, and other discommodities.
Their women were nothing daintie,The women halfe men. but did exercise themselues like vnto the men: and if they
were deliuered of child, they lay not long, but fell soone to their worke: they washt their children
as soone as they were borne in the neerest brooke, and then they wrapt them vp in
their swathing clothes. But after that the Romans were entred, and somewhat setled in Spain,
these people were forced by little and little to learne another discipline, and to frame themselues
to a more ciuile kind of life, being gouerned by more politike lawes, they of Betica and
the Turditanes exceeding the rest alwaies in mildnesse and humanitie:The tractablenesse of the Spaniards of Andelousia. for these were presently
changed to the Romans manners and discipline, forgetting their owne language, to imbrace
the other. Many townes were also built and peopled in diuers parts of Spaine, and the
Romans and Latines mixt with the Originaries of the countrey, who accustomed themselues
so well to the Latine tongue,The Spanish tongue a corrupted latine. as it since continued in Spaine: for the Castillian tongue at this
day is nothing in a maner but a corrupted Latine. And the Spaniards grew such, as many among
them did make their fame equall with the most esteemed among the Romans: the two
Senecas were Spaniards,Great personages Spaniards. with Silius, Martial, Lucan, Pomponius Mela, Portius Latro the Orator,
Quintillian, Columella, and the good emperors Traian and Theodosius, were Spaniards.
The Romans by the experience which they had, and the more to augment their owne glorie,
giue great titles of honor and commendation to this nation, whom they found somewhat
instructed in armes, and some discipline, by the Carthaginians. They call it rich in souldiours,
and a seminary of the enemies armies, which had fashioned that great captain Hannibal; and in
all they speak highly of Spaine, and not without reason: for the great courage and resolution of
them of Numantia, was memorable, a towne without walls, without towers, and without defences,
seated only vpon a little hill,The magnan^mitie of the N^mantin^s. and couered on the one side with a riuer, and defended by
a few souldiours, who notwithstanding withstood the force of mightie Roman armies for the
space of 14 yeres, and not only made head against them, but also repulst them ofte^ to their great
losse. In the end being besieged by aboue 40000 men, or, as some say, 60000, being prest by famine,
and forced to demaund a peace, finding no grace with their enemies, who had compast
them in with forts and trenches, being resolued vpon the last refuge, which was death, they

made so furious a sallie vpon the Romanes, as an infinit number of them were slaine vpon the
place, which was a deere purchase vnto the enemie. This happened during the Celtiberiqu^
warre, which continued twentie yeares. This magnanimitie, courage, adresse and militarie dis^cipline,
were thus begun, and by little and little augmented in this nation by the Carthaginians
and Romanes, in making warre against them: whom without doubt they might haue bin
able to haue resisted,Ignorance makes people subiect. if they had knowne their owne force and wealth, and if they had sooner
learned good lawes and policie, which maintaine people in amitie and concord. This was the
first prouince which the Romanes did assaile vpon the firme land, and the last which they subdued.
The strength of Pompeyes armie when he encountred Caesar in Macedonia, were the Spanish
bands, which were in his armie, if he could haue vsed them.
Faith and constancie in the end tooke place among this nation, whereof Hannibal had often
made triall. But what example can we find more memorable, than the fidelitie of the Saguntines
to the people of Rome, for the which they lost wiues, children, citie, and liues?
By little and little they also left that diuelish superstition of sacrificing of men, accustoming
themselues to more mildnesse and humanitie, and practising daily better discipline vnder the
Romans commaund; as if God would reforme them by their meanes, and prepare them to
receiue the true and wholesome doctrine of Iesus Christ:The true religion receiued with great affection by the Spaniards the which this nation did imbrace
happily in the beginning, with great fruit and notable examples in the Church of God.
But after that the barbarous nations were dispersed ouer all Europe, hauing troden vnder
foot the Majestie of the Romane empire, and inuaded the chiefe prouinces thereof, chased away
all learning, and good discipline, and infected the earth with heresies and superstitious ceremonies,
the ignorance of God and of his seruice, entred into Spaine, which our age doth
yet feele.Damnable arts in Spaine. Then was a time when as they kept publike schools of Magicke arts and conjuring,
to the which they had made subject Philosophie, Astrologie, Physicke, yea and Diuinitie
it selfe.
But leauing these things which belong to other discourses, let vs say, That the Spaniards in
those dayes were of diuers conuersations, as they were a mixture of diuers nations. They are
apt to receiue discipline in all things,Manners of the Spaniards in these times. according to the disposition of princes and lords, whom
they serue, they are faithfull and constant vnto them, desiring to be in perpetuall action, by
reason of the agitation of their spirits, which is like vnto the agilitie of their bodies, who for
the most part are leane and drie. They are sober and vigilant, but verie couetous, patient of
heat, cold, hunger, thirst, and all other discommodities, especially if there be any hope of profit
or honour, for the which they hazard themselues resolutely to all dangers: they desire to bee
well apparelled, and esteeme armes and horses aboue all things: they are impudent braggers
of their owne actions, vertue, and nobilitie: ciuile to conuerse withall, louing good townes,
copious in their language, much giuen to women; for the most part vnlearned, shewing little
art in that they do, disdaining labour, and a country life. The women are sober, louing their husbands
or their friends deerely, but wonderfull delicat, and curious of painting and perfumes,
retaining therein nothing of the auntient Spaniards: they nor their children drinke not any
wine.Language in vse among the Spaniards at this day. The countrey language at this day, is for the most part Roman or Latine corrupted and
mingled with some other words of such nations as haue held it in these last ages. The Biscane
tongue is preserued in Biscaie, and part of Nauarre, and other their neighbours: but in Granado,
Andalusia, Murcia, and Valence, especially among the rusticke multitude, the Moorish
and the Arabian tongue is in great vse: and in all ages almost, the people of Spaine haue vsed
diuers languages, and were different one from another. Making an end of this booke, we will
relate in the following, by what meanes and titles euerie nation hath from time to time
held it.




THE SECOND BOOKE OF
the Historie of Spaine.

The Contents.
1 THe reasons which moued the Carthaginians and Romanes to inuade Spaine vpon the West and
South parts, lying vpon the sea.
2 The Island of Ebusus or Iuisa first conquered by the Carthaginians.
3 Spaine exposed to the spoyle in the first Punicke warre.
4 Sagunte taken by Hanniball, which was the occasion of the second Punicke warre, and of the setling
of the Romanes Empire in Spaine.
5 Hannibals passage into Italie.
6 Cn. Scipio in Spaine, and his gouernment.
7 P. Scipio goes into Spaine: the war of the two brethren against Asdrubal Barcinien, and others.
8 Separation of the two armies, of P. and Cn. Scipios, whereof followed their defeat and death.
9 The Romanes Estate reuiued in Spaine by the vertue of Lucius Martius.
10 Discourse of the doubtfull euents of warre.
11 C. Nero sent from Rome into Spaine, circumuented by Asdrubal.
12 P. Com. Scipio comes into Spaine as Pro-consul; his manners and vertues.
13 The taking of new Carthage, the store-house for the Carthaginians in Spaine.
14 Scipio his acts after the taking of new Carthage: his iustice, religion, discipline, and gouernment:
his temperance, liberalitie, and policie towards the Spaniards: care, preparation, and prouision for
the warre.
15 Reuolt of many Noblemen and Townes of Spaine.
16 Asdrubal defeated at Becula, a Towne and Riuer, with other things done by Scipio.
17 Asdrubal Barcinien passeth into Italie, and abandons Spaine. M. Sillanus exploits against the other
Carthaginian captaines.
18 The exploits of L. Scipio, brother to the Pro-consull.
19 Other acts done by the Pro-consull Scipio: the last attempts of the Carthaginians in Spaine, and
the retreat of Asdrubal, sonne to Gisgo.
20 Practises with Masinissa Prince of Numidia. P. Scipio the Pro-consull passeth into Africke, to
stirre vp enemies against the Carthaginians in their owne countrey.
21 The taking and punishing of the townes of Illiturgis and Castulo, which had beene trecherous
to the Romanes.
22 Diuers Playes, Shewes, and Sacrifices made at Carthage the new by P. Scipio, in honor of P. and
Cn. Scipio his father and vncle.
23 Exploits of L. Martius, and the miserable end of the Astapeens.
24 Reuolt of Indibilis and Mandonius captaines, and of the Roman souldiors wintering neere vnto
the riuer of Sucro, and of their punishment.
25 Masinissa woon by the Romanes.
26 Departure of Mago Barcin out of Spaine: his fruitlesse enterprise against new Carthage: his
crueltie against the Gaditanes: their reuolt vnto the Romanes: Mago his passage into Italie.
27 P. Cornelius Scipio his returne to Rome, hauing gotten an absolute victorie of the Carthaginians
in Spaine.


SOme ages before the first warre betwixt the Romanes and the Carthaginians,
which grew by reason of the Isle of Sicile, the Gaditanes extracted
from the citie of Tyr, couetous and malicious according to the
nature of slaues,The Tyrians of the race of slaues from whence it may be they were issued (for we read,
that the bondmen of the Tyrians on a time slew all their masters, and
made themselues Lords of the towne; the which they held vntill Alexander
the Great, who did root out the race of them) began to torment
the Spaniards their neighbours, chasing them out of their lands
and possessions, making them slaues, and entreating them in the vildest manner they could;
which was the cause of great warre and diuision in that quarter of Spaine: so as injuries on
either part encreasing daily, the naturall borne disdaining the arrogancie of these strangers,
and enuying their greatnesse, made a generall league of many Communalties against them:
whereupon they of Gades finding themselues too weake to make head against so great a multitude,
they resolued to call in to their succour, and to the spoyle of Spaine, the Carthaginians
of Africke,The Gaditanes call the Carthaginians into Spaine. their brethren, comming from the same race and towne. The citie of Carthage
was then a great Commonweale, the which had a great jurisdiction among the Africanes,
and sought onely to enlarge their Empire; so as they were readie to run into Spaine,
with this honest and religious pretext, to succour the oppressed: whereas they not onely
freed the Gaditanes from all feare of the Spaniards, but did also subdue the people of Spaine,
setled themselues there,Carthaginians desire more to be great than iust. and gouerned it as their Prouince: from whence they drew afterwards
so great treasure and other commodities, as they presumed to assayle the greatest Potentates
in the world.
The name of Spaniards, before this warre, had beene great among other nations, onely in
regard that they serued as a prey to all strangers: which were they only which held the lower
countrey, and the coast of the Mediterranean sea, and part of the Ocean, South and West: among
the which, some nations of Europe and Asia had built and peopled some townes. As
for those which liued in the heart of the countrey, and in the mountains, their fame was more
obscure, being for the most part rough and barbarous, hauing scarce any commerce with
strangers, but to rob and steale, which was their best practise: and therefore vntill the comming
of the Carthaginians, they had beene as it were free, and assured both from inuasion
and trade, doing wrong rather than taking any: but afterwards they did all in generall learne
to manage armes with discipline, they vndertooke parties, contracted alliances among themselues,
and with other nations, growing by little and little more politicke, ciuile, and courteous.
The Celtes were alreadie mingled with the Iberians about the riuer of Ebro; and passing
on, they obtained lands and habitations in Lusitania, and in a corner of Betica, which
was neere vnto them: then passing the riuer of Duero, they planted themselues betwixt it
and Minio; and consequently to the mountains, in the countrey, which from them tooke the
name of Gallicia, and doth still hold it; whereas they built the towne of Porto, vpon the confines
of the Lusitanians, which is at this time a Bishopricke, retaining the name of Portugall,
and so goes on to the Westerne sea.
2 The Celtes, Iberians, and other Spaniards farre from the sea, as they were almost
like in manners, had (as is sayd) maintained their reputation free and vnited, vntill this
descent of the Carthaginians: who hauing resolued to settle themselues in Spaine, seized
first vpon the Island of Iuisa,Masee the first Generall of the Carthaginian arme in Spaine 562 yeres before Christ. and fortified it, Masee being Generall of this Armie.
This was fiue hundred sixtie two yeares before the comming of Christ, and an hundred
eightie nine yeares after the foundation of Rome. After which time, watching their opportunitie,
eight and fortie yeares after, they sent a great fleet of shippes into Spaine, led
by one Maherbal, vnder colour to relieue the Gaditanes, who had beene vanquished by
Baucius Capis, then reigning ouer the Turditanians, their neighbours. The name of the
protection and support of this puissant Commonweale of Carthage, purchased the Gaditanes
a peace and free trade; the which drew so manie families from Carthage into
the Island and Citie, as exceeding the rest, they got the absolute commaund thereof, Maherbal
yet liuing.
The Carthaginians continued for a time without any care of the affaires of Spaine,
beeing very much afflicted with drought and other discommodities, they hauing great

warre in Sicile and Sardinia, but about the yeare 255 they vndertooke againe the conquest
of Spaine, whither they sent Asdrubal and Amilcar, sonnes to Mago. Passing by Sardinia, Asdrubal
was slaine there, leauing three children, Hanniball the eldest, Asdrubal, and Psappho. Amilcar
was diuerted from Spaine by the warres of Sicile, where he was also slaine, and had
three sonnes in like manner, Himilco, Hanno, and Gisgo. The yeare 272 after the foundation
of Rome, they sent a small supplie of nine hundred souldiors into Spaine, whom they would
haue land in the Islands of the Baleares; but they were repulsed: and soon after Psappho, sonne
to Asdrubal, had charge to keepe the Spaniards in awe (who were sollicited by the Africane
Moores their neighbours, to joyne with them against the Carthaginians) who by his wisedome
restrained them; and moreouer, got sufficient forces from them to force the Moores
to sue for peace, and to giue ouer their enterprises against the citie of Carthage. In this warre
the vertue of Saruc of Barce (a towne neere vnto Carthage) author of the Barcinian faction,
was very famous. Psappho liued in great reputation, who after his death was by opinion receiued
into the number of the gods; the which he had procured during his life. For he had
caused certaine birds to be taught to speake, and made them learne to say, That Psappho was a
great god. Which birds being let flye, they chattered out those words in the fields, to the
great admiration of the people. After his decease the Prouince of Spaine was committed to
Himilco and Hanno (the sonnes of Amilcar) his cousins, who tried by faire and plausible means
to draw the inhabitants of the Baleares to liue in amitie with their Commonweale.
Hanno being arriued at Gades, and desiring to discouer the country, and the coast of Spaine
without the strait, he sayled vnto the holy Promontorie, or Cap S. Vincent: and hauing giuen
aduice vnto the Senat of that which he had seene and vnderstood, he obtained leaue to
continue his discouerie as well vpon the coast of Spaine, as Africke, in the Ocean sea: whereupon
he prepared two fleets; the one for the coast of Europe, and to passe vnto the Gaules,
and farther if he might; the charge whereof he gaue vnto his brother Himilco, and of the other
he would be captaine and conductor himselfe, and sayle towards Africke: so in the beginning
of the yeare 307 of the foundation of Rome they set sayle, either of them taking his
course. Himilco parting from the port of Heraclee, which was in the strait, coasted the Mesenians
and Selbitians, passed the Promontorie of Iuno, and the mouth of the riuer Cylbis,
which runneth betwixt Barbarie and Huelua, neere vnto the which in old time was the Island
of Erythrea, which is not to be seene at this day, vnlesse it be that of Gades it selfe: and then
he discouered the Tartessian forrests, and did see the Turditanes coast, whereas the riuer Betis
fell into the sea at that time by foure mouthes, afterwards reduced to two, but now there is
but one. Passing on, there came into his sight Mont Cassius, rich in veines of Tynne, from
whence it is likely it tooke his name: beyond the which, the riuer, which they now call Tinte,
(whose water is excellent good to dye blacke) fals into the sea, neere vnto Palos of Moguer.
This riuer was in old time called Iberus, as that which passeth and looseth it selfe at Tarracone.
From thence Himilco passed neere vnto Proserpinas Temple, built vpon a point which
runneth farre into the sea; vnto which place come the Marian hils: and a little more forward
riseth Mont Zephirus, whose top is alwaies hidden in the clouds: about the which for a good
distance the shoare is full of rockes vnto Mont Saturne, the which is among the Cenits, by the
which the riuer Anas or Guadiana doth run; at the mouth whereof were two Islands, whereof
the greatest was called Agone. Passing on by a long course towards the holy Promontorie,
and hauing doubled it, this Carthaginian armie came to the port of Cenis, neere vnto
the Islands which they now call Persegueres. Not farre from thence dwelt the Dragans, a
people of Lusitania, compassed in by the mountaines Cephis and Sempis, right against the
Islands of Stremnie, the which stands farre into the sea: but neerer vnto these Dragants was
another Island called Acala, about the which the waters were blew and wonderfull cleere, but
very stinking, whereof there are at this day no markes. Aboue Alcala was the mountaine
Cyprilian. Himil^o hauing sayled along the coast, hee discouered the Island Pelagie, full of
greene trees, the which he durst not touch, being consecrated to Saturne, hearing, that if any
saylers would land there, the sea was troubled. The shoare which goes vnto the mouth of
Tayo was inhabited by the Saries, a cruell and a barbarous people, whose Promontorie was
for that cause called Barbaresque. There notwithstanding was planted the Greeke Colonie
Olysippo, which is Lisbone at this day. These Nauigators came to the Promontorie Nerium,

which is Finis terrae, and to the neighbour Islands called also Stremnies, for that the inhabitants
of the Island of Stremnie aboue mentioned, being forced to leaue it for the multitude
of Serpents which were there, they retyred into these Islands. There is no further mention
made of Himilcos nauigation.
As for Hanno,Hannos voyage vpon the coast of Africke. he made a longer voyage: his armie consisted of many vessels, carrying aboue
thirtie thousand persons of both sexes: hee planted a Colonie vpon the sea coast of
Africke (the which is now Azamor) the which he called Thimateria: he passed on beyond the
foot of Mont Atlas, towards Numidia and Lybia: he discouered the fortunat Islands, which
are the Canaries, and those of Cap Verd, which is the point of the Hesperides; the Island of
Argin, in old time Cerne; and the Gorgones, so named by him; the mouths of the great riuer
Niger, the which hath Crocodiles in it, and sea horses as well as Nil, vntill he came vnto the
Island named at this day S. Thome, vnder the Equinoctiall. Some say, that hee doubled the
point of Africke, or Cap bonne Esperance, and passed as farre as the Arabicke sea, and from
thence returned to Carthage by Aegypt, reporting, That he had seene men all couered with
haire; which it may be were Apes, for there are very great and dangerous ones in some part
of Africke; and other wonders. He returned to Carthage fiue yeares after his departure.
It was in the yeare 312 of the foundation of Rome, when these two captaines vndertooke
their voyages; Gisgo their brother gouerned Spaine in their absence: and thinking to returne
to Carthage, to be partaker of the feasts and joy which were made in regard of their prosperous
voyages, he perished with all his ships at sea.
HannibalHannibal sent into Spaine. brother to Psappho, and cousin to these, surnamed the ancient, was sent into Spaine,
and with him Mago his kinsman. Mago stayed at the Baleares, and he passed to Calis: and
some hold, that he built a fort at the place which is called Lagos, the which was named
Port Hannibal: there was also built in his time, at the mouth of the riuer of Betis, Lucifers
Temple, dedicated to the goddesse Venus, whose starre was called Phosphoros, or Lucifer: it
is S. Lucar of Barraneda at this present. During their time and gouernment there grew great
warre betwixt the Spaniards of Betica and the Lusitanians, dwelling by the riuer Anas, the
which was nourished by the Carthaginians and their captaines Hannibal and Mago.
The Commonweale of Carthage had then great warres in the Island of Sicile,Warre in Sicile by the Carthaginians. kindled about
the yeare 346 of the foundation of Rome, by the Agrigentines, who did murther the
Carthaginian garrisons, being busie at their sacrifices: wherefore by decree of the Senat there
were leuies of men made in Spaine, and in the Islands of the Baleares. But the Agrigentines
were defeated in battaile, and then besieged for the space of two yeares, who in the end were
forced to yeeld to their mercie, who entreated them very roughly: whereupon they had recourse
vnto Denis the old, by whose aduice they freed themselues of those that did oppresse
them, and tooke from the Carthaginians the townes of Camerine and Gele. Denis although
he dissembled, seeming to be a neuter, found himselfe so ingaged, as he was forced to take
armes against the Carthaginians, by whom hee was vanquished, but with great losse of their
men: the rest of the Carthaginian armie, where Himilco Sepas had the leading of tenne thousand
Spaniards, was consumed by the plague: whereat Himilco was so grieued, as being returned
to Carthage, refusing to see either children or friends, he slew himselfe in his house. After
these ruins, by the industrie of Denis a peace was concluded betwixt the Carthaginians and the
Sicilians, or rather a truce for 30 yeres. This was in the yere 356 of the foundation of Rome.
About that time some ships of Carthage, dispersed by tempest, or else of set purpose following
Hannos discouerie, or imitating his designes, came vnto a great Island, which wee may
thinke to be that of S. Dominique at this day: which made them of Carthage to affect
these voyages with such vehemencie, as to diuert them, the Senat resolued to cause them to
be slaine which were returned, and had brought the newes, fearing least their citie and countrey
should be vnpeopled.
The truce being expired,New warres in Sicile. the Carthaginians prepared againe to warre in Sicile; during the
which truce, they had aduanced their authoritie and credit among the Spaniards, entertaining
diuisions among them, and taking parties: so as they had meanes at one time to bring to the
warres of Sicile 20000 foot and 1000 horse of that nation, making them by this means weake
against their own designs: to which forces they added 300 Majorquins, which vsed slings, and
10000 Africanes, making Hanno chiefe of this armie, who should suddainly inuade the Island,

whilest that Denis made warre in Italie. But Suniat a Carthaginian enuying Hannos charge,
aduertised Denis of this preparation; and as he continued in this trecherie, he was discouered
by the taking of a ship in the strait by them of Carthage, in the which were found his letters
and aduertisements to Denis, written in Greeke; whereupon he was taken and punished: and it
was decreed at Carthage, That no Carthaginian should learne the Greeke tongue: but Denis
his armie at sea was defeated, whereby the Carthaginians affaires prospered in Sicile.
Denis being dead,Truce with the Sicilians. and his sonne of the same name succeeding him, vnder the gouernment of
Dion his kinsman, the warre ended by a long truce betwixt the Carthaginians and Sicilians, and
Hanno returned with great treasure which he had gotte^ of those spoiles. He was presently sent
to Calis, and Bostar to Majorca, and to that part of Spaine which is opposit: Hanno tyrannizing
ouer the people in his gouernment, prouoked them to rebell; so as to subdue and punish them,
he called the Moores into Spaine, who afflicted them cruelly. The complaints being come vnto
Carthage, Hanno was called home and discharged of his gouernment; who in disdain thereof
attempted to poyson the whole Senat in a banket which he prepared for his daughters marriage.Hannos trecheri^ against the Senat of Carthage.
This trecherie being discouered and dissembled, they presently made Sumptuarie law,
limitting the number of persons, and the sorts of meats at such feasts. But hauing escaped punishment,
yet fearing it, he sought notwithstanding to trie his force, with a multitude of slaues
which he, his kinsmen, and friends had: wherewith the people being incensed, they besieged
him, and tooke him in his house, and then deliuered him to the Iudges; by whose decree his eies
were put out, his lims broken, his body torne with whips, and then hung vpon a crosse: his children
and all his kinsfolkes were also put to death, that they should haue no desire of reuenge.
A cruell example, but excusable in the Africans, for the foulenesse of the offence and the interest
of their countrey.The Carthaginians continue in the conquest of Spaine. The Carthaginians affecting much the conquest of Spaine, pursued it
without any disturbance, sending good Gouernors and wise captains: wherein they prospered
daily in such sort, as they might terme themselues masters therof, and so did enjoy it for aboue
350 yeares, all the people of Spaine being their subjects or allies; vntill that the Romanes began 
to make some practises,The Romanes seeke to get footing in Spaine by emulation. seeking to draw the people vnto them, and to be assured of them,
when any occasion should be offered. So either of these Commonweales made way for their
great designes, yet not entring into any ouert action: but the Island of Sicile assayled by the
Carthaginians, and especially the towne of Messina, did so engage them, as it could not be appeased
but with the ruine of the one party.Messina the cause of the first Punicke warres. For the space of 115 yeares there was either open
war, preparations for war, or a counterfeit peace betwixt the Romans and the Carthaginians.
They entred into this hostilitie 489 yeres after the foundation of Rome, and about 262 yeres
before Christ. This first warre was decided in Sicile, and in the Mediterranean sea, during 24
yeares; in which time the people of Spaine did adhere sometimes to one partie, sometimes to
another, as their affaires succeeded: the Carthaginians being in the end forced to demaund a
peace of the Romans,Spain nourisheth the hatred betwixt the Romans and Carthaginians. the rest of their hatred and splene continued yet in Spaine for a time: for
those which had rebelled against the Carthaginians, sought to maintaine their liberties by the
fauour of the Romanes, who encouraged and assisted them vnder hand: yet Amilcar, surnamed
Barca, father to Hannibal, being appointed Gouernor and Lieutenant generall for the Carthaginians
in Spaine, subjected vnder their obedience almost all the nations and townes which
had beene distracted, and did shake the allies of the contrarie faction. He was an irreconciliable
enemie to the Romanes,Priuat passion in Amilcar was the ruine of his countrey. and would that his sonne Hannibal should succeed him in the like
affection, and (as we say) should sucke it from his mothers breasts; binding him thereunto in his
youth by othes and religious ceremonies. For as he prepared to passe into Spaine with the armie,
offering the accustomed sacrifices vnto their gods, to haue a prosperous voiage, he caused
his sonne Hannibal (being then scarce nine yeares old) to approach vnto the altar, and hauing
commaunded him to lay his hand vpon the sacrifice, he made him sweare, That as soone as he
should be able to beare armes, he should employ them to annoy the Romans, and declare himselfe
their enemie.Amicar slaine by the Spaniards Whilest that Amilcar relies too much on his good fortune, and pursues the
rebels in Spaine inconsideratly, he was slaine, hauing done great exploits in nine yeares space.
They attribute the restoring and enlarging of Barcelone vnto him, and according vnto some,
the naming of it.
Asdrubal his sonne in law succeeded him, a wise and a valiant man, vnder whom Hannibal
learned his first precepts of warre. And as the troubles did not onely continue, but also

encrease in Spaine, new rebellions growing daily,The Carthaginians tyrannie aduanced the Romans credit in Spaine. by reason of the Carthaginians crueltie
and tyrannie, the Romanes were sollicited by many to take them into their protection; whereunto
they did willingly giue eare. Wherupon these two Commonweales were vpon tearmes
to enter into a more cruell warre than euer: to auoid the which, it was aduised by the Senate
of Rome to send Quintus Luctatius into Spaine, to treat with the Carthaginians, and to settle
some good course for the affaires of that countrey. So as betwixt Luctatius for the Romans,
and Asdrubal for the Carthaginians, there was a peace renewed and confirmed betwixt those
two Estates,A new accord betwixt the Romanes and Carthaginians. and the friends and allies of either part in Spaine; appointing the riuer of Ebro
for a limit and barre betwixt them, beyond the which they might not lead any armie. And for
that the towne of Saguntum being then rich and populous, held them long in debate, either
desiring to haue it on his faction, in the end (not able to agree) it was concluded, That it
should remaine neuter, vse her owne lawes, and be maintained in her libertie, and that neither
partie should attempt any thing to the preiudice thereof.
The Estate of Spaine being thus ordered, the peace (which was not well assured betwixt
the Romanes and Carthaginians) continued three and twentie yeres, or thereabouts, accounting
from the day that it was concluded in Sicile. Asdrubal gouerned Spaine beyond Ebro
eight yeares, and aduaunced the affaires of his Commonweale more by mildnesse than by
armes; whom they make the founder of new Carthage: but returning to a rigorous course,
his crueltie incited a Gaule,The great resolution of a seruant louing his master. who serued him, to murther him, reuenging the death of a Lord
of Lusitania his master, whom Asdrubal had caused to bee slaine, whose head he caused to bee
carried through the countrey vpon a launce, after that he had hanged the bodie vpon a crosse.
This seruant being taken, died in the extremitie of his torments, singing and laughing for joy
that he had done the deed.
4 Before the death of Asdrubal it was propounded in the Senat of Carthage, If it were
expedient to send Hannibal into Spaine, vnder the discipline of his brother in law, who demaunded
him? Among the Senators there was one of great esteeme, called Hanno, being of
a contrarie faction to the familie of the Barciniens, which also was great and rich, either hauing
their partisans.Factions in the Senat at Carthage. These pleaded vehemently, letting the Senat vnderstand on the one side,
that Hannibal was bred vp in armes, and by that meanes did imitate his fathers vertues: the others
to hinder this resolution, feared least the hatred which Hannibal bare vnto the Romans,
and whereof he made publicke profession, would ingage and draw their Commonweale into
new troubles and calamities:The ambitious enuie all men. For although the Carthaginians were exceeding ambitious,
and in that regard enemies to all mankind, yet did they feare the magnanimitie and constancie
of the Romans, and their valour, which they had tried. Besides, the forepassed warres as well
against them, as against others, yea, against their owne mercinarie souldiors, had wasted their
treasure, vnfurnisht them of ships, and consumed their best captaines; so as it behoued them
to liue many yeares in peace, before they vndertooke any difficult warre. But their miserie,
and that of Italie, would haue the Barciniens preuaile; and so Hannibal was sent into Spaine
to his brother in law Asdrubal, vnder whom he liued some three yeares: after whose decease,
he was demaunded for head and Generall by the men of warre, and by their fauour obtained
of the Senat and people of Carthage the gouernment of Spaine, being then about two and
twentie yeares old.Hanniball made Gouernour of Spaine. There was not in any age a more remarkable man than this, as well for
his great vertues as vices: for he was of a generous spirit for great attempts, and inuincible in
all dangers:His disposition and vertues. bloudie combates were his delights, neither did he want judgement nor counsell:
in the warre few men had better practised the knowledge how to obey, and how to commaund,
than he: he was neuer tyred with any toyle: he endured heat and cold indifferently:
he gouerned his feeding as nature required: he hated rest, and slept onely when hee found
himselfe idle, not vpon a soft and delicate bed, but most commonly vpon the ground, in a
Corps de guard, among the souldiors: he was not curious in his habits, but delighted much in
faire Armes and good horses; being alwayes the first in fight, and the last at a retreat. So
many vertues had for companions in the same subject,His vices. a brutish crueltie, damnable infidelitie,
sacriledge, and contempt of all religion. When as he found himselfe possessed of these
forces, he sought all meanes to breake the peace with the Romanes; propounding within
himselfe, not onely to chase them out of Spaine, but also to assaile them in Italie within their
owne strength, and in the very seat of their Empire. He began to make warre against the Olcades,

a people beyond the riuer of Ebro, who were in good termes with the Carthaginians,
but not their subjects, and tooke Althee their chiefe towne, and sackt it; the which did very
much terrifie their neighbours. Then he quarrelled with the Vaccees; sometimes pretending
a right, as being subject to the jurisdiction of Carthage; sometimes doing them injurie, or
pretending that he had receiued some wrong from them, hee so prouoked them, as among
many acts of hostilitie, after the taking of Hermandica and Arbocala, townes of the Vaccees,
and a great defeat which he gaue vnto the Carpetanians and the rest of the Olcades and
Vaccees, and in the end the conquest of all those Prouinces, he came vnto that which he had
propounded vnto himselfe; which was, to besiege Sagunt. The complaints of his excesse
came daily to Rome; yet the Senat being busied with the warres of Gaule, and against the Illyrians,
were not much mooued, vntill that the Saguntines seeing a siege comming before
their towne, quickened the Romanes by their embassadours, letting them vnderstand, That if
they made any account of Spaine, it was now high time to oppose themselues against the
violence of Hannibal;A friend doth not often stirre for his friends harme, vnlesse himselfe be interessed. who hauing broken their treaties and accords in a thousand sorts, might
be at that instant about their walls with an hundred and fiftie thousand fighting men. This
did moue the Senat of Rome not to neglect their allies, and to apprehend the dangers which
did threaten themselues, if they suffered the Carthaginians their enemies to prosper. Wherefore
they sent two embassadors to Carthage, which were, Publius Valerius Flaccus, and Quintus
Bebius Tamphtlus, with charge to passe to Hannibal, and to summon him to retyre, and to
leaue their allies in peace; otherwise to let both him and the citie of Carthage vnderstand,
that they would not endure the wrongs and injuries which had beene done them. But Sagunt
was besieged vnder colour of some controuersies and quarrels which they had with
their neighbours.Sagunt besieged. Hannibal being entred into their territorie, abandoned it to the spoyle of
the souldiors, and then assayled the towne in three places. There was one part plainer and
more accessible than the rest, where he intended to begin his batterie: but hauing made his
approaches with great toyle and difficultie, the successe was not answerable to his designe:
for there hee found a strong tower, and the wall raysed higher; besides, the place where
there was most danger was manned with their most valiant souldiors; who at the first repulsed
their enemies with their arrowes: but in the end not contented to shoot from their towers
and defences, they made sallies, and came to fight with them hand to hand: in which skirmishes
there was no great aduantage on either side. Hannibal himselfe approching too venturously
neere the wals, was wounded with a jaueline in the thigh, and ouerthrowne; the
which did much amaze them that were about him,Hannibal wounded. so as they fled; and it did so trouble the
rest, as they abandoned all their workes. Then had the Saguntines some leysure to breath,
and the towne was for a time rather besieged than assaulted, whilest that Hannibal was vnder
cure; yet they ceased not to make all sorts of engines to batter the towne: the which was
done afterwards, and more violently than before, and in so many places, as the besieged were
scarce able to make their defence: and there were three towers with their courtines betwixt
them alreadie ruined, so as the towne was discouered, and seemed to lye open; which made
both assaylants and defendants to run thither: where they did fight with such obstinacie,
both parties being in battaile betwixt the ruines, not as at the entrance of a breach, but as
in an open champaine, animated by two seuerall passions, the one hauing hope to vanquish,Hope and despaire breed like effects at this siege.
and the other no hope of mercie in their enemies. In the end, the Carthaginians were forced
to retyre; and soone after the Romane embassadours arriued in the rode of Saguntum:
but Hannibal would not heare them, but let them vnderstand, That a man busied with so
many affaires as he was, could not spend his time in words, and that he saw no great safetie
for them, if they landed among so many souldiours, of diuers barbarous nations. Whereupon
they passed into Africke, and hauing deliuered their charge vnto the Senat of Carthage,
and demaunded in vaine, That Hannibal (the author of the warre) should be deliuered
vnto them, after many protestations, they returned with bare words: For after much
contention among the factions in the Councell of Carthage (whereas Hannibal had manie
kinsmen and friends) answere was made vnto the embassadours, That the warre had
beene begun by the Saguntines, and that the Senat and people of Rome should not embrace
their quarrell against the Carthaginians, with whom they had liued in peace and amitie for so
many yeares.

Whilest the Romans were thus busied to resolue and to send embassadours,The simplicitie of the Romans. Hannibal pursues
his siege, and presseth Sagunt by all means possible: He builds new engines, animates
his souldiors, and promiseth them the spoile of a rich towne: the Saguntines rampar vp their
breaches, and labour day and night: the batterie begins afresh, and they haue many assaults
giuen, and with greater furie than before. In the end, being tyred with the multitude of assaylants,
who had fresh supplies continually, they could not keepe the Carthaginians from entring
by their breaches, their walls being newly repaired with earth, after their accustomed
manner, and therefore easie to pierce: so as they seized vpon an high place within the precinct
of the towne, whereas they planted many of their great crosse-bowes and artillerie after
their manner, and casting a wall about it, they made as it were a citadell; against the which
the Saguntines did presently make a trench, diuiding it from the rest of the towne, which
was not yet taken. And as it happened diuers times, that the one getting the other, must
needs retyre, the towne was reduced to a small compasse, and withall they had great want of
victuals, and of all other necessaries, by reason of the long siege, Hannibal was then forced
to march into Oretania and Carpetania, where there was some likelyhood of a tumult, for
that those which he had sent to enroll souldiors, were retained by them of the countrey, by
reason of the great rigour which they vsed. As his absence from the campe gaue some rest
vnto the Saguntines, so his comming among those people caused peace, and reduced them
to obedience. In the meane time Maharbal, sonne to Himilco, who had the charge to continue
the siege, vsed such diligence, as there was no shew of Hannibals absence. To conclude, hee
wrought so well, as at his returne he shewed him large breaches, sufficient to giue a generall
assault, which were made on the side of the castle, the which the Carthaginians did win. The
miserable Saguntines being thus prest, and out of all hope of succours,Friends a farre off are slow to succour. which could not come
vnto them but from Rome, which was farre from them, Alco one of their citizens cast himselfe
from the rampar, and went to Hannibal, without the priuitie of the Senat, that he might
moue him to some reasonable conditions: but Hannibal offered them their liues onely, and
that they should depart the town with one robe only, and to go and dwell where they should
be appointed: whereupon Alco durst no more returne vnto Sagunt, beseeching him to giue
him leaue to remaine within the campe: then there was a Spanish souldior named Alorco, who
offered himselfe to carrie these conditions vnto the Saguntines, and to persuade them to accept
thereof. But he preuailed as little as the other: for being heard in their Senat, they were
so farre from yeelding in that manner, as by a common consent they resolued to bring all
their gold, siluer, and other goods into the market place, where they set it on fire, and consumed
it: and there were some so desperat, as they cast themselues into the fire, to be consumed
with their goods. In the meane time there was a great noise heard from a tower which
fell suddainely, hauing beene long battered, the which gaue free entrie vnto the enemies:
 a band of souldiors then being entred by that breach, they made a signe vnto the campe:
whereupon Hannibal being vigilant to embrace all occasions,Sagunt taken by assault. marched thither with the whole
bodie of the armie, and tooke the towne, hauing giuen charge to his souldiors, to kill all that
had past the age of foureteene yeares: a cruell sentence, but he held it necessarie, seeing hee
had to deale with such obstinat enemies, who being in fight, neuer yeelded but by death, and
being shut vp within their towne, with their wiues and children, would rather burne themselues
in their houses, than yeeld. And although that many things were spoyled and consumed
by the fire, yet the bootie was great. Thus Sagunt fell into Hannibals hands, eight
moneths after the beginning of the siege. And during this siege, his wife Himilce was deliuered
of a sonne called Aspar, which doubled his joy. Then did the Romanes resolue to proclaime
warre against Carthage,The Romans resolue to warre against the Carthaginians. mooued partly with the vnworthie calamitie of their friends
and allies, and partly with the feare of their owne estate: the which happened 536 yeares after
the foundation of Rome, Pub. Cornelius Scipio and Titus Sempronius Longus being created
Consuls.
Honnibal was so farre from any remorse to haue drawne these two Commonweales into
armes, as contrariwise, when hee had brought backe his armie to new Carthage, and
diuided the spoyle among his souldiors,Good fortune transports Hannibal to ouergreat enterprises he began to make preparations to march into Italie;
from whence he meant to chase the Romans, and to driue them (if it were possible) out of
the world. Hauing therefore disposed of the affaires of that Prouince, and well fortified and

manned the townes, he left the gouernment generall thereof to Asdrubal his brother, and taking
his way by the Mediterranean shore to Empurias, he entred into Gaule, and came vnto
the Alpes without any opposition of the Gaules,He marcheth towards Italy. although they were much prest thereunto
by the Romans; leading an armie which consisted of Numidians, Africanes, Spaniards, some
Gaules, and other nations, the which he entertained and supplied often with the same nations,
as well with the reuenues of the mynes of Spaine, as that which he tooke from the enemie,
but most of all by his onely authoritie, and the reuerence of his name, so long as he continued
the warres in Italie, which was 16 yeares.
6 Whilest that the Consul P. Scipio attended him at the entrie of Italie,Cn. Scipio sent into Spaine. at the foot of the
mountaines, Cn. Scipio his brother (sent by him into Spaine) parted from the mouth of Rosne,
with a good number of gallies and other vessels, well manned with souldiours, and coasting
along the Gaulish shore, he came to Empurias without any encounter: where hauing landed,
he gouerned himselfe so discreetly in all his enterprises, and with so great humanitie towards
the Spaniards, as in a short time hee reduced to the deuotion of the Romanes those which
had beene drawne away either by force or feare,He wins the Spaniards by mildnesse. assured himselfe of the old allies, and got
new, not onely among the people which lay neere vnto the sea, but also of those which dwelt
farre into the countrey, and euen of the mountainers, although they were very rude and barbarous;
wherewith he encreased his armie, and had willingly from them, without any constraint,
victuals, and all other necessaries. Hanno appointed Gouernor of the countrey on this
side Ebro, for the Carthaginians, went to field to make head against the Romans, whilest that
Asdrubal, Gouernour generall of the Prouince, made hast to joyne with him with a great armie.Hanno defeated by Scipio.
But Scipio went speedily to charge Hanno, and did easily defeat him, where he slew 6000
of his souldiors, tooke 2000, forced his campe, and not onely spoyled the baggage of his armie,
but also that which Hannibal had appointed for Italie, wherewith Scipios souldiors were
made rich. In the meane time Asdrubal arriues, hauing had no certaine intelligence of the defeat
of Hanno: whereof being aduertised, he marched towards the sea, where he found many
Romane souldiours and mariners stragling after some spoyle; of whom he slew many, giuing
them a worthie reward of their negligence; the which happened neere vnto Tarracone:
yet hee made no long abode there, but presently repassed the riuer of Ebro. Scipio hauing
rested his armie foure dayes, resolued to pursue him, but he would first assure himselfe of Tarracone,
the which was not very well furnished.The Spaniard inconstant. Asdrubal seeing him retire, aduanced againe,
and did sollicite the Ilergetes to rebell, who notwithstanding had giuen hostages to the Romanes,
making them to spoyle some of their allies countrey; whereupon Scipio went to field,
and Asdrubal retyred. Scipio meaning to punish these Ilergetes, besieged Athanasia, their
chiefe towne, and forced them to redeeme themselues with mony, and to giue new hostages:
then he went to the Ausetanians, allied to the Carthaginians, neere vnto the riuer of Ebro,
whom he besieged, and defeated the Lacetanes who came to succour them, whereof there remained
12000 vpon the place, and the rest were dispersed, returning disarmed to their houses.
This siege continued 30 daies in the heart of winter, the snow being almost foure foot deepe,
wherewith their engines of batterie were in a manner couered, the which did preserue them
from the fire which was cast by the enemie. In the end, Amusite their captaine hauing abandoned
them, and being retyred to Asdrubal, the towne yeelded to Scipio, redeeming it selfe from
spoyle for 20 talents, amounting to 12000 French crownes: from whence Scipio led his armie
backe to Tarracone.
The second yeare of the second Punicke warre, Asdrubal Generall of the Carthaginians
resolued to charge the enemie wheresoeuer he should encounter him, either by sea or land,
hauing armed out thirtie gallies which Hannibal had left him, and tenne others which he had;
of all which, he gaue the charge to Himilcon, commaunding him to sayle along the coast in
view of his land armie, with the which he parted from Carthagene, keeping still neere the
shoare: whereof Scipio being aduertised, he resolued also to fight with Asdrubal, if any opportunitie
were offered. Yet hauing intelligence, that he had beene reenforced with some fresh
troupes, he resolued not to hazard a battaile by land, but to set vpon them at sea. Hauing to
that end embarked the flower of his armie, hee parted from Tarracone with fiue and thirtie
ships of warre, and came within foure or fiue leagues of the mouth of the riuer of Ebro: there
he was aduertised by two galliots of Marseilles, that the enemies gallies were at anchor in the



mouth of the riuer, and their land armie camped neere vnto them: wherefore Scipio desiring
to surprize them, commaunded his gallies to set forward, making great speed towards them.
Spaine had then many watch-towers vpon the coast, set vpon high hils, for the safetie of passengers
against pyrats. The Roman army was discouered by them, and an alarme giuen to the
Carthaginians, being sooner discouered by the army at land, than by the gallies. Asdrubal dispatching
many horsemen, gaue charge, That euery one should retire presently to his gally, and
prepare to fight, for the enemie had bin discouered. Most of the souldiors and marriners were
at land, dispersed here and there in the tents and villages, making good cheere with their companions,
fearing nothing lesse than the comming of the Romans that day, who were hidden by
the high clyffes which run into the sea, for that they could neither heare the beating of their
oares, nor any noise of their fleet. And as all was full of disorder and tumult among the Carthaginians,
Asdrubal put his armie in battaile neere vnto his fleet, whilest the rest embarked,
who ran without order or discipline, as if they had bin chased from the land, and would haue
saued themselues in the sea. The confusion was so great, that hindering one another, the souldiors
could not vse their armes, nor the marriners launch out, nor doe their duties, so as they
were forced to cut their cables; and doing all things in hast, they were defeated more by their
owne disorder than by the Romanes; who aduancing, tooke two gallies at their first joyning,
and sunke foure:The Carthaginians defeated at sea by Cn. Scipio. the rest of the Carthaginian fleet being dispersed, and not able to hold together,
they ran aground willingly, so as the men saued themselues, and fled to their army which
stood in battaile: who being spectators of this combat, saw their gallies pursued and taken, carying
all away that were not run on ground, or broken vpon the coast, so as the Romans drew
25 out with them to sea. This victorie did not only disarme the Carthaginians of their sea forces,
but also made them forsake all that coast. Wherfore the Romans being landed at Onusta
or Honosca, became masters thereof without any resistance, spoyling the countrey vnto the
gates of new Carthage, whereas they burnt the suburbes. Returning from thence laden with
spoyle to Longuntica (which at this present is Guardamar) they found-great store of a kind of
broome, wherwith they did vse to make cables for ships, the which Asdrubal had caused to be
gathered together, whereof they tooke what they pleased, and set fire on the rest. Then returning
to their ships, they passed into the Island of Ebusus or Iuisa, and battered the fort that
was in it; from the which they were repulsed. So as after they had spoiled and burnt the country,
they embarked againe, and being ready to weigh anchor, embassadors came to them from
the Islands of the Baleares, to demaund peace and friendship with the Romans.
Scipio being returned into Spaine, he gaue audience to the embassadours of all the people
that dwell about the riuer Ebro, and not onely to them, but to others of farther regions, desiring
to enter into league with the Romans. They hold, that he receiued hostages at that time
of aboue 120 Townes or Communalties. Scipio being fortified by this means, and thinking he
should be able from that time to keepe the field against his enemie, he led his armie towards
Castulo, and the mountaines which are now called Puerto Muladar, Asdrubal being retired into
Lusitania, towards the limits of our Portugal, vpo^ the Ocean, so as there was no great shew of
any warres that Summer. But the turbulent spirits of the Spaniards prouided worke for Scipio:
for a nobleman of the Ilergetes (the which is now a part of Catelogne) called Mardonius,Mardonius and the Ilergetes hold the Carthaginian party. when
as the Romans retired towards the sea, had sollicited many of the neighbor people to armes;
and seeing the Romans otherwise busied, he went with his troupes, and spoiled the country of
their allies: against whom, Scipio sent 3000 men, with the helpe of some of his friends, who defeated
these spoylers, flew many, tooke some, and made the rest glad to quit their armes. This
made Asdrubal to leaue the sea coast, and to march vp into the countrey, to assure his confederats
which dwelt on this side Ebro, and to succour them if need were: he came and lodged in
the countrey of the Ilercaones, which are of the country of the Ilergetes: but a tumult arising,
drew the war elsewhere:The Celtiberians take armes for the Romans. for the chiefe men among the Celtiberians, which make now a part
of new Castille, and of Arragon beyond Ebro, being entred into alliance with the Romanes,
and had giuen them hostages, hauing taken armes at Scipios persuasion, were entred into the
Carthaginians territorie, spoyling, burning, and putting all to the sword: they tooke three
townes from them, and in two encounters slew 15000 men, and tooke 4000, carrying away
many of their enemies ensignes.Pub. Scipio Proconsul in Spaine. At the same time P. Scipio arriued in Spaine, in qualitie of
Pro-consul; in whose absence Cn. Scipio his brother had vntill that time gouerned the warres:

for it was the Prouince which had fallen vnto him the yeare before, being Consull.
7 His gouernment then being continued, he arriued at Tarracone with 30 ships of warre,
and many of burthen, carying 8000 souldiors, and great store of victuals and other prouision:
where hauing landed his men, he went and joyned with his brother; and from that time the
affaires were gouerned by two captaines well vnited, and agreeing in all things: who whilest
that Hannibal was in action against the Celtiberians,The resolution of the two Scipioes of great consequence. resolued to goe directly to Sagunt; in
which towne they knew, that all the hostages which Hannibal had drawne from the townes
and people of Spaine, were kept with a small guard; which was the onely gage which the
Carthaginians had to assure them of the Spaniards fidelitie, and the onely bond wherewith
they tyed them: but one man brake it. He was a gentleman, who was then in garrison at Sagunt,
a Spaniard by nation, called Acedux, who had alwaies before shewed himselfe very faithfull
to the Carthaginians, but then (according to the manner of the Barbarians) he applied
himselfe according to the time and euents. This man hauing a desire to follow the Romans
partie,A notable trecherie of a Spaniard. and imagining, that such as reuolt, are commonly esteemed but base and infamous
creatures, if withall they doe not bring some notable commoditie to them that doe receiue
them, he bethought himselfe of an occasion, whereby he might purchase the grace and fauour
of the Romanes, by one of the greatest aduantages they might haue, if he could find
meanes to deliuer all these hostages into their hands: but for that they were straitly guarded
by men that were appointed by Bostares, Gouernour of the Prouince, there was great difficultie
in the execution of this enterprise. He came therefore vnto the Gouernour, who lay
in campe without the towne, to defend the landing vpon the sea shoare, being somewhat
farre off, and letting him vnderstand the dangerous estate of the Carthaginians affaires, after
so many defeats, and how little faith and constancie there was in the townes and confederat
people of Spaine, seeing so great a power of the Romanes neere them, fortified by so many
people which had taken their partie, and the goodly succours which the Pro-consull Scipio
had brought out of Italie, he aduised him to make the Spaniards more bound vnto the Carthaginians
by an honourable bountie, than they were by the gages which he had from them,
in sending backe to euery Towne and Communaltie their hostages. And to the end hee
should assure himselfe he would be readie to put in practise all that he should hold fit for
the good of the Carthaginians,Treason of a Spaniard lea^ing to the stronger party. he offered to conduct these hostages to their parents, and to
goe from towne to towne, confirming and encouraging his countreymen to be loyall to the
Carthaginians, and that thereby they should find they had so good an opinion of them, as
without any necessitie they had freely sent home their hostages vnto them. To conclude,
he could so well persuade this Gouernour, as (notwithstanding it seemed hard vnto him at
the first) he consented, appointing a conuenient time to send the hostages to their houses,
vnder conduct of this traitour: who in the meane time found meanes to slip vnto the Romanes
campe, and hauing met with some Spaniards in the armie, he caused them to bring
him vnto the Pro-consull as secretly as might be; to whom he imparted this businesse as he
had designed it; and a fit conclusion was taken betwixt them for this enterprise. This merchant
being returned againe to Sagunt,The indiscretion and rashnesse of Bostares in yeelding the hostages deliuered him by his Generall. and hauing againe conferred with Bostares the Gouernour
vpon this restitution at the time appointed, the hostages were in the night sent out
of the towne with a good guard, as it seemed: but they went not farre, before they fell into
an ambush which the Romanes had layed for them, where they were all taken, and led
vnto the campe. The same counsell which this Spaniard had giuen to Bostares, was by him
propounded to the Romanes, who made good vse thereof, and restored the hostages to
their parents and friends, and by that meanes made a wonderfull breach in the Carthaginians
Estate in Spaine: For the people and townes did soone find what an aduantage it was
to change their master; for that in stead of the Carthaginians commaund, which was imperious
and proud, the Romanes were entred with bountie and mildnesse. So euery one commending
the wisedome of this Acedux, sought some fit opportunitie to reuolt as he had
done. And if Winter had not forced them to surcease, the effects had followed with
out delay. Asdrubal finding himselfe too weake, was retyred into places of strength, farre
from the Romanes. The two Scipioes hauing diuided their charges, Publius conducted the
armie at sea, and Cneus that at land. Asdrubal durst not oppose himselfe neyther against
the one nor the other, but hauing after many petitions and much solliciting obtained from

the Carthaginians a supplie of foure thousand foot and fiue hundred horse: as soone as they
arriued, he went to field with his armie, approched neer vnto the enemie, began to repayre
his shippes, and to make a fleet for the defence of the coast and Islands. Being busie about
these things, the reuolt of the sea captaines, which had beene defeated the Summer before,
troubled him much. These after the battaile hauing beene much blamed by Asdrubal, did
neuer afterwards shew themselues neither faithfull to their Generall, nor well affected to
the affaires of the Carthaginians: so as by practises there were some townes yeelded to
the Romanes in the countrey of the Carpesians, where the Realme of Toledo is at this day;
and had taken one by force: so as all the warre was drawne by the Romanes into this countrey.
Wherefore Asdrubal entring the countrey in hostile manner, affronted a captaine of
this nation called Galbus, who lay in campe neere vnto the towne which had beene taken.
Hauing sent some souldiours lightly armed to the enemies trenches, to draw them forth
to skirmish, and some others against them that were gone to forrage, there was at one instant
a great tumult in their campe, and slaughter and flying without it, so as manie saued
themselues within their fort: yet in the end they were so well assured, as they not onely
defended their rampiers, but also sallied forth, and presented themselues in battaile against
the Carthaginians, going resolutely to the charge, leaping and skipping after their
accustomed manner, the which strucke terrour into the enemie, who retyred as hee could
with credit. Asdrubal hauing recouered a hill flanked with a riuer, he brought his armie
thither, thinking it needfull to fortifie himselfe there. So these two armies giuing feare for
feare, there were some skirmishes among the souldiours on either side, whereas to speake
truth, the Numidian horseman was not equall to the Spaniard, nor the Moores darts able
to pierce their aduersaries targuets, who were as nimble and actiue as they, and had more
force and courage. The Spaniards seeing that by running about the Carthaginians campe
they could not draw them forth to battaile, and that it was not easie to force, they went
to besiege a towne called Asena, whereas Asdrubal comming into that Prouince, had made
his store-house for victuals and munition;Contempt of militarie discipline followes a victorie. they tooke it by force, and spoyled all the countrey
about it: but after it there was neither order, obedience, nor conduct among them,
as it happeneth often after a good successe. Asdrubal seeing their disorder and negligence,
thought good to embrace this occasion:Asdrubal takes aduantage of his enemies negligence. Wherefore hauing aduertised his souldiors thereof,
he left his place of strength, and led his armie in good order against these Spaniards, who
were dispersed here and there in disorder, and without ensignes. Being discouered by them
that were in sentinell, euery one runs to armes, and so went to encounter the enemie disordered,
without ensignes and without commaundement. Some began the fight, whilst that other
arriued in troupes, the greater part being not yet come out of their campe: yet they encountred
them with such furie, as they stayed the first charge of the Carthaginians: but finding
themselues few in number, faint, and not well vnited, against many in good order, they were
soone broken, and forced to seeke their companions; and in the end they were so prest, being
on a heape, and not able to vse their arms, as they were for the most part slaine; some making
way by force through their enemies, saued themselues in the mountains and forrests neere adjoyning.
Their campe was in this amazement abandoned, and the whole Prouince was in one
day reduced vnder the obedience of the Carthaginians.
During these actions, Asdrubal receiued commaundement from his superiours at Carthage,The Councell of Carthage thinking to get Italy, neglect Spain.
That hee should march with all speed with his armie into Italie: the which being
knowne in Spaine, all the people in generall began to wauer, and to follow the Romane partie:
whereof Asdrubal did aduertise the Senat, letting them vnderstand what prejudice this
bruit did bring vnto the affaires of the Commonweale of Carthage; and that it was apparent,
if he parted from thence, before he should passe the riuer of Ebro, all Spaine would fall
into the Romanes power: for besides that he neither had men, nor a sufficient captaine to
leaue in his place, to guard that Prouince, the Romane captaines were such, as they could
hardly be resisted with equall numbers: wherefore he aduised them (if they had any care of
Spaine) to send a good Commaunder and a strong Armie in the place of that which he
should lead away: and although that all things should succeed as they desired, yet should
they euer find some alteration among the people of that countrey. Asdrubal his letters
did somewhat mooue the Senate, but for that they did more affect the affaires of Italie,

they did not alter any thing that had beene decreed touching his departure with his army, but
they onely sent Himilcon with some bands, and did arme some ships, which they held sufficient
to keepe the people of Spaine in awe, as well vpon the sea coasts, as within the countrey.
This captaine hauing past the sea with his forces, layed vp his ships in safetie, and fortified his
campe, he tooke some of his best horsemen, and past through friends and enemies countries,
vntill he came to Asdrubal, to whom he presented this decree of the Senat: and hauing conferred
with him, and vnderstood the course that he was to hold in the warres of Spaine, he returned
to his troups, hauing nothing that did assure him more from encounter vpon the way,
than his diligence and speed: For before they could haue meanes to assemble their forces,
they had news of his returne. Asdrubal seeing that he must needs go, he exacted great summes
of money from all the townes and people that were vnder the Carthaginians jurisdiction, being
well aduertised, that he must purchase the passage and fauour of the Gaules with readie
money, as Hannibal his brother had done. This done, hee tooke his way towards the riuer
of Ebro.
The Romane captaines being aduertised of all these things,Asdrubal prepares to goe into Italie. and knowing of what consequence
Asdrubals passage into Italie was, whereas Hannibal alone did much trouble the Romane
state, they imployed all their wits and meanes to stop him. Wherefore leauing all other
affaires, they joyned all their forces in one body, and passing the riuer of Ebro, towards which
Asdrubal approached, being doubtful whether they should fight, or by assailing some towne
or countrey that was confederat to the Carthaginians, seeke onely to stay and diuert him. In
the end they made a shew to besiege Ibera,The policie of the Roman and Carthaginian captaines. a towne which was rich and mightie in those
quarters. But Asdrubal to diuert them, and to succour his allies, marched with his armie towards
another towne, which a little before was yeelded to the Romanes: wherefore they
left the towne, and went directly towards Asdrubal. The armies were some dayes within a
league and a halfe one of another, before they came to battell, making light sallies one vpon
another. In the end, as if it had beene agreed vpon, they put their armies in battell. The Romanes
diuided their troupes into three;The order of the two armies. some of their footmen were placed before, and some
behind their ensignes, and the horsemen vpon the wings on either side. Asdrubal set the Spanish
footmen in the middest of the battell, the Carthaginians on the right hand, and the Africanes
on the left. To the Carthaginians he added the Numidian horsemen that were mercinaries,
and the other Africanes in the head of the battell; yet he put no Numidians on the
left hand, but such as had beene accustomed to go with two horses together to the warre, and
when they had wearied one,Agilitie of the Numidian horsemen. they leapt nimbly on the other, which was fresh, being armed, in
the hottest of the fight: so actiue and nimble they were, and their horses so gentle and tractable.
Being thus in battell, the Generals had equall hopes, for there was no great difference
betwixt their forces, either in number, or qualitie of men of warre: but among the souldiours
it was not so. The Romanes were persuaded, that the safetie of Rome and Italie, and their returne
to their houses, depended vpon this battell; and therefore they were resolued to vanquish
or die. But the Spanrards (whereof the most part of the other armie did consist) had
not that resolution, desiring rather to be beaten in Spaine, than to be drawne into Italie, conquerours:
Wherefore at the first charge their battailons in the middest were forced, and turned
their backes, the fight was more furious on either hand, for the Romans were furiously
charged on the one hand by the Carthaginians, and on the other by the Africanes, and in a
manner compassed in, when as their whole armie (being joyned together in one bodie) easily
repulsed them. So fighting in two parts, the Romans had the aduantage euery where, and
were masters of the field. The slaughter was great, and had beene greater, if the Spaniards
had not fled so fast in the beginning. The horsemen did not in a manner fight: for when as the
Moors and Numidians did see their squadron in the middest wauer, they began to flie, leauing
their wings naked, and leading the Elephants away with them. Asdrubal hauing continued
vntill the end of the fight, retired out of the prease with some few that followed him. The enemies
campe,A victorie of great consequence for the Romans. and all their baggage, was spoyled by the Romans. Through this victory, if there
remained any people in Spaine which were not firme and constant to the Romans, they were
now confirmed. On the other side* Asdrubal saw himselfe not onely out of hope to lead an
armie into Italie, but also in some doubt where he should find a place of assurance in Spaine.
These newes being aduertised to Rome by the two Scipioes, were verie pleasing; not so much

for the victorie which they had obtained,Asdrubals passage ^nto Italy broken. as for that Asdrubals passage was broken. This Summer
was prosperous for the Romanes affaires, but they began to want victuall, and the seamen,
both mariners and souldiors, were in a manner naked. Wherfore the captaines gaue the
Senat to vnderstand, That they must of necessitie prouide for these wants, else they should not
be able to entertaine neither the armie, nor the countrey. For the which the Senat gaue order,
by the good husbandrie of the magistrats, and the willingnesse of priuat persons; so as
there were some found which did vndertake to furnish the armies in Spaine, of all things necessarie
for three yeares.
Asdrubal accompanied by Mago, and Amilcar sonne to Bomilcar,Illiturgis besieged by the Carthaginians, relieued by the Romane. Carthaginian captaines,
were come to besiege the towne of Illiturgis, which had reuolted from them to the Romane
party: about the which they had made three camps, through which the Scipioes, two brethren,
past by force, with great slaughter of their enemies, and put victuals into the towne, whereof
they had great need: and hauing encouraged the inhabitants to carrie themselues valiantly in
the defence of their walls, as they had seene them do which came to succour them, they resolued
to make a furious sallie vpon the enemies fort, in Asdrubals quarter. Which Mago and Amilcar
seeing, they ran thither with all their forces; so as that day the Carthaginians had 60000
men in battell without their campe,A memorable defeat by the Carthaginians. against 26000 Romans, or thereabouts; who notwithstanding
had the victorie, without any doubt, hauing slaine more of their enemies than they
were themselues, taken aboue 3000 prisoners, woon about 1000 good horses of seruice, caried
away 59 ensignes, slaine fiue Elephants in fight, made the enemies to raise their camps, and
(which was their chiefe designe) freed the towne of Illiturgis from siege. The Carthaginians
to recouer their honour,Spain fit to supplie armies. went to besiege Incibile, another place allied to the Romans, hauing
filled their bands, and made new supplies in the country, who demaunded nothing more
than warre, so as there were any hope of spoyle: for at that time Spaine did abound in youth.
There they did rather increase their shame:Another victory by the Romans. for being assailed by the Romans, they lost 13000
souldiours more, which were slaine vpon the place, 3000 prisoners, two and fortie ensignes,
and nine Elephants. Then in a manner all Spaine did adhere vnto the Romans, to whom this
Summer was verie succesfull.
The yeare following, when as Q. Fabius, and M. Claudius Marcellus were Consuls, and the
fift of the second Punicke warre, had diuers euents: for Asdrubal and Mago defeated great armies
of Spaniards, which were allied to the Romanes, before they had left their garrisons,
where they had wintered, to passe the riuer of Ebro: and in a manner all that part of Spaine
was recouered by the Carthaginians: but the diligence of P. Scipio, who marched thither
with his armie, kept them play, and assured the countrey. Hee came first and camped at a
place called Haut-Chasteau, or High-Castle, famous by the death of that great Amilcar;
the which was strong,A castle where great Amilcar was slaine. and well furnished with come which they had brought thither a little
before: but the countrey round about was full of enemies, and some of the Romans,
which had taried scattered behind from the bodie of the armie, had beene charged by the
enemies horse,Romans defeated. who slew two thousand, and retired without any losse. This made P. Scipio
retire into a countrey of more safetie: who fortified his campe, and entrenched it neere vnto
the mount of Victorie, whither Cn. Scipio his brother came with all his forces. And in a
manner at the same instant, Asdrubal, sonne to Gisgo the third, a Carthaginian captaine,
presented himselfe with a complet armie, in view of the Romanes, and planted his campe
right against them, hauing a riuer betwixt them. There P. Scipio hauing taken certaine men
at armes with him, parted secretly to discouer the enemie and the countrey: but being himselfe
discouered by the enemie, hee was in daunger to be defeated, had hee not recouered
a little hill neere adjoyning, whereby hee had meanes to defend himselfe, and to make head
against them that did enuiron him, vntill that his brother Cn. Scipio came to vngage him. The
towne of Castulo which was so great a friend,Castulo yeelds to the Romanes. and so strictly allied vnto the Carthaginians,
as Hannibal had taken a wife there, yeelded vnto the Romanes. The Carthaginians returned
vnto the siege of Illiturgis, in the which there was some garrison of Romane souldiours,
hoping to take it by famine.Illiturgis releeued againe by the Romans. Cn. Scipio to releeue both the garrison and the inhabitants allied
to the Romanes, marched that way, past valiantly betwixt two armies, and put a legion of resolute
souldiours into the towne, with great slaughter of the enemie.
The next day was no lesse happy vnto him, in a braue sally which he made, where there were

slaine in these two encounters twelue thousand Carthaginians, and aboue ten thousand prisoners,
with fiue and thirtie ensignes, so as Illiturgis was againe freed from siege. The enemie
being chased from thence, they went to besiege Bigerre, another towne allied to the Romanes;
but they retired presently vpon the brute of Scipioes approach, and marched towards
Munda, where they were also pursued by the Romanes. There they had a sharpe encounter,
which continued foure houres; but as the Romanes had the victorie, they sounded a retreat,
for that Cneus Scipio,Cn. Scipio hurt. Generall of the armie, had beene thrust into the thigh with a Numidian
launce: which wound his souldiours that were fighting about him feared to haue been mortall;
without which accident it is certaine the Carthaginians campe had been taken that day,
and the victorie absolute.The Carthaginians put to rout. For the souldiours with their Elephants had been repulst vnto their
palisadoes and rampars, vpon the which there were nine and thirtie slaine with darts: Yet
they say, that in this fight the Romanes slew aboue twelue thousand of their enemies, and caried
away seuen and fiftie ensignes. The Carthaginians being defeated, retired to Auringe,
where they were pursued and prest by the Romanes, during this amazement; and were againe
charged before they had leasure to assure themselues, and to recouer their spirits, Scipio causing
himselfe to be carried through the battailons in a litter. Here he had an absolute victorie,
but with much lesse slaughter by the halfe,Another defeat of them. for the enemies were reduced to a smaller number.
But as those people were prompt by nature, to renew the warres, and presently to supplie
their armies, the countrey being fertile of souldiours, their bands were presently filled
by the diligence of Mago, brother to Asdrubal, being sent to make new leuies, so as they durst
hazard another battell: the euent whereof was like vnto the former, most of the Carthaginian
souldiours comming faintly to fight, as for a partie which had beene often beaten, and in
few dayes.Carthaginians againe defeated. They lost in this conflict eight thousand men slaine vpon the place, and almost one
thousand prisoners, with eight and fiftie ensignes, and great store of baggage, rings, chaines,
and bracelets of gold: two great noblemen of Gaul were also slain, the one called Moenicaptus,
the other Ciuismarus: eight Elephants were taken, and three slaine. Thus the Romans affairs
prospered in Spaine, who in the end were ashamed, that the townes of Sagunt, for the which
this war was begun, had continued fiue yeares in their enemies power. Wherefore they approached
neere vnto it, and by fauour of the battels which they had woon, did easily chase away
the garrison that was within it: and hauing conquered the place, they called home all the
old inhabitants,Sagunti^^ restored to their goods. and restored them to the possession of their goods, rased the Turditans towne,
which had beene the motiue of their desolation, and sold the inhabitants thereof for slaues,
to them that would giue most.
The Romanes to haue the better meanes,The Romans stir vp enemies to the Carthaginians in Africke. not onely to represse the injuries of the Carthaginians,
but also to assaile and annoy them, did stirre vp new enemies against them neere vnto
their towne, and drew vnto their alliance Siphax, king of a part of Numidia, who was alreadie
somewhat discontented with them: so as they were forced to haue their recourse vnto Gala, another
king of the same nation,Gala father to Masinissa. and to incense him against Siphax. This Gala was father to Masinissa,
from whom the Romans did afterwards draw many good seruices: but at that time he
shewed himselfe a bitter enemie to Siphax, and did often defeat him. In the meane time nothing
was done worthie of memorie in Spaine; only the Celtiberians which were in pay with
the Carthaginians, were drawne away by the Romanes, whom they entertained with the
same conditions: and these were the first mercinarie souldiors which the Romans vsed, to their
great prejudice. Moreouer, the two Scipioes sent aboue 300 Spanish gentlemen into Italy, to
solicite them of their nation, which were in Hannibals armie, to leaue his partie, and to joyne
with the Romanes.
After this, there were two yeres spent before there was any memorable act done in Spain,
both parties encountring one another rather by counsell and practises, than by open hostilitie.
The seuenth yeare of this warre, the Romane captaines assembled their forces, and it was
resolued in counsell, That they must not content themselues onely to haue stopped Asdrubals
passage into Italy, but they must seeke some meanes to end all the warre in Spaine: presuming
they had forces ynow to doe it, hauing this Winter drawne vnto them, and armed 30
thousand Celtiberians. The enemies had three camps, two whereof were commaunded by
Asdrubal sonne to Gisgo, and by Mago, being both joyned together. They were distant from the
Romanes some fiue dayes journey: But that which Asdrubal, sonne to Amilcar, the auntient

Gouernour of Spaine, led, was neerer, being lodged neere vnto Anitorge. The Generall
of the Roman armie would first giue him a charge, hoping to defeat him easily. One onely
difficultie troubled them, which was, how they should hinder the other two armies (after the
defeat of this Asdrubal) from retiring into some place of aduantage among the mountaines
and forests;The two Scipioes attempting too much, ruine themselues. and by that meanes should draw the warre in length. Hauing then a conceit to
make warre against all Spaine at one instant, they resolued to diuide their forces betwixt
them: so as P. Scipio with two third parts of the Romane armie, and the bands of their allies,
should goe and affront Asdrubal sonne to Gisgo, and Mago; and that Cneus Scipio
should lead the rest of the old legions and the allies against Asdrubal Barcin.
This being concluded, these two armies with their commaunders parted at one instant: the
Celtiberians marching before, came and encamped neere vnto Anitorge; in view of the enemie,
being seperated the one from the other by a riuer. There did Cneus Scipio stay with his
troupes, and P. Scipio marched on where he was to make warre. But when as Asdrubal saw
them diuided, and one farre from the other, being a wise and politique captaine, considering
that the sinewes and strength of the Romane armie consisted of their allies, and in mercinarie
souldiours, and knowing the treacherous and inconstant disposition of the barbarous, euen
of the Spaniards in those times, by the experience he had had in that long warre, hee resolued
to trie all means possible, to corrupt the Celtiberians, which were vnder the Romans pay, being
30000: the which he did happily effect, by the meanes of some of the same nation which
were in his camp; who vsing the same language, and hauing means to haue secret conferences
one with another,The mercinarie Spaniards make no account to abandon the Romans at need. they concluded with the captaines of the Celtiberians, that for a good
summe of money they should retire with their men, and returne to their houses. It seemed a
matter of small moment to them: for they were not prest to turne their armes against the Romanes,
but onely to retire, and not to make warre: besides, most of the souldiors were glad to
rest, and desired to see their kinsfolkes and friends, goods and possessions. Wherefore it was
easie for the captains who were corrupted, to persuade them to dislodge, being without feare
to be staied, or forced by the Romanes, who were but few in number. Let this be an example
to all estates that make warre,The force of an armie ought to be of naturall subiects, and not of strangers. neuer to fortifie themselues so with mercinaries and strangers,
as they may prescribe them a law; but let their greatest strength be of their own nation. These
Celtiberians then hauing taken vp their ensignes, and trust vp their baggage, departed suddenly:
neither could any intreatie nor prayers preuaile to stay them, pretending, that they
had warre at home,The infidelitie of the Celtiberians. and that they must goe and defend their owne houses. Cncus Scipio seeing
himselfe thus abandoned, and not able to preuent it neither by intreatie, force, nor any
good counsell, finding himselfe too weake to hold the field against so great and mightie an
armie, hauing also no meanes to joyne with his brother P. Scipio, he meant to trie if he might
retire safely and with his honour, and flie all occasions to be forced to fight. But Asdrubal holding
him vanquished, would giue him no rest, but followed him continually at the heeles.
The like terrour,Two Roman armies in p^ey to the enemie. but a farre greater daunger, did at the same time presse P. Scipio, being
freshly charged by a new and a valiant enemie: it was Masinissa a young prince, then allied
to the Carthaginians; who afterwards was famous, and made mightie by the amitie of the
Romanes.Masinissa a fierce aduersarie to the Romans. P. Scipio at his first arriuall found him in front, with goodly troupes of Numidian
horsemen, comming continually day and night to his trenches, keeping his armie in perpetuall
alarme, so as not any one durst goe farre out, either for forrage or for wood, dislodging
their sentinels oftentimes, and pursuing them euen within their gards, and to the ports and
rampars of their campe, whereas the Romanes were shut vp as if they had beene besieged,
and in want of all things, wherewith they were likely to be daily more and more opprest, if a
Spaniard called Indibilis should come and joyne with the Carthaginians, where he was expected
with seuen thousand and fiue hundred Suessetanians. For so graue and wise a commander
as P. Scipio was, he tooke a bad and rash resolution: for hauing left his campe to the gard
of a few men, vnder the commaund of T. Fonteius his lieutenant, hee parted about midnight
to goe and encounter Indibilis, and to fight with him: the which he did, and had easily defeated
him, if the Moores and Numidian horsemen (who had watched Scipioes departure) had
not come and charged the Romanes in flanke, the which caused a great terrour among them;
and besides they were charged in the rereward with all the Carthaginian armie, which had
followed them. Being thus enuironed of all sides, doubtfull where they should make head, or

which way they should force through the enemies, and escape that daunger, their Generall
P. Scipio fighting and encouraging the souldiors, and going to all places where his presence
was needfull,P. Scipio slaine, and the Romans defeated. was thrust through the right flanke with a launce, so as he fell downe dead from
his horse. Then the enemies which had charged that troupe which was about Scipioes person,
seeing him on the ground, went running throughout the armie, leaping for joy, and crying out
that the enemies Generall was slaine. This accident gaue the Carthaginians an assured victorie,
the Romans (being destitute of a head) thinking onely how they should flie and saue themselues.
It was easie for them to make way through the Numidians, who were but lightly armed,
but to saue themselues by flying against so many horsemen, and footmen who did run in
a manner as swift as horses, there was no meanes: so as the slaughter of the Romans was very
great, both in the fight and in the flight, and hardly had any one escaped, if the darkenesse of
the night had not fauoured them.The victorious Carthaginians pursue the victorie. The happinesse of so great and important a victorie of the
Carthaginians, was no whit impaired by the negligence of their captaines, but making good
vse thereof, presently after the conflict, hauing giuen some little rest vnto their souldiours, the
armie dislodged, and marched with all speed to Asdrubal Barcins campe: being assured, that all
their forces vnited together, they should easily vanquish the other Romane armie which remained,
and by that meanes end the warre in Spaine. Being arriued, the joy was great among
the captaines and armies, rejoycing at this late obtained victorie, whereas so great
and redoubted a captaine of the enemies had beene slaine, and all his armie defeated:
wherefore being full of hope, they assured themselues to doe as much vnto the others.
There was yet no newes of this lamentable defeat in Cneus Scipioes armie,Heauinesse in Scipioes armie without any apparant cause. but there was
seene a sad mournefull silence, as if they had had some secret presage, as it happens often
to such as doe diuine of an approaching mischiefe. The Generall of the armie, besides
that he found himselfe weakened, and abandoned by his allies, hearing that Asdrubals armie
was so much renforced, was much perplexed, and could not by any conjecture and reason
of warre imagine other, than what had happened: For what reason were it to thinke, that
Asdrubal and Mago could passe without fighting, if his brother had beene liuing? Why did
he not hinder them? or at the least coast them and follow them, to come and joyne with his
brother, if he could not keep the enemies armies from joyning? Being in this perplexitie, seeing
no other meanes to assure himselfe, but by a retreat, hee parted secretly in the night, vnknowne
to the enemie, causing his armie to make a long march: But the day hauing discouered
his departure, the Numidian horsemen were presently sent after; who ouertooke the Romane
armie toward the euening, and skirmishing, stayed them much, charging them sometimes
behind, and sometimes vpon the flankes. Scipio gaue order, that in fighting the armie
should still aduance, fearing the enemies battailons of foot, which marched with all speed
after their horse. In the end night approached, and yet the Romanes had not much aduanced,
being forced to make often stands against the Moores, who did continually annoy them.
Wherefore Cneus Scipio retired with all his troupes to a little hill, a place of small aduantage
for them that were alreadie wauering; yet the seat was somewhat higher than the fields
about it: There he lodgeth, and puts his horsemen and all his baggage in the middest, and
his footmen make a circle round about, and so did easily resist the attempts of the Moores.
But when as the Generals with their complete armies were joyned together, hee saw there
was no meanes to make it good by fighting, if he did not intrench himselfe after the accustomed
manner: Wherefore he began to aduise by what meanes he might make his palisadoes;
but he was come into a bare, barren, and drie soyle, where there was neither trees nor bushes,
nor any ground fit to make flagges; neither could they digge into it, nor make it hard for the
enemie to approach, for the ascent was easie on all sides: yet to make a kind of rampar, hee
caused them to take their packe-saddles and dorsers, and to tye them together, wherewith the
souldiours made as it were a wall of a conuenient height round about them, filling vp the places
which wanted, with such baggage as they had.
The Carthaginians being arriued, put themselues in order to assaile this little hill, but
discouering a new kind of rampar, and not accustomed, they were somewhat amazed:
but their commaunders began to crie; How now souldiours, why stay you? why doe you
not speedily pull vp and scatter this baggage which doth amaze you, and is not fit to stop
women nor children? The enemie is ours, wee hold him fast, being hidden behind those

cofers and burthens. Thus contemptuously did the captaines speake, yet was it not so easie
to make a breach,The Roman armie forced and defeated. nor to passe ouer them: but in the end they forced them, and the souldiors
found passage in diuers places, so as they made a great slaughter of the Romans; yet the greatest
part of the vanquished saued themselues by flight, who finding woods and forests, a good
number of them, after a long and tedious journey, came vnto P. Scipioes campe, commaunded
by T. Fonteius,Cn. Scipio slaine. the lieutenant. Cn. Scipio was also slaine in this assault at the hill, as some
say, in the beginning of the fight: others notwithstanding affirme, That he thought to saue
himselfe with some few men, in a tower which was there adjoyning, the which being enuironed
by the enemie, and the gates set on fire, they were all taken and slaine. Behold two great
captaines, brethren, dead, and their armies defeated, in lesse than a moneth, leauing the Romans
affaires in Spaine so troubled, and in such despaire, as they might well say, all was lost:
But humane things are gouerned by a higher power, who doth not alwaies impart his decrees
to our discourses.
9 There was a Roman knight called L. Martius,Anno 541 of Rome. sonne to Septimius, a yong man, actiue,
hardie, and of greater courage than could be expected in a man of his condition, who assured
the remainders of the legions, and the faithfull allies of the Roman state, and reuiued Spaine
from their sorrow and mourning,The courage of L. Martius re^i^es the Romans from despaire. for the losse of two such great personages, and of so many
good men, and from the calamitie and daunger they were then in: and in the end recouered
the honour and fame of the Romanes, which was growne contemptible. Hee had with
his generous disposition learned good discipline vnder Cn. Scipio. And hauing gathered many
of them together which had fled from the defeat, and drawne a good number of souldiours
out of the garrisons and vnited townes, he made a little armie, and came and joyned with T.
Fonteius, P. Scipioes lieutenant. This armie being on this side Ebro, in a campe well fortified,
it was resolued to chuse a head that should commaund ouer all, and that they should take
their voyces therein, as the bands should enter into gard one after another. L. Martius being
but a knight, was so gracious, as all in generall gaue him their voyces, and he was chosen
Captaine Generall of the Roman armie.L. Martius chosen Generall of the Roman army After which time hee was verie carefull to fortifie
himselfe in places of strength, and to prouide store of victuals and munition, finding the
souldiours readie to execute whatsoeuer hee commaunded. But it was not long before
there came newes vnto the campe, That Asdrubal the sonne of Gisgo marched towards
them, to make an end of the warre, and to free the countrey of those few Romanes which
were yet remaining in Spaine. Then the souldiours remembring their old captaines, began
to faint at their new captaines commands; so as the centeniers and other officers and bands,
yea and L. Martius himselfe had much adoe to reuiue them, reproaching them, that they behaued
themselues faintly like women, making fruitlesse lamentations, which was not the
meanes to reuenge the deathes of their Generals, nor to recouer their lost honour. The enemies
were not far off, and it was time to preach to them; when as suddenly there was seene a
strange alteration throughout all the Romane campe: Their mourning was conuerted into
furie, euerie man fell to his armes, and they cried out, that they should bring them to the enemie.
They sally forth of their gates,The Carthaginians proud of their great victorie, are defeated by the Romans. and with great courage receiue the Carthaginians, who
came disordred, and in a manner contemning them whom they had alreadie vanquished. This
resolution of the Romanes amazed them, wondering at the number and order of these men,
who had gathered them together, or what captains they had remaining after the death of the
two Scipioes. But in the end they were forced to flie, and were hotly pursued that day, vntill
that Martius thinking the souldious did abandon themselues too much,L. Martius restraines the furie of the Romans. caused a retreat to be
sounded, and himselfe standing before their ensignes, stayed their rashnesse, which might
haue drawne them into some disorder, and so (desiring nothing but reuenge and bloud) hee
brought them backe to the campe. The Carthaginians being thus roughly repulsed from
the Romane trenches, seeing they were no more pursued, they presumed it had beene feare,
and therefore they retired softly, and without care. Being in their campe they vsed the like
negligence in their gards and watches: for notwithstanding they did see the enemie neere
them, yet they did esteeme them to be but the reliques of two armies which they had beaten
and defeated some few dayes before.
Martius being aduertised by good spies, what was done in the enemies campe, hee vndertooke
rather a rash than hardy attempt, but the issue was fortunat. Knowing that he had the armie

of Asdrubal Gisgo now in front, the which was followed by the two others, hee thought
it lesse daunger to aduenture to fight with that alone, than to attend and bee beaten by all
three together: If he vanquished, he should restore their affaires, which were almost ruined,
and if he were beaten, at the least he should haue the honour to bee the assailant. Hauing
therefore assembled the captaines, centeniers, and chiefe souldiors, he deliuered vnto them
the pitifull estate of their affaires, and how that for the honour and reputation of their countrey,
for the loue they bare to the deceased Scipioes, and for the interest of their owne liues,
they were to carrie themselues valiantly and couragiously against their cruell enemies which
pursued them; whose negligence and contempt did inuite them to goe and assaile them, and
did promise them a certaine and easie victorie, especially if they made hast before all their forces
were vnited: the which afterwards they could not withstand, concluding, that there was
no other meanes to make warre, than to issue forth the next night, and to goe and force the
Carthaginians in their trenches. He found the souldiours well disposed at this motion, wherefore
he commaunded them to prepare their armes, and to be readie to depart when he should
commaund.The ouer great boldnesse of Martius, which proued suc^esfull by the enemies negligence. The Carthaginian armie made two lodgings, about a league and a halfe one
from the other: betwixt both was a great valley couered with trees. In this forest was an ambush
of Romane souldiours layed, with some horsemen, to stop the passage for such as
would runne from one campe to the other: the rest of the Romane armie was led with great
silence against the enemies, where finding neither gards nor sentinels, nor any thing else to
stop their passage, they entred farre, as if they had beene within their owne campe: then
suddenly the trumpets sounded, and making great cries they fell to the execution, killing all
they met, without mercie, and setting fire of the enemies lodgings and tents; but aboue all
they seised vpon the ports and issues, that not any one might escape. The amazement, fire,
cries, and slaughter, did so trouble the Carthaginians, as they could not heare one another,
nor giue any order for any thing. They found themselues among troupes of armed men:
thinking to flie, they were slaine at the gates, if any leapt ouer the rampars, they fell into
the ambushes, so as the enemies which were in the other lodging, could haue no intelligence
of this surprise, but by death, which was presented vnto them at the Romanes comming, who
with great celeritie (boyling with furie, and implacable desire of reuenge) came thither, and
there found greater negligence than they had done in the first campe: For these were farther
retyred from the enemie, and vpon the breake of day many were gone forth for forrage and
wood. There were armes at the ports, but no souldiours, some here, some there, some asleepe,
and some walking in their gownes in the trenches. The Romans fell vpon these carelesse
people, hauing no resistance made at the ports: they entred within the campe, and in
the middest thereof began a bloudie fight, the enemies running from all parts at the first
crie and tumult, striuing vertuously to repulse the Romanes. Which conflict was likely to
continue long: but when as the Carthaginians discouered their enemies targuets all polluted
with bloud, they fainted, hauing thereby an assured argument of the defeat of their
companions.A great defeat of the Carthaginians. This feare put them in rout, and to a miserable flight, euerie one sauing himselfe
where he found any way open to escape, and abandoning the campe. So in one night
and the day following, there were two campes taken, vnder the conduct of L. Martius.
The number of the dead, according vnto some, was seuen and thirtie thousand, and aboue
eight hundred prisoners. The spoyle was verie rich, and among other things, there was
found a great targuet of siluer, weighing one hundred thirtie and eight pounds, on the
which was grauen the picture of Asdrubal Barca,A targuet of siluer a monument of Martius victorie. the which was afterwards set in the temple
of the Capitoll, and it was called Martius targuet, remaining for a memorie of the victorie
which hee had gotten against the Carthaginians, where it continued vntill the Capitoll
was burnt.
This action restored the Romans power and authoritie in Spaine, and was the cause that
some time was spent without any enterprises of either side, either fearing to hazard any thing
after so great losses.
10 These diuers and contrarie accidents teach vs how little wee should relye vpon the
euents of war, and that it is not in the power of man to maintaine himselfe one day: wherefore
if modestie be necessarie in humane things, yea in greatest prosperitie, and to beare a respect

to the diuine power, presuming little vpon our owne judgements, wisedomes, happinesse,
and fame, it is chiefely in the conduct of warre. There wanted no qualities in the two
Scipioes, to make them great and famous captaines; yet they tooke bad counsell, both together,
and diuided and ruined themselues by their ouerweening, and by too much attempting
at one instant. The Carthaginians by the victorie which they had gotten, had made
the way open to ouerrun all Spaine at their pleasures: and moreouer, considering the cruell
warres which the Romanes their aduersaries endured with much difficultie in Italie; they had
now time, and a wished opportunitie to ruine them quite, drawing all their forces into those
parts: but being growne insolent and carelesse in this great prosperitie, they are suddenly staied
by a souldiour of no fame, without qualitie, and almost vnknowne, whom the diuine prouidence
would make an instrument to shew that it is he,God onely doth raise and ruine estates. and not the wisedome of man that
doth raise or ruine estates. The griefe which they had conceiued at Rome, for the defeat of
their armies, and the death of such excellent captaines as the two Scipioes, was somewhat
appeased by the successe of Martius enterprises: and consulting in the Senat touching that
which hee had written, there was not any one but did allow his actions to be high and generous,
and did much commend him: But as for the title which he gaue himselfe, of Propretor,
or Lieutenant to the people of Rome, the gouernement being vacant, that seemed vnto
them all arrogant and ambitious, yea a verie bad example, and of worse consequence: For
that (said they) if they should suffer the souldiors to chuse captaines at their pleasure, it would
blemish and ouerthrow the authoritie of the Senat,A comm^ndable seueritie in the an^ient Romans. of the people, the lawes and magistrats.
Some were of opinion, they should treat of that in Councell before all other things: but it
was thought fitter to deferre it for a time, and to send backe those knights which had brought
these letters to Rome, with a good answer. Wherefore they did write vnto L. Martius (without
giuing him any other title) touching the prouision of victuals, apparell, and other things
belonging vnto the armie.
These men being dispatched, it was first of all resolued by the Consuls and Tribunes, to
propound vnto the people, to name some one to be sent into Spaine, to commaund the army
whereof Cn. Scipio had had the charge.Anno Rome 542 C. Nero sent Propretor into Spaine. But this was deferred vpon some new accident, so as by
way of prouision they sent C. Nero with twelue thousand foot, halfe chosen out of the Romane
legions, and halfe of their allyes, three hundred Romane knights, and eight hundred
of the confederat townes. With which forces he past into Spaine, and landed at Tarracone,
whereas he presently went to field, hauing armed all the mariners, to make the greater shew.
To him, as Propretor, and lieutenant generall for the people of Rome, T. Fonteius, and L.
Martius, deliuered vp the legions, and all the forces which they had preserued, and happily
imployed after the defeat of the two Scipioes. With this armie Nero went to seeke out the enemie,
who was camped at a place called Pierres noires, or Blacke stones, in the country of the
Oretanes, betwixt the townes of Illiturgis and Mentisa. Nero had seized vpon the straits,
and so prest the enemie, as Asdrubal for feare of a worse accident, sent a herauld vnto him,
to offer and promise him, That if he would suffer him to goe out of those passages, hee would
breake vp his campe, and send his souldiours out of Spaine. This was pleasing vnto Nero,
wherefore a day was appointed to conferre and capitulate betwixt the heads of the armies.
At their first meeting there was propounded by the Romanes, That the Carthaginians
should deliuer vp their citadels, and at a certaine day draw their garrisons out of the townes
which they held, and that they should haue libertie to carrie away all that was theirs. All this
being granted them,Asdrubal a politique captaine, circumuents Nero. Asdrubal gaue order in the night (whilest that the Romanes were fed
with a hope of peace) that they should begin to packe away their baggage secretly, and to
draw away that which was most troublesome in the army, which way they could: yet he prouided,
that few men should goe out of the campe, least the enemie should discouer his fraud.
The day following they entred againe into conference, where as many friuolous things
were propounded, to passe away the day: and at night the Carthaginians did as they had
done before, spending many dayes after this manner, in disputes and difficulties, and
still discharging that at night which hindered them most. After that they had drawne all their
footmen and baggage into a place of safetie, there remained nothing but the horsemen and
Elephants.
Asdrubal,Asdrubal makes no conscience how to deceiue his enemies. as his feare decreased, so did his faith diminish, hauing no care to keepe that which
hee had promised: Yet they were to meet againe one morning, when as a thicke foggie mist
had couered all the earth. Asdrubal making vse of this occasion, sent to intreat Nero to excuse
him, if he came not to the parley, for that it was a festiuall day with the Carthaginians,
and therefore he could not with a good conscience treat of any businesse. This was well taken
by Nero. In the meane time Asdrubal through the fauour of this mist, escaped with all
his horses and Elephants. The third part of the day being spent, the Sunne dispersed this fog,
and then the Romanes found that they were deceiued, and that the enemie was escaped:
whereat Claudius being much grieued, began to follow him, but hee could not force him to
fight, there were onely some light skirmishes made betwixt the forerunners of the Romane
armie, and the Carthaginians rereward.
All things standing in this estate, Spaine remained quiet: such as had forsooke the Romans
after the aboue mentioned defeats, returned not; and such as had continued constant vntill
that time, reuolted not. At Rome the Senat and people were troubled to send a commaunder
into Spaine, that were of such authoritie and vertue, as he might deserue to succeed the
two brethren, the Scipioes. Euerie one was carefull to whom he should giue his voice: and as
there was much dissenting in such a choice, in the end it was decreed, that the election of him
which should be sent Gouernour into Spaine, should be made in a generall assemblie of the
people, by the voyces and suffrages of the companies: For the which a day was appointed by 
the Consuls.All affect honors but euery man slies the danger. They supposed this charge would haue beene affected and sued for, like vnto other
dignities; and that some would present themselues, and desire to be admitted: but no man
appeared: for euery one feared to go thither, where as two of the greatest souldiours that
were among the Romane captaines, had beene defeated and slaine in lesse than thirtie daies,
one after another.
The people being assembled at the appointed day, in great care and amazement, to see the
magistrats and prime men of Rome gazing one on another, without a word speaking, euerie
one apprehended the ruine of their commonweale:Great confidence of P. Corn. Scipio son to P. Scipio slain in Spaine. but P. Corn. Scipio, sonne to him that
had beene slaine in Spaine, shewes himselfe in a place somewhat higher than the rest, and
declares openly, That hee demaunded the gouernement. Euerie one then began to crie out
for joy, and to shew him some signes of fauour, as presaging vnto him a happie and prosperous
successe in that charge. The voyces being gathered, he was by a general consent chosen
head and Gouernour of Spaine for the people of Rome. Scipio was not then foure and twentie
yeares old:People inconsiderat do often repent. wherefore after this election made, the people repented them to haue been so
inconsiderat, as to giue so great a charge to so young a man, euerie one calling to mind the
late misfortune of that house, and euen with horrour of his name, who was so neere allyed
to two such desolate families; who went to make warre in a place where both his father and
vncle had beene slaine, and euen among their sepulchres. But Scipio finding this suddaine
alteration, spake vnto them, of his age, and of the charge hee vndertooke, with so great
an assurance, as hee purchased a good opinion with the people, and filled them all with
great hope.
If there were euer any one among the Romans indued with singular vertue,Scipio vertuous and hypocriticall and that could
put it in practise, and make good vse of it, from his youth, it was this Scipio, so as wee may
rightly say, that he had both the apparence and effect of vertue. He was I say, both vertuous
and an hypocrite both together, making vse especially of religion to win the peoples fauour,
and the obedience of such as he commanded; an vsuall policie which hath beene practised by
the great and wise men of this world in all ages,The antients vsed religion to keepe the people in awe. saying, that they must keep the people in awe
with the terrour of religion: the which were commendable, if they would adde vnto it, the title
of True: and that in stead of making men religious, they would not draw them to superstition.
Scipio did neuer begin day, but by prayers vnto his gods, faining often, that hee had visions
in the night, and receiued diuine commandements; and finally, that he had secret conference
with the gods, which in his time they did worship at Rome. Such was the peoples opinion of
his vertue, as they held him to be somewhat more than an ordinarie man, and they told a fable
of his birth,A fable of Scipioes birth. somewhat like vnto that of Alexander the great: which was, That he had been ingendred
of some god, who in the forme of a great serpent came and lay with his mother, and that
oftentimes such as entred into her chamber, had seen this apparition, but it vanished presently.

He maintained himself in this reputation with such art, as neuer any one complained that he
had been deceiued by his reuelations or myracles, finding means to breed an impression therof
in the hearts of men, without affirming or denying them directly. The people of Rome referred
to the direction of a man thus qualified, and so young, one of the most important gouernments,
and of the greatest charge in their whole estate. At the same time when as he laboured
for the gouernment of Spaine, Marcellus returned out of Sicile, where hee had taken
Siracuse, by the treason of Meric, a Spanish captaine, entertained by the Siracusans. There
were appointed for Scipio (besides the forces that were in Spaine) 10000 foot, and 1000 horse;
and there was giuen him for his lieutenant and assistant,M. Iulius Syllanus lieutenant and counsellor to Scipio. M. Iunius Sillanus: who parting out
of the mouth of Tiber with 30 galleasses, hauing fiue oares on a side, and coasting along the
shore of Tuscane and Gaule, they arriued at Empurias, at the foot of the Pyrenee hills, a Grecian
towne, founded by the Phocians, where Scipio landed with his armie, the which hee led along
the shore to Tarracone, causing his fleet to follow close by the shore.
Being at Tarracone, he held a generall assemblie of all the confederat townes of Spaine,
who sent their deputies and embassadours vpon the brute of his arriuall. He laied his ships
on ground, according to the auntient manner, and sent backe foure Marsilian galliots, which
had come to doe him honour. There hee heard the embassadours of the countrey, which
wauered, and were amazed at the accidents past. And although he had a great presumption
of himselfe,Malestie ioyned with modestie in P. Scipio. and of his vertue, yet did hee neuer let slip any proud speech, or that was ill
taken by any: but carried such a majestie in his words, as they were forced to beleeue what
he said.
Parting from Tarracone, he went to visit the confederat townes, and came vnto the place
where as the old armie did winter; whereas he did commend the souldiours, that after two
such great defeats, they had vertuously defended and preserued the prouince, not suffering
the enemie to enjoy the fruits of his victorie, but hauing chased him out of the countrey on
this side Ebro, had assured, and faithfully defended the friends and confederats of the people
of Rome.Scipio honors L. Martius, yet without disparaging himselfe. Hee did greatly honour L. Martius, yet so, as he would haue the world know,
that his owne glorie could not be ecclipsed by another mans. Syllanus tooke the place of C.
Nero: and lodgings were appointed for the new come souldiours to winter in. Scipio hauing
thus disposed of all things, and visited all places where his presence was required, hee returned
to Tarracone. His fame was no lesse among his enemies than friends, and euen now their
hearts were seised with some feare, but could giue no reason for it: which was as a presage vnto
them of that which should happen. The Carthaginian armies were retired into diuers
places to winter. Asdrubal sonne to Gisgo, was lodged farre off, about Calis, neere the Ocean,
Mago more into the land, aboue Castulo, in the straits and neere forests: and Asdrubal son
to Amilcar, about Sagunt, somewhat neere vnto the riuer of Ebro.
13 In the beginning of the Spring, P. Scipio hauing put his gallies to sea, and called the
succours of his allies to Tarracone, he commanded that both the ships of war and of burthen,
should bend their course towards the mouth of Ebro: thither the legions were appointed
also to come from the places where they had wintered. Then he himselfe parting, with 5000
of the associates, from Tarracone, came vnto the armie. There he spake much in commendation
of the old souldiours, which had beene in so many vnfortunate encounters, incouraging
them to better hopes vnder his commaund, not forgetting his fained reuelations. Hee layed
before their eyes the diuision of the Carthaginian captaines, who kept their forces dispersed:
which was the cause of the defeat and ruine of his father and vncle. Finding the armie willing
and resolute, he left M. Syllanus to gard that which lies on this side Ebro, with 3000 foot, and
300 horse, and he himself past on with the rest of the armie, the which consisted of 25000 foot
and 2500 horse. Some were of opinion, that the enemies armies lying farre distant one from
another, he should goe and fight with the neerest: But he thought otherwise; for he doubted,
that whilest he should spend his time to draw the enemie to fight, and to seeke his aduantages,
the others would make hast to come into those parts: so all three armies being vnited
together, he should not be able to make head against them. Wherefore he resolued to go
and suddenly to besiege new Carthage, a towne verie rich of it selfe, and abounding with all
sorts of prouision,Scipio begins his charge with a great enterprise of victuals, armes, and treasure, which the enemies had laid vp there for the
warre, and in the which the hostages of all the good townes and prouinces of Spaine were

kept: situated in a commodious place to passe into Africke, hauing an ample port, and capable
of any great fleet,Silence required in a great captaine. and the best of all that coast of Spaine. Yet hee did not acquaint any
man liuing with this his resolution, but onely C. Lelius, who commanded the armie at sea, hauing
giuen him charge so to direct his course,C. Lelius Generall of the gallies as at one instant they should come before the
towne with both armies. The seuenth day of their departure from the riuer of Ebro, Carthage
was besieged both by sea and land. The campe was planted on the North side, and
fortified with a palisadoe. The situation of Carthage was after this manner.The situation of new Carthage. In the middest
of that coast of Spaine, is a gulfe, which runnes fiue hundred paces into the land, and hath
not much lesse in breadth. The mouth of this gulfe is couered with a little island, which defends
it from all winds, except that which carries the name of Africke, of the place from
whence it comes, which we may cal Southeast, or Libecchio, according to the Italians. Within
this gulfe there riseth a peece of ground, almost like an island, on the which the towne is
built: Which peece of ground is enuironed with the sea on the East and South sides, hauing
towards the West a marish, which doth couer some part of the North, the which is not verie
safe, being in some places deeper than in others, as the sea doth rise and fall. A little hill
joynes the towne vnto the firme land, being some two hundred and fiftie paces. This part
was left open by Scipio, without any fortification: whether hee did it to braue the enemie,
or leaue this passage open to make continuall courses, and attempts vpon the towne, and
then to haue his retreat easie. Hee also planted his gallies within the port, seeming as if hee
would also besiege the towne by sea: giuing charge vnto the captaines to be watchfull, and
to stand vpon their gards: For in the beginning of a siege, he that is shut vp doth most commonly
make greatest sallies.
Hauing therefore prouided for all things necessarie for a siege, he then resolued to impart
his designe vnto his souldiors, and to shew them the reasons which had mooued him to begin
warre by a siege: and to persuade them, that it was easie to take it suddenly, whilest their
forces were farre off. Hee shewed them, That new Carthage was of such consequence, as
the taking thereof would conquer all Spaine for the Romanes: by reason of the hostages
of the princes, potentates, townes, and commonweales of the countrey, which were kept
there: the which being taken, the enemie, who had not any but mercinarie souldiours
(which must alwayes haue money) would soone bee abandoned by their men: for that the
money appointed for their pay, was within the towne, in the which the Carthaginians
made their treasurie, the magazine for their victuals, and for all sorts of munitions and engines:
All which things, said hee, the towne being taken, will come into our hands, and the
enemie shall bee left naked of all meanes to make warre. We on the other side, shall be furnished
of all things necessarie, but aboue all, wee shall get a good towne, and commodious
port, to receiue all things whereof wee shall haue need, as well by sea as land: yea we shall
haue an easie passaage into Africke, if it be needfull to go thither.
He made so liuely an impression of the opportunitie, profit, and easinesse of the siege and
enterprise, as they began to crie, that he should lead them to the assault, the which he did presently.
Mago commanded within the towne, who seeing that they prepared to come vnto an
assault, gaue order on his side to withstand their furie. He assured himselfe of the castle for his
retreat, putting fiue hundred souldiours into it, and as many vpon a high ground within
the towne, on the East side. He appointed two thousand souldiours to make a furioussally
vpon the enemie, and the rest of the multitude were put in conuenient places to succor where
need should require. These Carthaginians opening their gates, issued out vpon the Romans,
comming to the assault, and staied them, wheras the fight was long doubtfull: but the Romanes
hauing still fresh supplies, the Carthaginians were in the end forced to turne their
backes, in such feare and disorder, as, if they had beene eagerly pursued, they had entred pell
mell with them into the towne, in the which the tumult and confusion was no lesse, than
in the fight: for many of them left their gards for feare, as if the towne had beene taken.
Scipio obseruing what was done, and watching all occasions from an eminent place, seeing
the walles abandoned in some places, hee put all his armie in battaile, commaunding them
to march towards the towne with their ladders. He himselfe being couered with some soldiours
that were well armed, goes among the troupes, to encourage them, and to be an eye witnesse
of the valor and cowardise of euery one. The wals were again furnisht with soldiors by the

diligence of Mago, wherefore the souldiours comming to the assault, were entertained with
a shower of darts and arrowes which fell vpon them, more vpon their flanks than in afront:
besides the wall towards the firme land, was very high. Notwithstanding the souldiors animated
by their Generals presence, and with a desire to vanquish and spoile, planted their ladders
of all sides, and mounted couragiously, striuing who should get first to the top of the wal.
But many of the ladders, being ouer-laden with the multitude, brake, and they fell into the
ditch; besides most of them were too short. They gaue an assault in like manner towards the
sea, but with more amazement than danger, and of euerie side there was more brute than effect:
so as for this time the Romans were repulst, which gaue courage vnto the enemies, and
hope they should be able to keepe the towne; persuading themselues, they were out of scaladoe,
and that their armies should haue time ynough to come and succour them. But Scipio,
who was resolued to take this towne, did not suffer them to continue long in this errour: for
as soone as he had caused them which had giuen the first assault to retire, being wearie and
wounded, he made other fresh souldiours to aduance against the towne, to renew the assault,
taking the ladders from their companions. He had beene aduertised by fishermen of Tarracone,
which were in his campe, and who had waded through the marishes on the West side
of the towne, That there was no great store of water along the wall, when the tyde was spent,
and that it was easie to goe to the foot of it: and withall had obserued, that on that side the
wall was but low, ill rampared and fortified, and without gards, for that they assured themselues
of this stil water. Wherfore vpon the ebbe, and a strong Northerly wind, which draue
out the water, it was easie to wade through: he embraced this occasion, and sent some troups
thither, shewing them the easie accesse; saying, That the gods did inuite them, and assure
their passage, causing the sea to retire, whereby they might take the towne, as it fell out: For
finding no man to resist them, whilest that all were busie in other places, where as they feared
most, they entred into the towne, and marched directly towards the port where as the combate
was hottest, where they were sooner felt than heard; and the enemies were charged both
in front and in flanke, before they knew that the towne was taken: so as the number increasing
still, one helping another ouer the wall, euerie one sought to saue himselfe, and not any
one made any more resistance.New Carthage taken. Wherefore the gate being broken, and an entrie made for the
armie, they entred in battaile into the towne, with their commaunders and ensignes, and seised
vpon the chiefe places. Those which had past ouer the walls, made a great slaughter of
the inhabitants. The Carthaginian souldiours retired themselues into two forts, the one was
to that high peece of ground aboue mentioned, on the East part of the towne, garded by fiue
hundred souldiours, and the other was the castle, which Mago had reserued. The mount being
assailed by a part of the Romane armie, was presently forced: Soone after Mago seeing
there was no more hope, hauing made some resistance, yeelded the fort also, and all that was
within it. Vntill that time the Romanes slew all they met aboue fourteene yeares of age:
but the castle being yeelded, they were commaunded to cease from killing: then they began
to fall to the spoile,The number of the prisoners taken at Carthage which was verie great, where they had ten thousand prisoners, all men of
free condition. Those that were naturall citizens were set free, and the towne restored vnto
them, and all that was found belonging vnto them. There were also found about two thousand
artisans, whom Scipio adjudged to the publique of the people of Rome, giuing
them hope of speedie libertie, if they carried themselues like good men, and did imploy themselues
valiantly in the warres. With the rest of the youth which was able and strong, he furnished
his gallies: and encreased his armie at sea, with eight gallies taken from the enemie. Besides
this multitude, there was found within the fort the Spanish hostages, whom hee treated
as honourably as if they had beene allyed to the people of Rome.Scipio intreats the Spanish hostages kindly. Thus this wise Generall by
his mildnesse and humanitie woon the hearts of the people, with more honor, and much lesse
paine and daunger, than if he would haue forced them by armes, the which notwithstanding
he could well employ at need. The engines to batter and defend townes and forts, were infinit:
there were threescore and fourteene ensignes taken: the gold and siluer was carried to
the Generall: there were two hundred threescore and sixteen cups of gold, euery one weighing
a pound; and in siluer coined eighteene thousand and three hundred pounds weight, with
great store of siluer plate. All which things were deliuered by weight to C. Flaminius the treasurer.
Besides, there was found 40000 bushels of wheat, and 270000 of barley. There were

taken within the port an hundred and thirteene shippes of burthen, whereof many were still
laden with armes, corne, siluer, yron, cloth, stuffe to make ropes, and other things for
the vse of shippes: so as in regard of the spoyle, the towne of Carthage was esteemed of
least value.
14 The heat and furie of the souldiours being past, and Scipio in quiet possession of the
towne, without any contradiction, the same day leauing the towne in gard to Caius Lelius,
with the souldiors of his gallies and mariners, he brought backe the Armie and Legions to
their campe, very much tyred with so many exploits of warre which they had done in one
day: for they had fought hand to hand in field, had giuen an assault, and taken the towne with
extreame paine and danger, and that being taken, they had been still forced to fight with great
disaduantage against them that held the castle: wherefore he suffered them to rest vntill the
next day, when as he caused the whole armie both of sea and land to assemble, thanking first
of all the gods,Scipio doth first giue thanks to the gods for his victorie. who not onely had deliuered into their hands the richest towne of all Spaine,
but had gathered together in it as it were a spoyle of all that was precious in Spaine and Africke;
so as their enemies were left naked of all things, and they were abundantly furnished
with superfluitie. Then did he publikely acknowledge the valour of his souldiors, commending
such as had done their duties,He commends the souldiors valour. according to euery mans vertue and resolution, wherewith
they had repulsed the enemies, who had sallied out so furiously against them; and notwithstanding
the height of their wals, the dangers of vnknowne passages in the moores, and
the munition of their forts and citadels, they had past all, and surmounted all obstacles.
Wherefore although he knew that all deserued much, yet it was expedient to haue an especiall
regard to those that had first mounted vp the wals, and therefore he commaunded they
should shew themselues. There were two souldiors which pretended this honour to be due
vnto them: it was a crowne of gold made with battlements,A murall crown. which the custome and auncient
militarie order of the Romanes did giue vnto him that mounted first vp the enemies walls.
One of these was Q. Trebellius, a Centenier of the first Legion; and the other, Sextus Digitius,
a souldior of the sea armie;Emulatian for honour. who (as it happeneth often) had put the whole armie into factions,
either being supported by them of his ranke. C. Lelius maintained them of the fleet, and
M. Sempronius Turditanus the Legionaries; which contention had almost bred a mutinie, but
Scipio gaue them arbitrators, which were the two abouenamed, and P. Cornelius Caudinus for
a third, who should examine the cause, and informe him. Notwithstanding, after they had
taken from them these men of respect, who should be judges in stead of supporters, the disorder
grew greater: for although they seemed partiall, yet they did restraine the violent passions
of both parties, rather than maintaine them: which C. Lelius perceiuing, leauing the assembly,
he went and informed Scipio, that this businesse was handled without modestie, order,
or reason, and that they were like to fall to armes: and although they proceeded not so farre,
yet was it dishonest and a very bad example, that honour due to vertue should be sought in
that manner by corruption and false witnesses:The reward of vertue must not be sought by vicious meanes. for on the one side the Legionaries, and on
the other the mariners, offered to sweare what they would haue them, not knowing the truth,
nor considering that in so doing they made themselues guiltie of perjurie, and did draw the
punishment of that crime not onely vpon their owne heads, but vpon the whole armie, and
on the Romane Ensignes and Eagles,Romans religious violating and contemning in this manner the reuerence
of an oath: Hee aduertised him of these things by the aduice of Cornelius and Sempronius,
the two other arbitrators. Scipio gaue him thankes, and did much commend him for it?
wherefore hauing called the souldiours together, he let them vnderstand, That he was duly
informed,Scipio doth cunningly pacifie a great tumult. how that Q. Trebellius and Sext. Digitius were the first that mounted vp the wals
of Carthage, and the one as soone as the other, and therefore in witnesse of their vertues he
did honour either of them with a murall crowne. And thus he wisely pacified a great sedition
among the souldiors, and did auoid a detestable profanation of all religion; the which
was of great consequence among the Romanes, who were no lesse desirous, that the world
should be as well conceited of their pietie and justice, as of their valour. He afterwards rewarded
euery one according to his merits, and among others, Lelius Generall of the armie at
sea, to whom he did as great honor as he would haue done vnto himselfe, giuing him a crowne
of gold, and thirtie oxen. Hee caused all the hostages of Spaine to be brought before him,
which were found in new Carthage, to whom he spake courteously, giuing them good hope,

and letting them vnderstand, That they were fallen into the hands of a Nation, which desired
more to win the hearts of men,Scipio seekes to win the Spaniards hearts by his great b^untie. and to tye them vnto them by their good deeds, than
to constraine them by feare or force; and had rather haue other nations for their faithfull
companions, than to subdue by an odious seruitude. He caused the names of the Townes
and Communalties of Spaine to bee giuen him in a List, and enquired of the number of
prisoners of either of them, to whom he sent messengers, willing them to come and receiue
their owne. If at that time there were any embassadours of any of those places within
his campe, hee presently caused theirs to be deliuered vnto him. C. Flaminius Treasurer
generall had the charge of the rest, with commaundement to entreat them well. Whilest
these things were in hand, a Spanish Ladie, who was very old, stept out of the troupe of
hostages,A Spanish ladie hauing honor in recommendation and cast her selfe at Scipioes feet: shee was wife to Mandonius, brother to Indibilis,
Lord of the Ilergetes: beseeching him to giue especiall charge vnto the gards, to
entreat the women well and honestly: To whom Scipio answered, That they should not
want any thing: But (sayth she) it is not the fcare of any want that maketh me thus carefull:
for what doth not suffice them that are in our estate? I feare another thing; it is the youth of
those that are about me, whom I see in danger to receiue disgrace: as for me, my age doth free
me from that misfortune. There were about her the daughters of Indibilis, and manie others
of great houses, very faire, and in the flower of their ages, which honoured this Ladie
as their mother. Then Scipio with a noble and vertuous courage answered thus: Truely,
the discipline which I haue learned among the Romanes, and which I obserue, doth admonish me,
that whatsoeuer is held worthie of respect in any part of the world, should not bee violated or
corrupted by vs:Scipio honours the vertue of ladies, prisoners. but aboue all this, your vertue and modestie inciteth mee to be more carefull to
preserue you, seeing you shew that you haue not any way forgotten that which doth most honour
and adorne women. He therefore gaue them in gard vnto one, whose modestie and continencie
was well knowne vnto him, commanding him to keepe them with as much honest
respect, as if they were the wiues and mothers of their owne allies. Then they brought
vnto him a young virgine a prisoner, fit to be married, and so exceeding faire, as she drew
vnto her the eyes of all that beheld her. Scipio enquired of whence, and what parents
she was of? Among other things he vnderstood, That she was promised to a young Nobleman
of the Celtiberians, called Allucius: He caused her to be carefully kept; and sent
vnto the virgines parents, and to her future husband; that they should come vnto him:
who being arriued, he spake vnto this yong man (whom he knew to be exceedingly passioned
with loue) vsing a more artificiall speech vnto him than hee did vnto the virgines
parents.
I am (sayd hee) young, and so are you, wherefore my desire is, that wee conferre more freely
together: Your Spouse being brought before mee by our souldiours, and vnderstanding that
you loued her with great affection, I did easily beleeue it, seeing her beautie: for if it were lawfull
for me to seeke the pleasures which youth demaunds, and that my mind and thoughts were
not wholly employed for the affaires of the Commonweale,Scipio ouerrules his owne desires, to honor himselfe and his countrey. I would willingly be excused, if I did
abandon my selfe to the passions of loue, being so iust and lawfull, as of her that should bee my
wife: wherefore I fauour yours as much as I may. Your Spouse hath beene kept here with mee
with such honour and respect, as if shee had beene with her father and mother, and hath beene
garded to make a pure and absolute present vnto you, worthie of my qualitie and yours. I demaund
onely in recompence of this gift, that you will be a friend to the people of Rome, and if
you thinke me thereby to be an honest and a good man, such as they of this countrey haue heretofore
knowne my deceased father and vncle to haue beene, know that there are many such in the
citie of Rome; and remember, that there is not any nation vpon the earth, whose hatred you
and yours should more seeke to auoid, and to seeke their friendship, than ours.
This vnexpected fauor, the which could not be comprehended nor equalled by any recompence
or thanks, held this Spaniard seized with joy and shame: who taking Scipio by the right
hand, prayed all the gods to requite the great fauour he had done him, seeing he found himselfe
insufficient to make any satisfaction as he desired. Then were the virgins parents called,
who seeing their daughter alreadie freed without any ransome, entreated Scipio very earnestly
to receiue the gold which they had brought to redeeme her, which was of a good quantitie,
saying, they would hold it for a great grace, that he had preserued their daughter vndefiled.

Scipio being much importuned by them,Scipio addes liberalitie to his continancie. was content to please them: whereby hee caused
these presents to be brought before him, and hauing called for Allucius, hee sayd vnto him:
Besides that which you are to receiue of your father in law in dowrie with your wife, take
this present from me, commaunding him to carrie this gold away with him. Allucius hauing
receiued these honours and presents from Scipio, he returned joyfull and content to his house,
filling the whole countrey with his prayse and merits: and in truth it was an act as generous,
liberall, chast, and religious, as hath beene in the memorie of any age done by a Pagan
in his youth and vigour, and who had commaundement and soueraigne power in that
behalfe ouer the enemie; but it may be it was not without ambition, nor humane considerations.
There was a bruit throughout all Spaine, That there was a young man come like vnto a
god, who surmounted all things, as well by force of armes,Vertue giues to euery one hi^ due reward. as by his courtesie and bountie:
wherefore Allucius hauing made a leuie of his friends and vassales, came within few dayes
vnto Scipio, being accompanied with foureteene hundred horse, to doe him and the people
of Rome seruice.
Scipio after hee had stayed C. Lelius with him some dayes, to dispose of the hostages, the
spoyle, and all other things with his aduice and counsell, he sent him to Rome with a galeasse,
and Mago with him, who was late Gouernour of new Carthage, and about fifteene Senators
prisoners, to bee messengers and assured witnesses of his victorie. During his abode at Carthage,
he exercised his souldiors in all exercises fit for the warres, as well by land as sea. The
first day he caused the Legions to run armed foure myles together,Militarie exercises done by Scipio. which makes a league:
the next day he made them to scoure their armes before their tents: the third day they fought
in forme of battaile with poles and darts blunted: the fourth day they rested, and the fifth
they ran againe with their armes. Thus he did employ his souldiors during his abode at Carthage.
The mariners did exercise themselues in rowing vp and downe in their gallies, and
made sea fights to trie the swiftnesse of their gallies. These things were done without the
wals of the towne, to fashion their minds and bodies to all warlike exercises: but within Carthage
there was nothing but preparation to armes,The care and diligence of a good Generall. the Generall being carefull to see all
things himselfe in person. Sometimes he went aboord the gallies, sometimes he ran with the
Legionaries, sometimes he went to visit the workmen in the Port and Arsenall, vsing incredible
care and diligence. Hauing thus prouided for all things necessarie, repaired the breaches
of the towne, and manned it with good souldiours, he went to Tarracone. In the end
the deputies of many townes of Spaine came vnto him, where he had assigned an assembly for
all the allies of the people of Rome, as well old as new, whither came many deputies on this
side Ebro, and some beyond it.
The Captaines and Commaunders of the Carthaginians did what they could to conceale
the losse of Carthage;The Carthaginians dissemble their losse. and when as they found it was generally knowne, they sought with
good words to repaire their losse, saying, it was but a towne lost, surprised by a young man,
who persuaded himselfe, that he had thereby woon all: but when he should see three great
captaines and three victorious armies approach, he would abate his pride, and remember the
miserable end of his house. This they bruited among the people, yet knew they that the
losse of Carthage had much weakened their forces.
The 34 day after that Lelius was parted from Carthage, he arriued at Rome with his prisoners,
to the great contentment of the people. The next day hee deliuered vnto the Senate
what had beene done in Spaine; the towne of new Carthage (the chiefe of the whole countrey)
taken in one day, and many townes which were reuolted, returned again to the Romans,
and many others receiued into a new league; the which was verified by the prisoners answeres.
The Romans aboue all things feared Asdrubals passage: for they had worke ynough
to resist Hannibal alone. Lelius was sent backe into Spaine in the same vessell which had
brought him.
The yeare following,Ann. Rom^ 544. when as Qu. Fab. Max. for the fifth time, and Qu. Fulv. Flacc. for the
fourth time were Consuls of Rome. Scipio hauing spent all the Winter to win the hearts of
this barbarous nation, some by presents, others in deliuering them their hostages and prisoners,
Edesco a famous captaine among the Spaniards came vnto him: His wife and children
were with the Romanes, the which was partly the cause of his reuolt: and withall, he found

all the Spaniards to affect the Romanes, and to abandon the Carthaginians, as Indibilis
and Mandonius did, who were then the greatest noblemen in Spaine, and were diuided from
Asdrubals campe, lodging with their troupes on the sides of certaine hils, from whence
their passage was safe and easie vnto the Romanes.Asdrubal thinkes to repaire their losses by a battaile. Asdrubal finding this disfauour in the
Carthaginians affaires, resolued to hazard a battaile, before they were quite abandoned
by their allies; and Scipio on the other side demaunded nothing more: for besides the happie
successe of his enterprises, which puft him vp, he thought it more expedient to fight,
thinking it more safe to charge Asdrubal alone, than to stay vntill the other two Commanders
and armies were joyned with him. Notwithstanding all this, he had prouided for all
euents, if he should be forced to fight with many: for seeing that all the coast of Spaine
was cleere from the Carthaginian gallies, and therefore hauing no vse of his, hee disarmed
them at Tarracone, and put both the souldiors and mariners among his Legions, and
thereby did much encrease his armie: for he had found wherewithall to arme them within
Carthage, besides the armes which hee caused to be daily made. With this resolution
he departed from Tarracone, after the returne of Caius Lelius, without whose aduice Scipio
did not attempt any matter of consequence, and crossing a great countrey, hee found
all things quiet and fauourable for his armie: vpon the way he encountred Mandonius and
Indibilis,Mandonius and Indibilis reuolt vnto the Romans who came to meet him with their troupes. Indibilis spake vnto Scipio for them
all, not rashly or foolishly, after the manner of the Barbarians, but with great grauitie, modestie,
and pertinent reasons, rather excusing than glorifying themselues, that they were
come vnto him, leauing the Carthaginians partie; letting him vnderstand, That they did
it not lightly,In revolts the cause and not the name is to be regarded. or vpon the first occasion: for they knew well, that the name of reuolt was
execrable among old allies, and alwaies suspect vnto new, by the generall custome of all
nations, the which (sayd he) I doe not disallow, so as the hatred which is borne vnto such
men, be grounded vpon the cause, and not meerely vpon the name of reuolt. Afterwards
he made a discourse of that which they had done for the Carthaginians, and of the pride,
couetousnesse, ingratitude, and wrongs which had beene done vnto them by their souldiors;
protesting, that for these considerations they had long before resolued to addresse
themselues vnto the Romanes, with whom they thought that justice and respect had place,
although their persons were in the Carthaginians armies. Moreouer he sayd, That they
had recourse vnto the gods by prayers, who neuer suffer the violences and insolencies of
men vnpunished; and they entreated Scipio not to esteeme them lesse for their retreat vnto
him, nor to value them more, but that he should hereafter vse them according to their merits,
and according to the zeale and affection hee should find in them. Scipio answered, That
he would doe so,It is no rebellion to leaue them which despise God and nature. and that he did not esteeme them rebels, which held not themselues tied to
any alliances made with men, which make no account of any diuine or humane lawes; commaunding,
that their wiues and children should be presently deliuered vnto them: which was
a pleasing and acceptable gift vnto these Spaniards. The next day Scipio hauing taken their
oathes, and contracted with them, he sent them into their countries, to make new leuies of
men: afterwards, by the direction of these noblemen of Spaine, the Romane armie went to
meet with the enemie.
Asdrubal was come to lodge his campe neere vnto Becula,Asdrubal comes towards the Romanes. a towne or riuer (for in this
point the Authors are doubtfull, it may be it was both) beyond the riuer of Ebro, and had
set gards and sentinels on horsebacke vpon the approches; the which were at the first charged
by the fore-runners, and by them of the Romane fore-ward; who made so small resistance,
as they might easily judge, how much the two parties did differ in courage. These
horsemen made a speedie retreat towards their campe, being pursued by the Romanes, who
carried their colours euen vnto the enemies trenches and rampiers; and hauing that day
onely quickened their courages a little, they planted their campe. In the night Asdrubal remooued
his armie vnto the side of a hill, where there was a large plaine, hauing a riuer behind
him, and on either side steepe craggie rockes. This place commaunded another plaine,
the which had also a steepe descent round about it, the which was hard to mount vnto. Asdrubal
seeing the Romane armie in battaile in this lower plaine, he sent downe the Numidian
horsemen,Scipio encourageth his armie to fight. the souldiors of Maiorca, which were lightly armed, and the Africanes. Scipio
went from ranke to ranke to encourage his men, telling them, That the enemie fled the fight,

and durst not come downe to battaile, but sought places of strength, as one that had no confidence
in his vertue, nor armes: wherefore they should remember, that the walls of Carthage
(which were much higher than those rampiers) could not hinder their entrie, and that
there was no obstacle could repulse the vertue of the Romanes. To what end shall those high
clyffes where they are lodged, serue? but to make them haue the greater fals when you shall chase them,
and they flye to saue themselues; but I will stop that passage: and thus he encouraged his souldiours.
Hee then sent two companies, the one to seize vpon the strait of the valley by the
which the riuer did run, and the other to keepe the way, by the which they came from the
town by the vallies and passages of those hils into the open field. Then he led the most actiue
and light souldiours, which had the day before broken the enemies gards, directly to them
which were vpon the edge of the first plaine. When they began to mount, they found no other
hinderance but the roughnesse of the way, but when they came to approch within the
reach of their darts, they were presently entertained with a shower of arrowes, darts, and
stones, whereof the souldiors and horse-boyes had abundance in that place. Although the
place were hard to ascend, and the Romanes much galled with their darts, yet those which
had beene accustomed to the assaults of townes,He chargeth the enemie. growing obstinat against all opposition, in
the end got vp; then was the chance turned: for as soone as the Romanes could get any sure
footing, and come to handie blowes with the enemie (where they were not so expert as in
running and leaping) they were soone dislodged, and chased with great slaughter vpon their
owne battaile, which stood in order vpon the hill. Then Scipio hauing commaunded his victorious
souldiors to pursue and to charge this battaillon in the middest couragiously, he diuided
the rest of his troupes betwixt himselfe and Lelius, whom he commanded to compasse
in that little hill on the right side, and to seeke some easie way to get vp vnto it, and he in the
meane time went and charged the enemies vpon the flanke, who were much amazed and
troubled, thinking to turne the head of their battaile against the Romanes, whose cryes they
heard on euery side, when as suddainely Lelius came vpon them: so, as being prest on all sides,
they were soone disordered,Asdrubal and the Carthaginian armie defeated by Scipio. they themselues opening their rankes, to giue passage to their
companions which fled, hauing no meanes to retyre in good order, in a place which was so
strait and of such disaduantage. Here there was a great slaughter made, and it preuailed little
to flye: for the gards which were set by Scipio vpon the passages, stayed them; yea, the multitude
was partly stayed by the Captaines and Commaunders, to saue the baggage, whilest
the rest did fight: besides, their Elephants being terrified, were as hurtfull to them as to
the Romanes. There died eight thousand of the Carthaginian armie. Asdrubal stayed
not to the end of the battaile, but hauing sent some of the Elephants before with his siluer,
he retyred almost in the beginning of the fight, following the riuer of Tayo, vntill hee
got vnto the mountaines, where hee gathered them together that fled. Scipio seized vpon
the enemies campe, and gaue all the spoyle vnto the souldiors, except the prisoners of free
condition, whereof there were ten thousand foot and two thousand horse;Scipio seekes to win the Spaniards by his bountie. among the which,
such as were Spaniards were set free without ranson, and sent home to their houses: the
Africanes were deliuered to the Treasurer to be sold. The Spaniards which were in the Romane
armie, as well those that were before yeelded, as prisoners, rejoycing at the happinesse
of this victorie, honoured with his bountie, running about Scipioes lodging, began to salute
him with the title of King; but he let them vnderstand, that he was not pleased therewith:
wherefore hauing enjoyned them to silence by a trumpet, he sayd vnto them:Scipio as a Roman detest^ the title of a King. That he held
himselfe sufficiently honoured to bee called by his souldiours by that name which the Romanes in
their tongue gaue vnto their Generall; which was, Imperator, as one would say, he that commaunds
an Armie, which was a great title for him. As for the name of a King, it may be it was esteemed among
other Nations, but the Romanes could not endure it: yet hee had a royall heart, and if they
found such a disposition to be worthie of respect, they should be content to thinke so, and vse no
more that word of King. The Barbarians did obserue an admirable greatnesse of courage
in Scipio, that being seated in so high a degree, yet hee contemned the title which all other
men doe so highly esteeme. After this, he bestowed presents vpon the noblemen of
Spaine, and gaue three hundred horses to Indibilis, such as he would chuse of those which
had beene taken.

As they were selling of the African prisoners, by the Generals commaund, there was a
goodly young stripling, whom the Treasurer (hearing that he was royally descended) sent to
Scipio:Massina nephew to Massinissa prisoner to the Romans. being demaunded by Scipio, What he was, and of whence, and why he followed armes
being so young? he answered with teares, That he was a Numidian, and that his name was Massiua,
who being left an Orphan, retyred to Gala king of the Numidians, his grandfather by the mothers
side, and there had beene bred vp, and had followed his vncle Massinissa, who came lately into
Spaine to succour the Carthaginians with some bands of horse: That before that time hee had neuer
beene in any combat, for that his vncle restrained him, by reason of his tender age: but the day of
the last charge he had stolne from him, and hauing found meanes to recouer horse and armes, he had
thrust himselfe into the battaile with the rest, where he had beene ouerthrowne by the default of his
horse, and was taken by the Romanes. Scipio commaunded, that this Numidian should be kept,
vntill hee had finished that which concerned the publicke. Being afterwards retyred to his
tent, he sent for him againe, and asked him if he would returne to his vncle; who answered
with great signes of joy, That he would be very glad. Then Scipio hauing giuen him a gold
ring, a rich embrodered robe, a cassocke after the Spanish fashion, with a claspe of gold; and
hauing mounted him vpon a good horse, with rich furniture, he sent him away, giuing him
certaine knights to conduct him where hee pleased. These things being thus past, as they
consulted among the Romanes touching the affaires of the warre, many were of opinion,
That he should pursue Asdrubal; yet Scipio was content to place a garrison in the straits
and passages of the mountaines, employing all the rest of the Summer to win the Spaniards
by gifts and other fauours, receiuing many into the alliance and protection of the people
of Rome.
17 In the meane time the two other captaines Mago and Asdrubal sonne to Gisgo came
into base Spaine, to joyne with Asdrubal Barcinien, somewhat too late after his defeat, but
very fitly to consult of their affaires. They saw the Spaniards were daily practised to reuolt,
and that the Carthaginians should not be able to hold any one place in Spaine, if they did
not speedily preuent it. Asdrubal of Gisgo relyed much vpon the Spaniards which dwelt along
the Ocean, and about Gadiz, whereas the Romanes had not yet beene: but the other
two did foresee that the Romanes bountie would corrupt them as well as the rest; assuring
themselues, that there was not any Communaltie, nor priuat man in Spaine, which began
not to wauer,The Carthaginians resolue to carry all the Spanish soldiors out of Spaine, to preuent reuolts. and would neuer cease to reuolt, if they did not vse one meanes to preuent it:
which was, That Asdrubal Barcinien should gather together all the Spaniards he could, and
lead them into Italie; as it had beene formerly concluded: and by this means Spaine should
be disarmed of her owne forces, and more easily kept in awe by feare; and as for their armies,
they would supply them with other souldiors: and therefore they were of opinion, That Mago
should leaue his troupes to Asdrubal Gisgo, and passe speedily into the Islands of Maiorca
and Minorca, with store of treasure, to make good leuies of that nation: In the meane time
Asdrubal of Gisgo should retyre into the farthest bounds of the Lusitanians, to auoid all occasion
of fighting with the enemie: That Massinissa with three thousand horse chosen out of
all the bands, should spoyle the enemies countrey on this side the riuer of Ebro, and succour
their friends and faithfull allies. These things being concluded by the Carthaginian captains,
were presently put in execution.
In the eleuenth yeare of the second Punicke warre, M. Marcellus and T. Quintius Crispinus
being created Consuls at Rome, the gouernments of Spaine were confirmed for another
yeare to P. Cor. Scipio and to M. Sillanus. The sea Armie in Spaine being eightie gallyes, as
well of those which came out of Italie, as were taken at Carthage, were reduced vnto thirtie
by a decree of the Senate, commaunding Scipio to send fiftie into Sardinia, as well for the defence
of that Island, as of Italie, by reason of the great preparation which was made in Africke,
whereas they said the Carthaginians did arme two hundred sayle, to come vpon the
coast of Italie.Asdrubal Barci^ien passeth into Italy. This yeare Spaine was somewhat quiet, Asdrubal thinking onely of his voyage
into Italie, and to prepare his armie, wherein he vsed exceeding great diligence, vntill he
had passed the Pyrenees. Being entred into Gaule with great store of treasure, hee leuied
souldiors of that nation, and assured his passage by the Alpes; the which did much trouble
the Romanes: for they had then worke ynough to make head against Hannibal: but the wisedome

of C. Nero and M. Liuius, the new Consuls for the yeare following, freed them of that
care: who by an aduenturous, but a necessarie stratageme of warre, whilest they kept Hannibal
play in Apulia, defeated and slew Asdrubal, neere vnto Senegaille, with almost all the
Spaniards, Gaules, and Ligurians, whereof his army consisted:Asdrubal and his armie defeated in Italie. a defeat which did recompence
that of Canes, yet was it not without great effusion of bloud on the Romanes side, who lost
aboue 8000 men. Yet this did assure their estate, which vntill that time had beene in great
danger; and Hannibal vpon the newes of his brothers death, began to distrust his owne good
successe and his countries.
Spaine during Asdrubals preparation, and a while after his passage into Italie, had some rest
from warre, but they fell soone againe to armes. At that time Asdrubal, sonne to Gisgo, kept
about the Island of Gades, and in the West marches, neere vnto the Ocean. The Romanes
commaunded all along the Mediterranean sea, and held all that part of Spaine which lies towards
the East.Hanno sent from Ca^thage into Spain with a new armie. In the place of Asdrubal Barcinien they had sent Hanno from Carthage, with
a new armie; who hauing passed the sea, joyned with Mago. These two had leuied among the
Celtiberians (which is in the middest of Spaine) great troupes of souldiors, in a short space.
Scipio sent M. Syllanus against this armie with 10000 foot and 500 horse; who making great
marches, by difficult and strait passages, which are ordinarie in Spaine, he approched by the
meanes of certaine Celtiberian guides (who had changed their partie) neere vnto the enemy,
before they had any newes of him, being also aduertised by the same Celtiberians, when hee
came within two leagues of them, that vpon the way hee should encounter two of their
campes; that of Celtiberians, newly leuied, on the left hand, being some 9000 men; and the
other of Carthaginians, on the right hand. As for these, they obserued good discipline, kept
their gards, and had their sentinels placed in good order; but the others regarded it not, but
were secure and carelesse, like new souldiors: who thinking themselues at home, apprehended
nothing that was to be feared. Wherefore Syllanus marched first towards them, causing
his troupes to goe on the left hand, as closely as they could, least the Carthaginians in the other
lodging should discouer him. Then he sent forth some to discouer the enemies countenance,
and marched speedily after them. He was now within lesse than halfe a league, before
the enemie had any notice of his comming: for he went by broken wayes and deepe vallies
full of trees, where he fed his armie: there they returned vnto him, whom he had sent forth
to discouer, who confirmed that which the reuolted Spaniards had deliuered vnto him. Then
the Romanes (leauing their baggage vpon the place) put themselues in battaile, and marched
against the enemies, whom they found in great amazement, seeing the Romane armie
so neere. Mago, who was in the other campe, posted thither vpon the first bruit, to put them
in defence. There were some 4000 good souldiours among the Celtiberians, carrying targuets,
and 200 horse, the which were set in the front, and the rest to second them were lightly
armed; and in this manner they came to fight. They were scarce come without their rampiers,
when as the Romanes cast their darts at them, but the Spaniards stooped to auoid
them:M. Syllanus surprizeth and defeats the Carthaginians. then rising suddainely againe, they cast theirs against the Romanes, who standing
close, and couered with their targuets, defended themselues from any harme; but approaching
neerer, they came to the sword. The place where they did fight was of great aduantage
for the Celtiberians, by reason of the vneuennesse, whose custome was to skirmish with
leapes and jumpes, contrarie to the Romanes, who fight close, and stand firme: and therefore
this vneuen ground did not much trouble them, but that they were sometimes constrained
to breake their rankes, by reason of the straits and little groues, wherewith the
countrey is full, fighting sometimes one to one, and two to two; the which did also hinder
the enemies from flying, and exposed them to the slaughter. All those of the fore-ward
which carried targuets, were in a manner slaine, and they continued killing and ouerthrowing
those that were lightly armed, and the Carthaginians which were come to their succours,
led by another Hanno, who was taken aliue: but Mago retyred in the beginning of the
battaile with about 3000 foot and all the horse, and the tenth day after came vnto Asdrubals
campe. The Celtiberian souldiours which remained, got home into their countrey
through the woods and forrests. This victorie was very pleasing vnto Scipio, who did greatly
extoll Syllanus his vertue, and was in hope to end the warre, if he did speedily set vpon Asdrubal,
who remained in the remotest part of Spaine, in the Betique Prouince, which now

is Andalousie. He hauing intelligence, that Scipio marched towards him, dislodged from the
place where hee encamped,Asdrubal breaks vp his army, and leaues the field to the Romans. and retyred in great disorder towards the Island of Gades, then
thinking, that whilest he had an armie in field, they would not cease to pursue him, he resolued
to breake vp his campe, and to put his souldiours into garrison, as well for their safetie, as the
townes, and he himselfe went into the Island.
Scipio being aduertised, that the enemie had no armie in field, and seeing that he must make
warre in diuers parts of the countrey, and besiege one towne after another, a matter of some
difficultie, and of more toile than profit, he turned head again: yet for that he would not wholly
abandon that part of Spain to the enemy, he left L. Scipio his brother with an army of 10000
foot and 1000 horse, to trie if he could take Auringe, the chiefe place of the country, situated
in a fertile soyle, vpon the marches of the Mellesians, the inhabitants whereof were naturall
Spaniards. There were certain mynes of siluer found, and it was Asdrubals retreat, from whence
he made his courses into the countrey. L. Scipio being come neere the towne, before he did
wholly besiege it, he sent some to parle with the inhabitants, to know their minds, and to persuade
them rather to trie the Romans friendship than their armes. Preuailing nothing, he besieged
it, and cast a trench about it, with a double pallisado, diuiding his armie into 3 troupes,
the which should keepe the towne in continuall alarme. The first assault giuen by one of the
three troupes was valiantly maintained, and their ladders, with the souldiors which mounted,
throwne into the ditch, and the assailants were often in danger to be drawne vp with hooks of
yron, which the besieged cast downe from the wals and towers,The Romans besiege Auringe. so as the Romans were forced
to retire. L. Scipio finding that the small number which he had sent to the assault made the partie
vnequall, hauing therefore caused the first to retire, he sent all the rest of his armie to giue a
new assault: the which did so amaze the besieged, being tyred with the first assault, as the inhabitants
abandoned the wals; and the garrison of Carthaginians thinking that the towne had
bin yeelded, left their gards where they had bin set, and put themselues into one body. The inhabitants
fearing, that if the enemy forced the town, they should be all put indifferently to the
sword, resolued to preuent this danger by yeelding: and hauing opened a gate, they went forth
in troupes, carying only their targuets, to defend themselues from the Romans darts, and holding
vp their right hands naked in sign of peace, they let the Romans vnderstand that they yielded.
It is doubtfull whether they did vnderstand their meaning, seeing them come a far off, or
whether the Romans did doubt some fraud;Auringe taken by L. Scipio. but they charged these poore Spaniards, and cut
them all in peeces, and by the same port entred the towne with their colours flying, killing all
they met without exception, and in the meane time some of their troups forced the other gates,
and made way vnto their companions. The horsemen being entred, seized vpon the chiefe places,
as they were commaunded, being followed by them which they called Triaires, which are
footmen, fighting alwaies in the rereward, to second where need required. The rest of the legionaries
dispersed themselues throughout the towne, putting all to the sword. In the end the
Carthaginians were taken prisoners, and some 300 of the inhabitants: the rest which remained
after the furie were pardoned, and their houses and libertie yeelded them. There died at the taking
of this towne 2000 of the enemies, and some 90 of the Romans. It was a pleasing exploit
to them that did execute it, but especially to P. Scipio, who commended Lucius his brother with
all the honorable tearmes he could, equalling the taking of Auringe to that of Carthage: and
seeing winter approched, and that there was little reason to pursue Asdrubal, and lesse to vndertake
the siege of Calis, he retired with his campe on this side Ebro, and sent his soldiors to winter. He
sent L. Scipio to Rome, with newes of that which had bin done, and with him he sent Hanno, one
of the enemies captains, and many other great prisoners: this done, he retired to Tarracone.
19 The Romans after this good successe were in hope to chase their enemies out of Spain:
for hauing defeated one of their armies, taken one of their chiefe commaunders, the rest of
their forces being disbanded, and forced to liue within their forts and garrisons, in the farthest
parts of the countrey, Scipio thought there was now no cause of any present feare, but that he
might dispose of his affaires at leysure: yet he was deceiued: for Spaine by reason of their
stirring spirits; and the opportunitie of places, was in that respect as fit as any Region in the
world (after such defeates) to leuie new armies, and to reuiue the warre. Asdrubal then,
sonne to Gisgo (who did second the Barcins in wisedome and valour worthie of a great
Commaunder) being assisted by Mago, sonne to Amilcar, did so deale with the Spaniards,

as he leuied 50000 foot and 4500 horse of that nation, beyond the riuer of Ebro: he mustered
them neere vnto the towne of Sylpia, and there did the two Carthaginian captains encampe,
being resolued to accept of a battaile if it were offered. Scipio aduertised of this great vnexpected
preparation, drew his Legions to field, although he held them not sufficient to oppose
against so mightie an armie. As for the succours of Spanish allies, his meaning was to make
some shew vnto the enemie: yet would he not fortifie himselfe with so great troupes, as he
should haue cause to feare his ruine by their trecherie,Scipio trusts not vnto mercinaries, as his father had done. as had happened vnto his father and
vncle: wherefore he sent Syllanus to Colca, who commaunded ouer 28 townes, to demand the
succours of horse and foot, which he had promised to enroll during the Winter: and he himselfe
going from Tarracone, as he passed by the townes of his allies, tooke vp such souldiors as
he thought good, and came to Castulo, whereas Syllanus met him with 3000 foot and 500
horse. From thence he marched beyond Becula, hauing in his armie, as well of citizens of
Rome, as of allies, of foot and horse about 45000 fighting men. As they made their lodging,Mago and Massinissa charge the Romanes.
and did rampier it after the accustomed manner, behold Mago and Massinissa come with
all their horsemen, and charge them that were busie at worke; whom they had put to rout, if
Scipio had not caused certaine bands of horsemen to gard them, being in battaile behind a little
hill, who aduaunced against the first that were approched neere the rampiers, forcing
them to retyre in the beginning without any great difficultie. The fight was long, and somewhat
doubtfull against them which came afterwards close and in good order, but when as
the Romane bands which were dispersed here and there approched, and that the souldiours
which laboured at the rampiers, left their worke and fell to armes (being so commaunded)
the wearied refreshed with new supplies, and greater numbers comming still from the campe,
then the Numidians and Carthaginians finding the charge hote, retyred in the beginning in
good order, but being ouerpressed by multitudes, they could no longer make head, but were
put to rout,The two armies in battaile readie to fight. euery man sauing himselfe as he could. This encounter did puffe vp the hearts of
the one, and abate the courage of the others, yet there were daily skirmishes betwixt the
horsemen and them that were lightly armed. In the end Asdrubal put his army into battaile,
the which Scipio did also on his part: but either armie continued in that manner neere his fort,
vntill the euening: whereupon first the Carthaginians and then the Romanes retyred into
their campes, and thus they continued for certaine dayes together, Asdrubal comming first
to field, and making his retreat first, without any attempt one against another. The Romans
held the middle part in their battaile, and the Carthaginians did the like in theirs, being mixt
with Africanes: vpon the wings in either armie were their allies, all Spaniards: before the
Carthaginians battaile were their Elephants, which a farre off shewed like castles, and it was
giuen out, That the armies should fight in that manner, and that the Romanes and Carthaginians
(betwixt whom the quarrell was, holding the middest of the battailes) should encounter
with like armes and courage. Scipio hearing that this opinion was generally beleeued, changed
the order of his battaile: wherefore at night hee caused warning to bee giuen secretly
throughout the campe, That euery one should be readie for the breake of day, that both men
and horse should refresh themselues, the horsemen should be armed, and the horses sadled and
bridled: And when as day began to appeare, he sent all his horsemen, and the footmen that
were lightly armed, against the Corps de gard, which were vpon the approches of the enemies
campe, and then he marched himselfe with the whole armie, hauing against the expectation
both of his own soldiors and of the enemie set the Romans vpon either wing, and the troupes
of their allies in the midst. Asdrubal moued at the noyse which his horsemen made, goes out of
his tent, and seeing the tumult which was before the trenches and palisadoes of his campe, the
smal assurance of his soldiors, the enemies colours glistering a far off, and all the fields couered
with their troups, he presently sends forth his horsemen against the Roman horse, and he himselfe
hauing put his footmen in battell, goes out of his campe, without changing any thing of
his former order. The horsmens encounter continued long, without any aduantage: for whe^ as
any one was forced to giue back (the which was ordinarie on either side) they had a safe retreat
to their squadrons of foot: but after that the bodies of both armies were neere one vnto another,
Scipio giuing a signe, caused his horse to retire, and opening the ranks of foot, receiued them
within the battell: then he placed them in two squadrons behind the points of it, to reenforce
and support his foot; and when he saw it was time to charge, he commanded the battaillon in

the middest (which were all Spaniards) to march softly: he himselfe leading the right point,
had giuen charge to Syllanus and Martius (who had charge on the other side) that as they
should see him aduance,The Romanes and the Carthaginians ioyne in battaile. they should doe the like, and begin the battaile with the enemy, with
the most resolute of their horse and foot, before the two squadrons in the middest should
come to joyne. Wherefore stretching forth in this manner both the wings, either of them
with three companies of foot and as many horse, and some forlorne hopes lightly armed,
went with all speed to affront the enemie, whilest the others followed. Betwixt both
wings there was a void place, for that the Spaniards marched more slowly; and they had alreadie
begun the charge on either side, when as the chiefe strength of the enemie (which consisted
in the Carthaginians and old African souldiors) was yet a crosse-bow shot of, and durst
not turne towards the wings to succour their companions, least they should leaue the battaile
naked and open to the enemie, who came against them. The horsemen and Romane
souldiours did wonderfully gall the enemies wings vpon the flankes, the companies of foot
which made the point, prest them in front, and sought to cut off the wings from the rest of
the battaile, and euen now the partie was not equall in any part: for besides that the
points of the Carthaginians armie were furnished with horse-boyes and Spaniards newly
leuied,Scipioes policie deceiues Asdrubal. who had to deale with Romanes and braue Latine souldiors, the day being far spent,
Asdrubals armie grew weake, for that they had beene surprised by the alarme in the morning,
and were forced to put themselues in battaile without feeding; the which Scipio had
done of purpose, and to that end had delayed the fight for many houres, beginning it as
late as he could. It was past noone before the foot companies which were in the wings began
to charge, and much later before the battaillons in the middest did joyne, so as before
that all their forces came to fight, the heat of the Sunne, the toyle being so long on
foot, laden with armes, hunger, and thirst, had so tyred the Carthaginians and young Africanes,
as they were forced to support themselues vpon their targuets, they were so faint.
Besides the Elephants (terrified with the furious combate which was vpon either wing)
had run through their middle battaillon. Wherefore the Carthaginians tyred in bodie,
and fainting in courage, began to recoyle, but without disorder, euen as if they had retyred
by their Generals commaund. But the victorious Romanes charging them with great resolution
on all sides, when as they found them to shrinke, notwithstanding all the persuasions
of Asdrubal to keepe their rankes vnto the next hils, where they had a safe retreat (being
not able to withstand the enemies force) they all turned their backes and fled, feare being
of more force than shame.Feare is of more force than shame Being come vnto the foot of those hils, they would haue stayed
their ensignes, and rallied themselues to make head against the Romanes, who had
made a stand to put themselues in order to assayle them: but when they saw they were
eagrely pursued, they fled into the fortification of their campe, with great amazement, being
chased so neere by the Romanes, as they had almost entred pell-mell with them. There
fell so great a shower after the heat of the Sunne, as they which pursued, were forced to
stand still, and to retyre with great toyle vnto their campe: yea, there were some which did
superstitiously beleeue, That it was not good to proceed any farther that day. Although
the night and the raine did inuite the Carthaginians (who were tyred and wounded) to take
some rest; yet feare and danger made them to fortifie their campe with all expedition, which
they presumed would be assayled by the enemie at the breake of day: and seeing they could
not conquer by armes, they raysed their rampiers with stones, gathered out of the neere vallies.
Hereupon they did see themselues abandoned by their allies:Trecherie of the Spaniards to the Carthaginians, their allies. wherefore they thought
it best to be gone, holding flight more safe for them than anyforce. The beginning of the
Spaniards reuolt was by Atanes Lord of the Turditanes, who passed vnto the Romans campe
with great troupes of his subjects: and soone after two forts of importance were yeelded
vnto the Romanes by such as had them in gard. Asdrubal fearing this mischiefe would grow
greater, trussed vp his baggage and dislodged. Scipio being aduertised in the morning, that
the enemie was gone, sent his horsemen after them, and then marched after with the Legions
and the rest of the armie with all speed: who if they had followed them the rightway,
they had soone ouertaken them: but they trusted to their guides, who assured them of another
way, which conducted them to the riuer of Betis, where they might cut off their passage.
Asdrubal hearing that way was stopped, was once in mind to haue retired towards the Ocean:

but his souldiours (obseruing no kind of discipline) marched like men that fled, so as they got
some ground of the Romane Legions: yet the horsemen and souldiors which were lightly armed,
pursued them still, and did not abandon them; but charging them sometimes in the rere,
and sometimes in the flanke, did stay them and force them to fight, vntill the Legions arriued:
then was there no more any combat, but a slaughter, as of sheepe, vntill that their Generall
(the author of their flight) saued himselfe with about seuen thousand men, most without
armes; the rest were in a manner all slaine or taken. The Carthaginians which escaped with
their captaine,An absolute defeat of the Carthaginians. entrenched themselues suddainely vpon a mount, and there defended themselues
easily against the Romanes, who did striue to get vp; yet being in a naked and desart
place, and vnfit to endure a siege of few dayes, many disbanded and went to the Romanes
campe: the which Asdrubal perceiuing, he abandoned his souldiors, embarked himselfe,
and passed into the (...) of Calis. Scipio aduertised of his flight, left Syllanus with tenne thousand
foot and a thousand horse to besiege their campe, and he with the rest of the armie returned
in 70 daies to Tarracone, where he should dispose of the affaires of the princes and noblemen
of Spaine, and giue rewards according to euery ones merit.
After his departure,Massinissa practised by Sillanus. Syllanus had secret conference with Massinissa, who hauing new designes
in his head, passed into Africke with a small traine, that he might draw his people to
his owne humor. The cause of his suddaine change did not then appeare, the which he did
afterwards justifie by a long and constant loyaltie, wherein hee did persist vntill his death.
Mago did also passe into the Island of Gades, Asdrubal hauing sent backe the vessels: so as
the armie (being abandoned by the Commaunders) was dispersed, some sauing themselues
by flight in the neighbour townes, and some yeelding to the Romanes. In this manner were
the Carthaginians chased out of Spaine,The Carthaginians chased out of Spaine. about the twelfth yeare of the second Punick warre,
by the conduct and happinesse of Publius Scipio, fiue yeares after that he had had the charge of
the armies and gouernment of Spaine. Within few daies after Syllanus came to Scipio, being
at Tarracone, bringing him newes, that the warre was ended. L. Scipio was sent from thence
to Rome, with many prisoners of marke to carrie newes of the absolute victorie obtained
of the Carthaginians in Spaine. But Scipio not content to haue effected so great matters in
that countrey, had a greater designe, so great was his mind, and so desirous of glorie.
Wherefore knowing, that there was not any one man to make head against him in Spaine,
he embraced all Africke,Great dangers accompany great enterprises. whither he passed to make factions, and to trouble the Carthaginians
Estate: the which succeeded happily, but it may be with greater hazard than was fit for
his ranke.
Pub. Cornelius Scipio being returned out of Africke, where he had withdrawne from the alliance
of the Carthaginians king Siphax their neighbour, and although hee did now see
Spaine quiet in respect of the Africanes; yet he knew, that some townes did containe themselues
more for feare than for any loue, as those which had greatly incensed the Romanes
during the precedent warres: the first and chiefe, either in greatnesse or offence, were Castulo
and Illiturgis:Castulo and Illiturgis (...) and rebellious townes. Those of Castulo had shewed themselues friends during the prosperitie
of the Romanes; but after the defeat and death of the two Scipioes, they had reuolted to
the Carthaginians. The Illiturgians had done worse: for besides their reuolt, they had deliuered
such as had saued themselues there after these defeats, to the slaughter. These crimes
were wisely dissembled by Scipio, when hee came first into the Prouince, and that matters
were yet doubtfull: for if he should then haue punished them; he should haue respected justice
more than profit.Not expedient at all times to be iust. All things being now assured and quiet, hee thought it a fit time to
punish them. Wherefore hauing called Lu. Martius to Tarracone, he sent him to besiege
Castulo, with the third part of his forces; and hee himselfe departing from Carthagena,
led the rest of his armie before Illiturgis, whither he came in fiue dayes march. The inhabitants
doubting, that they would not leaue their trecheries vnpunished, had fortified their
towne, and furnished themselues with all things necessarie to endure a siege. Scipio let
his souldiors vnderstand, That these Spaniards did rightly feare that which they had merited,
exhorting them to goe against them with greater furie than against the Carthaginians
themselues. For (sayd he) the quarrell which wee haue had against them of Carthage,Scipio besiegeth Illiturgis. was onely
for glorie and desire of rule, but wee take armes against these men, to punish them for their
wickednesse and cruell treason. The time is now come, when wee shall reuenge the murthers done

vnto our companions, and the trecherie which they had prepared for you, if you had fallen into
their hands after the defeats: and therefore let vs deale so, as neuer any Nation shall hereafter
dare to wrong the souldiors or citizens of Rome in any disgrace whatsoeuer. Hauing animated
his souldiors with these words, hee commaunded ladders should be brought, and distributed
to the most assured companies: then diuiding his armie into two, he commaunded, That
Lelius his Lieutenant should assayle the towne on the one side, and he would lead the rest
into diuers places; the which was executed with great courage and resolution. The townesmen
had no need of any captaine to encourage them in their defence: for euery one knowing
his danger,The remembrance of great crimes make men desperat. was both a spurre to himselfe and his companion, saying, That it was not
the honour of a victorie which they sought of them, but their punishment: That they must
make an account to die, but it was more honest and safe to hazard it fighting (whereas
euery one giueth as well as taketh, and oftentimes the vanquished riseth, and the victor falleth)
rather than to be led bound and manacled (after that wee shall haue seene our towne
burnt to ashes) to end our liues with torments, and all ignominie, in the sight of our wiues
and children,Honor and libertie animate valiant men. who shall be made slaues. Wherefore they came resolutely to the walls, not
onely such as were able to carrie armes, but old men, women, and children, which made resistance
aboue their forces; they brought stones, and gaue armes to those that did fight. It
was not onely a question of libertie which giueth courage to valiant men, but they did apprehend
the horror of punishments, and the vild and ignominious death which they should
suffer: euery one tooke courage, seeing his companions valour: Wherefore if it was well
assayled, it was better defended: so as this Romane armie, which had subdued all Spaine,
being often repulsed by the inhabitants, did shamefully wauer. Which Scipio perceiuing,
he feared least his men should faint after so many vaine attempts, and the enemies should
grow more hardie, wherefore hee thought it needfull to hazard his owne person, and to bee
partaker of the danger: whereupon he commanded them to make ready their ladders againe,
and reproching the souldiors of cowardise, he aduanced to mount himselfe (if he had found
them slacke) and came neere vnto the wals,Scipio obstinate to vanquish or die. not without great danger: but the souldiors being
very carefull of their Generall, began all to crie out; and carried ladders to all parts. Lelius
did also presse them on his side: so as then the valour of the defendants was forced to
giue place, and they abandoned the rampiers. It happened, that during this tumult, the
fort which was held impregnable was surprised: for certaine souldiors of Africke reuolted,
which were in the Romane armie, seeing that they of the towne were busied to withstand
an assault in the most dangerous places, and the Romanes as busie to get an entrie into
the towne, they obserued the highest part of the towne, couered with a steepe rocke, which
had neither rampier, gard, nor defence. These men being actiue and nimble, began to
creepe vp this rocke, with the helpe of certaine pykes of yron, which they did strike into
the stones, and made steps of them, the first helping vp their companions which followed;Illiturgis taken, and the executi^n cruell.
so as in the end they got vp to the top of the rocke, from whence they began to run with
horrible cries towards the towne, which was alreadie woon by the Romanes. Then shewed
they the fruits of their choler and hatred: none were spared, but all put to the sword,
men, and women, of all ages and sexes; yea, and poore infants: no man cared for spoyle,
the fire deuoured what might be consumed,And quite ruined. and the rest was ruined, for that the Romanes
would not leaue the markes of a towne, nor the memorie of any habitation of such enemies.
From thence Scipio led his armie to Castulo. This towne was not onely kept by Spaniards,
which were come thither from diuers places, but also by the remainder of the Carthaginians,
which were brought thither to garrison after the retreat of their armie. But before
that Scipio arriued, they had newes of the taking of Illiturgis, which strucke a great rerror
among them, and made them almost to despaire: and as euery mans guilt was not alike, so euery
one sought to prouide for his owne safetie. Wherefore they began to distrust one another,
and in the end fell to an open diuision, the Spaniards seperating themselues from the Carthaginians:
Cordubelus commaunded the Spaniards, who spake openly, That they must yeeld vnto
the Romans:Cordubelus yeeldeth vp Castul^, and the Carthaginian garrison. Himilco was chiefe of the Carthaginians, whom Cordubelus deliuered vp with
the towne vnto the Romans. By this voluntarie reddition, being also not so culpable as they
of Illiturgis, the victorie was vsed with lesse rigor.

22 From thence Martius was sent against them of that nation, which plaid the rebels, to
subject them to the Romane yoke: and Scipio returned to new Carthage, to performe the
vowes which he had made vnto his gods, and to represent the games of fencing which he had
prepared in honour of his deceased father and vncle. These fencers which were brought forth,
were none of his slaues, nor such as had beene made free, which the master fencers were wont
to present vnto the people, which sell their bloud, and are hired for money: but all those that
did fight, came willingly without any fee:Combats vpon furious ambition for some were sent by the noblemen of the countrey,
to shew the valour and dexteritie of the nation; others presented themselues vnto the
combat, for the loue they bare vnto their Generall; others thrust forth with glorie, defied,
or being challenged, accepted the combat willingly. Some there were, which not able to
end their suits by pleading, resolued trie it by the sword, who were of no base condition, but
gentlemen of noble houses. Among others Corbis and Orsua,A suit decided by armes. two cousin germines, who
contended for the principalitie of the towne of Ibis, would end their controuersie by armes.
Corbis was the elder. The father of Orsua had lately ruled in that towne, hauing succeeded
to that seigniorie by the death of his brother. Scipio would haue reconciled them by justice,
and knowledge of the cause; but they both answered, That it was not the custome among
kinsfolkes, and that they would not haue any gods nor men to be their judges, but Mars. Corbis
was the stronger, and Orsua the more couragious, by reason of his youth, both resolute to
die, rather than to submit himselfe vnto his aduerse partie. With this resolution they shewed
themselues to the whole armie. The eldest also had more experience in his weapon, and was
more cunning, so as he did easily vanquish the foolish presumption of the younger. To these
sights of fencers were added funerall plaies, according to the manner of the Pagans, with preparation
fit for the countrey, and as at the warre.
23 During these shewes, the Romanes lost no time, Scipioes lieutenants being seriously
imployed about their affaires. Martius hauing past the riuer Betis (called Circe by them of
the countrey) tooke two good and rich townes, without striking stroke. There was another
towne called Astapa, the which had alwayes held the Carthaginians partie,Astapa. and made profession
to hate the Romanes deadly, yea when there was not any necessitie of warre: and yet
their towne was neither strong by nature, nor art, whereby they should grow proud: but the
nature of these men (who had no delight but in theeuing) had caused them to spoile the countries
of the Romane allies, and to strip their victualers, souldiors, or merchants,Astapians desperat theeues. if they found
them scattered; yea they had layd an ambush for a great troupe of men passing through their
countrey, and hauing surprised them in a strait, had slaine them. When as the armie came before
the towne, the inhabitants prickt with the feeling of their faults, expected no mercie of
their enemies, and seeing no meanes to hold against a siege, they tooke a cruell and detestable
resolution: for they brought into the middest of their market place all that was good and precious
within the towne, and laied it on a heape, vpon the which they set their wiues and children;
then they planted great store of fagots and other wood round about it: this being
done, they appointed fiftie yong men well armed, for the gard thereof, enjoyning them, that
whilest the euent of the fight betwixt them and the Romanes was doubtfull, they should remaine
there, and be faithfull gardians of their goods, and of those persons whom they held
deerest: but if they saw it succeeded ill, and that the towne was in daunger to bee lost, they
might then be assured, that all they which had fallied out vpon the enemies were slaine in the
fight: wherefore they did conjure them by all the celestiall and infernall gods,A barbarous and detestable resolution of the Astapians. to remember
their liberties, which that day should end by an honest death, or by an infamous seruitude:
and therefore they should not leaue any thing that belonged vnto them, wherewith the enemie
in his furie might glut his crueltie: to which end they had both fire and swords in their
hands; and that therefore such things as were to perish, should be destroyed by the hands of
their faithfull friends, rather than be exposed to the scorne and insolencie of the enemie. This
spoken, they added an execrable curse vpon those that should suffer themselues to be mooued
with any pitie or tendernesse of heart, and forbeare to execute that which they had decreed;
then hauing opened the gate, they marched directly to the Romane trenches, with more than
a brutish furie. The Romanes had no conceit they should sally thus forth vpon them, wherefore
they found the passages vnto the campe but ill garded. Some troupes of horse and foot

lightly armed, were suddenly sent out against them, where they came to fight with more
furie than good order: Wherefore the horsemen which came first to charge the enemie (being
repulsed) amazed the footmen, so as the Astapians had come vnto the Romanes campe, if
the legions (hauing some little leasure) had not put themselues into battell. There the enemies
like madde men, ran desperatly vpon their weapons: but the old souldiours keeping
their ground, and ouerthrowing the formost, stayed them that followed: then seeking to beat
them backe, finding them obstinatly resolued to dye where they stood, they opened their battailon,
compassing them in with the multitude, and slew them all. This was done like souldiours,
against incensed enemies, that were armed: but within the towne there was a barbarous
slaughter,The Astapians do barbarously murther their owne wiues and children. where as the citizens themselues murthered the weake vnarmed multitude of their
wiues and little children, casting their bodies yet breathing into the fire, whose bloud did in a
manner quench the flames. In the end being tyred with this pitifull slaughter of their owne,
they leapt armed as they were into the middest of the fire. Thereupon the victorious
Romanes entred, who beholding this cruell spectacle, stood amazed for a season: then seeing
the gold and siluer shine through the fire (thrust on with greedinesse) they went in to gather
it vp; but many of them were roasted in the fire; being kept in by the prease that followed
them.
Thus ended the siege of Astapa, being consumed by fire, with all her treasure, whereas the
Romans got no spoile. After this exploit Martius tooke in many other places of the country,
which yeelded to his mercie, and then returned with his victorious armie to new Carthage.
About this time there came certaine deputies secretly out of the island of Gades, who promised
to yeeld vp the towne with the Gouernour,The Gaditanes offer to deliuer their town vnto the Roman^. into the Romans hands, and all the Carthaginians
which were there in garrison. Mago was retired thither, after the dissolution of the
campe, when as he was forced to flie, who hauing gathered together certaine ships, assembled
some troups out of Spaine and Africke, neere vnto the strait. These citizens being heard, and
hauing plighted their faith one vnto another, to obserue what had beene promised, they were
sent backe. Scipio sent Martius thither by land with his ablest troupes (and Lelius by sea) with
seuen gallies and a galleasse; to the end, that with a mutual consent they should mannage this
enterprise both by sea and land.
24 Whilest they are busie to surprise Gades, Scipio fell verie sick,Scipio falls verie sicke. but it was made greater,
according to the common custome of men: the which did much trouble the whole countrie,
and euen those that were farthest off: and it seemed by the discord which grew of this false
brute, that if it had beene true, it would haue bred a great alteration of the affaires in Spaine;
for neither the allies, nor the Romane armie, could containe themselues in their duties. Mandonius
and Indibilis being sorie that the effect was not answerable to their conceptions,Ambition makes Mandonius and Iudibilis dis^oial which
was, to make themselues kings, as soone as the Carthaginians were expelled, mooued the
Lacetanes of their countrey to armes, with many Celtiberians, forraging and spoyling the
fields of the Suessetanes and Sedetanes, who were allied to the Romanes. Besides, there
grew a mutinie in the Romane campe, neere vnto the riuer of Sucro, or Xucar, where as there
lay eight thousand men in garrison, to keepe the people in awe on this side the riuer of Ebro.
These troupes had begun to grow disordered, before the vncertaine brute of Scipioes death:
which grew through idlenesse, the which doth commonly fall out,Idlenesse makes soldiors insolent and (...). when as souldiours want
imployment. Then they grew licentious, and discontented, for that being accustomed to
take spoiles, and to riot at their enemies charges, during the warres, they now saw themselues
restrained, and gouerned according to the orders of the time, when as the warre ceased. And
these were their reasons. If they make warre (said they) in any part of Spaine, why doe they
keepe vs here, where there is no imployment? If the warre be ended, why do they not lead
vs backe into Italie? Then they demaunded their pay after an insolent manner,They that are accustomed to liue vpon spoile, cannot subiect themselues to discipli^^. not like
vnto souldiours well disciplined. When the captaines and officers of companies went the
round in the night, those that were in the corps degard vsed many opprobrious speeches
against them. Some stealing forth in the night, spoyled the countrey of their friends and
neighbours: yea they grew so insolent, as euen in the day time they would goe out of
the campe, and abandon their ensignes without leaue. Finally, all was done after the appetite
of souldiors which were without order or discipline, and without any commaund of their

heads and Tribunes; onely they were content there should be some forme of a Roman campe
maintained, and did suffer the captaines to sit in their accustomed places to doe justice: they
tooke the word from them, went to the gard in their turnes, and set their sentinels. And although
they had in a manner supprest the authoritie of their commaunders, yet they made a
shew to obey them, whom in truth they commaunded. This they did, thinking that in the
end their captaines, being infected with their frenzie, would joyne with them. But when they
saw that they reprehended them sharpely, and that they sought to suppresse their furies,The Roman captaines chased out of their camp by the mutined souldiours. and
openly refused to be companions vnto them in their insolencies, they chased them first from
their seats, and in the end forced them to forsake the campe. Which done, they began to
chuse the most seditious among them for their leaders and captaines, creating with a general
consent C. Albius Calenus, and C. Atrius Vmber, simple souldiours, to be their Tribunes: who
not contented to take the markes of Tribunes, presumed to vsurpe the authoritie of the Soueraigne
head, causing rods and axes to be carried before them, not remembring that those
rods and axes wherewith they thought to terrifie other men, should fall vpon their owne
shoulders: for the conceit they had of Scipioes death, did blind their vnderstandings, imagining
they would presently take armes throughout all Spaine, and that in these tumults they
should haue meanes to spoyle the champian countrey, and to ransacke townes; and that any
excesse in such a tumultuous time,In a confusion of the state all excesse seemes light would be held light. As they did expect from time to time
fresh newes not onely of Scipioes death, but also of his funerall, when as they saw that not any
one did come, and that this bruit did vanish by little and little, they began to find their
owne errours, demaunding in a rage, Where they were that had abused them with that vntruth;
seeking to persuade themselues, that they had not maliciously inuented it, but rather
beleeued it inconsideratly. Wherefore these new captaines were abandoned, and they began
now to abhorre the false markes and titles, and the commaund which they had vsurped, apprehending
the force of justice, whereunto they were subject. This sedition being somewhat
pacified, and certaine newes come of Scipioes recouerie, there came seuen Colonels,
sent by him vnto the campe: at whose arriuall the souldiours began againe to fall into their
frenzie, but they were pacified by them with good words, addressing themselues to such as
were of their acquaintance: then going about the lodgings and tents,The discretion of the Colonels to pacifie the m^tinie. euen vnto the Generals
seat and lodging, if they found any assembled together, they spake mildly vnto them, demaunding
the reason of their alteration, and blaming in some sort their actions. Their generall
excuse was, That they were not payed, and that they had beene carefull to punish them
of Illiturgis for their wickednesse committed after the defeat of two armies, and of two great
captaines, but not rewarded their desers, which after these misfortunes had maintained the
honour of Rome, and preserued the countrey by their vertue and valour. The Tribunes or
Colonels seemed to allow of their reasons; saying, That they would make report thereof vnto
Scipio, and that they were exceeding glad there was no harme, but that might be easily
cured: that (thankes be to God) Scipio and the commonweale of Rome, had meanes both to
content and reward them.
Scipio was better acquainted with warre than with ciuile seditions, so as he was somewhat
troubled how he should carrie himselfe in this action, fearing that as the souldiours had done
in their excesse, so he in punishing them might exceed measure: he therefore resolued to proceed
with mildnesse. There were collectors sent presently to the tributarie townes, to leuie
money, giuing the souldiours hope by that meanes, that within few dayes they should be mustered
and paied: and then he made a proclamation, That all the souldiours should come to
new Carthage, to receiue their pay, either all together, or by companies apart. In the meane
time the Spaniards which were rebelled, retired home to their houses, the which did wholly
pacifie the sedition in the Romanes campe. Mandonius and Indibilis being aduertised, that
Scipio was liuing, gaue ouer their enterprise, and were abandoned by all those that had followed
them, finding not any one, neither Romane nor stranger, that would bee a companion
of their follies.
There grew a question among the seditious, Whether they should go to Carthage or not,
euerie one casting what was most safe and expedient for them: if they must needs goe, whether
they should goe all together, or in companies one after another: in the end they resolued,

that their best course was to submit themselues vnto Scipioes mercie; saying,The mutinous souldiors resolue to submit themselues to Scipioes mercie. That he had
pardoned enemies, and that their offence was none of the greatest, for there had not beene any
man slaine nor wounded: And for the safest, they should goe all together. Whilest they
consulted what they should doe, they also resolued at Carthage, how they should intreat
them: Some were of opinion to punish them all in generall; saying, That it was a meere rebellion,
and no sedition: others aduised to punish the authors onely, which might bee some
fiue and thirtie in all. This aduice was followed, that the punishment should end whereas
the offence began. And to the end they should not thinke this counsell was held to punish
the seditious, as soone as euer they came forth, a proclamation was made, That euerie one
should haue his horse and armes readie to march against Mandonius and Indibilis, and that
they should giue order to haue victuals readie for certaine dayes, and to make other preparations
for the armie, which should march.
The seuen Tribunes which had beene sent to the mutined souldiours, and who had pacified
them with good words, were sent againe to meet them; to either of which was giuen a note,
in the which were written fiue names of the authors of this disorder, with commaundement,
That being among them, either of them should seeke to draw them that were in his roll into
his lodging, and there make them good cheere, and to drinke of the best vntill they were
drunke, and then to put them into safe keeping, without any brute. These troupes approached
to new Carthage, and vnderstood by all those they met, that the next day they should
march against the Lucetanes, vnder the conduct of Syllanus and Lelius: the which did greatly
rejoyce them, not onely freeing their hearts from feare, but also persuading themselues,The heads of the seditious are punished for the multitude.
that by that meanes their Generall should rather be in their power, than they in his. About
Sunne set they entred into the towne, finding the other souldiours preparing themselues to
march. They were entertained with words fit for the businesse which was in hand; That their
comming was pleasing vnto the Generall, the other armie being readie to march, with such
like words. They lodged and refreshed themselues, and the heads of the mutines were
drawne by a deuice into certaine houses, where they were taken and bound. A little before
day the baggage of the armie which they made shew should dislodge, began to march, and
at the breake of day the companies followed: but they stayed at the gates, whereas they set
good gards, that no souldiour might goe out of the towne. Then they called these souldiors
newly come, to the assemblie, who came before the Generals Tribunall with great arrogancie,
as if they would haue terrified him. Then the Generall went vp to his seat of justice, and
at the same time the companies which were in armes at the gates, were called backe, who
compassed them in behind, they being vnarmed: then their hearts began to faint, and that
which did most amaze them (as they confessed afterward) was the vigorous countenance of
Scipio, whom they expected to find leane and pale. Hauing continued there some space without
any word speaking, vntill the chiefe offendours were brought vnto the place; they being
come, he began to reprehend them sharpely, for that contrarie to their dueties and the
naturall bond they had vnto their countrey, and against the oath made vnto their commaunders,
they had shewed themselues rebels, disobedient, perjured, and enemies both in word
and deed: hauing followed men that were not well borne, nor esteemed for any vertue, but
rascals, to whom they had giuen full power and commaund ouer them, such as Atrius Vmber,
and Calenus Albius. I do not thinke that you haue all runne willingly into this furie,Scipio makes a notable inuectiue against the seditious souldiors. but that
some were the motiues and beginners, and the rest were infected by their acquaintance, as with the
plague: when I consider that the brute of my death hath beene receiued, beleeued, and hoped for among
my souldiours; who haue so carried my selfe, as I need not feare that any one in Spaine (the Carthaginians
being chased away) should hate my life, no not our enemies themselues. I beleeue then,
that our whole armie is not so ill affected, but if it were so, I would willingly dye here in your presence:
I beleeue rather, that this mischiefe hath proceeded from the malice of some few. But I will forbeare
to speake of my selfe, and suppose you haue my name in detestation, and disdaine my commaund: thinke
of your offences, and consider how great they are against your countrey, your parents and children, against
the gods, witnesses of your oathes and promises, against your commaunders and captaines, against
all order and martiall discipline, and against the manners of your auncestors. What offence had
your countrey done you, that you should take armes against it, and betray it, in conferring your

counsels with Mandonius and Indibilis. What had the commonweale of Rome committed, whose
maiestie you haue troden vnder foot, wresting the authoritie out of the Tribunes hands, who were
created by the peoples voyces, to giue it vnto priuat men? and not content to haue them for Tribunes,
you haue giuen them the markes of a Generall, to them I say, who neuer yet commaunded ouer a poore
slaue. Albius and Atrius haue beene lodged in the Generals tent, by you Romanes, the trumpet hath
sounded before them, they haue giuen you the word, they haue set in the Proconsull Scipioes chayre,
they haue had an officer to make place, when as they had the rods and axes carried before them. What
more monstrous and detestable crimes can you imagine? the which in trueth cannot bee purged,
but by the bloud of such as haue committed them. But what frenzie made you presume, being but
eight thousand men (better without doubt than Albius and Atrius, to whom you haue subiected your
selues) to be able to take the prouince of Spaine from the Romanes by force, I being dead or aliue, the
rest of the Romane forces being safe, with the which I haue in one day taken new Carthage by assault,
defeated foure great captaines, and chased foure Carthaginian armies out of Spaine? Thinke you that
the greatnesse and strength of the Romane commonweale consists in the life or death of any captaine
whatsoeuer? What am I more than Flaminius, Paulus, Gracchus, Posthumus, Albinus, M.
Marcellus, T. Crispinus, C. Fuluius, the two of our house, and so many other braue and valiant
captaines which haue died in this warre, and yet the people of Rome stand firme, and would still, although
there should dye a thousand more, either by sword or sicknesse? much lesse can the Romane
state shrinke or decay by my death. After that my father and vncle (who were your captaines) had
beene slaine in these countries, you your selues did chuse L. Septimius Martius to bee your head against
the pride and insolencie of the Carthaginians (I speake of him as if Spaine wanted other
captaines.) M. Syllanus, is not he here also, with equall authoritie to myselfe? L. Scipio my brother,
and C. Lelius, lieutenants, are not they here also? Would not these men haue maintained
and defended the maiestie of the Romane Empire? What comparison can you make betwixt the armies,
the commaunders, and the causes? And admit you had all aduantages, should you therefore
take armes against your countrey and fellow citizens, renounce the countrey which hath bred you,
with your wiues and children, to adhere vnto the enemie, and to chuse your abode at Succron?
And what was the reason? for that your pay was a little protracted, by reason of your Generals
sickenesse? O worthie cause to make you violate all diuine and humane lawes! O Romanes, you
haue wonderfully erred, beleeue me, you haue lost all reason and iudgement, and the infirmitie of
your minds hath beene worse than that which afflicted my bodie. My words seeme sharpe vnto
you, but your actions haue beene farre more sharpe: which if you repent, I desire there should
bee no more mention made of them, but remaine buried in forgetfulnesse, holding the repentance
of such detestable acts, to bee a sufficient chastisement, for as much as concernes you all in generall.
But as for Albius Calenus, Atrius Vmber, and others which haue beene the authors
of this wicked sedition, they shall expiate their follies with their bloud: the which should not be displeasing
vnto you, but rather desired and applauded, seeing they sought to ruine you, and haue offended
none more than you.
In this manner Scipio spake vnto the seditious souldiours, and presently execution was
done of these fiue and thirtie men, with horrour and great feare to all the rest of the offendors:
For the armed souldiours which stood about the assembly, began to beat their targuets,
the names of them that were condemned, were openly pronounced by the crier,The punishm^^ of the chiefe offendors.
they were drawne naked, tied to posts, vnto the place, beaten and torne with rods, and
then beheaded, all the assistants being so amazed with feare, as there was not a sigh heard
among them. The bodies being carried away, and the place cleansed, after the accustomed
manner, Scipio made the souldiours to take a new oathe, and they were paied what was due
vnto them, calling them by name one after another. This was the end of the mutinie and
sedition made at Succron, vertuously and yet mildly chastised by Scipio,Sedition is a mischiefe which doth much import estates. considering the qualitie
of the crime, which was of such consequence for great estates, as many haue not spared
innocents themselues, to terrifie others.
At the same time Hanno had bin sent by Mago to the mouth of Betis (which is now Guadalquiber)
with a small number of Africanes, who gathered together some 4000 men vpon those
marches: but he was charged by L. Martius, and forced in his campe, and most of his souldiors
slain, some at the assault of his rampars, and the rest in the field, being pursued by the horsemen

as they fled, and he with a small number saued himselfe. Whilest this was doing about that
riuer, Lelius arriued with his sea armie at Carteia, hauing past the strait, at the entrie whereof
this towne is situated in the Ocean.The practise of the Gaditans discouered and supprest. The Romanes thought they should haue meanes to
surprise the towne of Gadiz by intelligence, as they had contriued it with some of the inhabitants:
but this busines was discouered before the execution; the complices were taken, and
deliuered by Mago vnto the Praetor Adherbal, to be led to Carthage the great; who put the
conspirators into a galeasse, and for that it was heauier and more slower than the gallies, he
sent it a little before, and himselfe followed it with eight gallies. This galeasse was alreadie entred
into the strait; when as Lelius discouering it out of the port of Carteia, put forth also
with a galeasse, being followed by his seuen gallies, and assuring himselfe that the enemies
galeasse carried by the current within that strait (being hard to force) could not turne backe,
he went to affront Adherbal and his gallies.A fight at the sea betwixt Lelius and Adherbal The Carthaginian seeing himselfe surprised,
was doubtful whether he should flie after his galeasse, or else make head. Whilest he stands in
suspence, Lelius commeth vpon him, and it was not in his power to auoid the combat. They
were in a strait, whereas nothing could be done after the manner of sea-fights, by the iudgement
of captaines and mariners: for the sea going high in that place, they could not turne
their gallies at their pleasures, the which were carried by the waues as well against their own
as against the enemies, notwithstanding all their endeuours; so that oftentimes they might
haue seene a gallie flying turne her spurre suddenly against that which pursued her, by the
turning of a waue, and that which chased her, to flie away. The gallies being in this strife, it
happened, that the Roman galeasse (whether by her weight, or the number of her oares)
mastring the waues better than the rest, forced two Carthaginian gallies, stemming the one,
and disarming the other of all her oares of the one side, as she passed by her, and would in like
manner haue endamaged the rest, if she had incountred them: but Adherbal with the helpe of
his sailes and oares, recouered that coast of Affricke which was neerest. Lelius being victor,
returned to Carteia, and informed of all that which had passed at Gadiz, how that their practise
was discouered, and that the conspirators were sent to Carthage, he aduertised Marius,
that it was labour lost to stay there, being more expedient to returne towards their Generall:
which they did both within few daies after,Mago brother to Hannibal and Generall of the Carthaginians, hopes to recouer all Spaine. and came to new Carthage. Mago hearing of their
departure, and freed from feare, did not only resume new courage, but was also in hope to recouer
all Spain by the rebellion of the Ilergetes; wherefore he sent presently to Carthage, to
acquaint the Senate with the sedition which had lately happened in the Romanes campe, and
the rebellion and reuolt of their allies, giuing them charge to make them greater than they
were; persuading them, that it was now a fit time to recouer the Seigniorie of all Spaine,
which they had receiued from their ancestors, and therefore they should send forces to do it.
As for Mandonius and Indibilis, who were gone to the field, vpon the brute of Scipios death,
thinking to make vse of the Roman soldiors which were mutined, when as they vnderstood
the truth of all things, they retired home to their houses without any alteration, attending
what should be done vnto the seditious; presuming, that if Scipio pardoned his own soldiors,
he might also vse the like clemencie towards them: but when as they vnderstood with what
rigor he had punished them, they thought it was a presage for them to attend the like, for
that they were guiltie of the same crime: wherfore they gathered their forces together, and
caused their confederats to arme, meeting in the territorie of Sedera, where they had camped
in the beginning of their reuolt, being some 20000 foot and 2500 horse.Scipio prepares to goe against Mandonius and Indibili^. Scipio hauing
easily pacified the discontentment of his soldiors, paying vnto euery man what was due
vnto him, shewing them a good countenance, and vsing good words, to whom before his
departure from Carthage, he made a speech in some bitter tearmes against the rebellion of
these two noble men.
I goe not (said he) against these men to punish their ingratitude and wickednesse with the like affection,Scipios speech to his soldiors.
as when I did chastise the offences of our fellow citizens, for what I did then was very sparingly,
as if I should haue torne out part of mine owne bowels; wherefore I was content to correct the error
or the offence of 8000, by the punishment of 35 men: but now that I march with you to ruine the Ilergetes,
to whom we are not tied neyther by birth nor friendship, seeing that league which was betwixt vs
had bin wickedly broken and violated by them, I know that all you of mine armie are eyther Romanes
or Latins: besides, there are few of you which haue not bin brought out of Italie hither by my vncle

Cn. Scipio, who first brought a Romane armie into Spaine, or by Publius my father, or by me, and that
you are all accustomed to the names and conduct of the Scipioes. Wherefore I desire to carrie you backe,
that you may be partakers of the triumph, which we haue well deserued. As for this warre whither wee
go, let vs not call it a war, if we will remember what we haue done in this country. I do more esteem Mago,
who hath saued himselfe in an island (out of the world as a man may say) with a few ships, than of
the Ilergetes. He is a Carthaginian captaine, and holds some forme of a garrison where he is, but these
are theeues, and captaines of theeues, which are of no moment in a well gouerned warre, but onely to auerrun
and spoyle their neighbours fields, carrie away their cattell, and set fire of their farmes: whose
force and valour consists in flying swiftly, and not in fighting well. If I goe first against them, doe not
thinke it is for any danger, or difficultie, or for any feare I haue that the war wil be long by their means,
but onely to the end so wicked a rebellion should not remaine long vnpunished, nor to leaue any enemie
in armes, if it be possible, in a prouince conquered with so great happinesse and valour as we haue done.
Then he exhorted them to follow him vnder the conduct of the gods, not to the wars, but
to punish wicked men: injoyning them to be readie for the next day. Being parted, he made
ten lodgings with his campe, before he came to the riuer of Ebro, which hauing passed the
fourth day following, they presented themselues in sight of the enemie. Betwixt both was a
large vally, compassed in with mountaines: there Scipio made some troupes of cattell which
had beene taken in the enemies countrey, to be put, to draw them forth to fight, causing them
to be kept with some souldiours which were lightly armed. The Spaniards fall vpon this bootie,
and the Romane souldiours goe to rescue it. Hereupon Lelius arriues, being appointed to
second these footmen, with some bands of horse, who arriued fitly, for the combat was doubtfull.
The Spaniards were repulst by these succours with great slaughter, yet they fainted not
for all this, but presented themselues the next day in order of battel, vpon the same place: and
for that the vallie was not able to containe all their forces, they brought forth some two third
parts of their foot, and all their horse. The Romans held the straitnesse of the place to bee an
aduantage for them, for that their souldiours did fight better close than in an open field, who
kept their rankes, and did not run vp and downe like vnto the Spaniards: besides, they saw that
they should haue to deale but with two third parts of the enemies armie. And Scipio resolued
of a stratagem: for seeing that he could not flanke his footmen with his horse, by reason of the
straitnesse of the place, and that by the same reason, the enemies horse were also vnprofitable,
he commaunded Lelius to lead all his horsemen about the hills, and to seeke some passage to
charge the Spanish horsemen vpon the backe, and to draw them from their foot.A battell betwixt the Romans and naturall Spaniards. And to the
end the enemie should not discouer what Lelius intended, he presently went against the enemie
with his footmen, placing foure companies onely in front, for that he could not do otherwise:
so the battell began in two seuerall places, betwixt two battailons of foot, and two of
horse, whereas one could not succour another, till in the end the Spanish foot being put to
rout, their horsemen being prest before by the legions, and behind by the Roman horse, were
all presently slaine, so as of all the horse and foot which fought in the vallie, there escaped not
any one. The other third part of the Spanish army, which came not to fight, but had only been
spectators in a safe place, on the top of the hils, had all means to flie away; among whom there
escaped Mandonius and Indibilis. The campe and all their baggage was taken, with 3000 prisoners:
and of the Romans there were slaine about 1200, and about 3000 hurt.The Spaniards defeated. There is no doubt,
but they had gotten this victorie with lesse bloud, if the field had beene larger, and that the
Spaniards might haue fled more easily.Mandonius and Indibilis yeeld to Scipiors mercy. After this rout, Indibilis resolued to lay aside armes,
and as the safest way, to submit himselfe to Scipioes faith and clemencie, the which hee had tried:
and therefore he sent Mandonius his brother vnto him, who did prostrate himselfe at his
feet, confessing their fault, which seemed (said he) to be as a fatall disease in that season: hauing
not onely run among the Ilergetes and Lacetanes, but also infected the campe and Romane
armie: finally, that both he and his brother were come thither, being readie either to yeeld vp
their liues to Scipio (from whom they had receiued them) if it were his pleasure, or in taking
them againe from him, to be for euer bound vnto him. It was an auntient custome with the
Romanes, not to capitulate, nor to haue any peace with them with whom they had no allyance
nor friendship, before they did yeeld into their hands whatsoeuer they held, were it holy
or prophane, giuen hostages, deliuered vp their armes, and receiued garrisons into their
townes. Scipio was content to receiue Mandonius present, and Indibilis being absent at that

time,Scipio pardons the rebellious Spaniards. with some bitter speeches giuing them to vnderstand, that they had deserued death: but
they receiued their liues by the grace of the people of Rome. Moreouer, that hee would not
disarme them, which was the assurance they did vsually take of rebels, but would they should
hold them freely, and to be void from feare: but if they reuolted againe, they should know
he would not be reuenged of innocent hostages, but vpon such as had offended, and that he
would punish those that should present themselues in armes, and not the disarmed: Wherefore
they should chuse, whether they would haue the Romanes fauourable vnto them, or incensed
against them. Thus was Mandonius sent away, without any other punishment than
money, which they commaunded him to furnish to pay the armie. Scipio hauing sent L. Martius
before, to passe the riuer of Ebro, and Syllanus to Tarracone, he staied some time, vntil the
Ilergetes had paid their money, and then he followed after Martius (who approached neere
vnto the Ocean) with some few men, and no baggage.
25 The treatie begun with Massinissa had beene delaied for diuers reasons: for this Numidian
would treat with Scipio himselfe, and make his promises to him. This made Scipio to vndertake
a long voiage. Massinissa was in the island of Gades, where hauing intelligence by Marius,
that Scipio approached, he told the Gouernour Mago, That the horses and horsmen were
spoiled in the island, where they caused a dearth of all things, to the hurt of others; desiring
him to giue them leaue to passe into the firme land, to make some courses into the enemies
countrey. Being past, he presently sent three of the chiefe among the Numidians to Scipio,
two of the which should remaine for hostages, and the third returne to bring him notice of
the day and place where the enteruiew should be;A parley betwixt Massinissa and Scipio, to the preiudice of the Romans. where they met with a small companie.
Massinissa first of all thanked Scipio, That he had sent him his nephew, his brothers sonne: then
he said vnto him, That he had long desired to see that day, and that hee desired much to doe
something that might be acceptable vnto him, and profitable to the Romans: wherein hee
would imploy himselfe more willingly than any stranger whatsoeuer, the effects whereof he
could not yet shew in Spain (a country vnknowne vnto him) but in place where he was borne
and bred, hoping to succeed his father in the kingdome: and that if the Romanes did send Scipio
into Africke, he did hope to worke so, as the estate of Carthage should not stand long. Massinissa
was welcome vnto Scipio, who heard his words with great content, knowing that whatsoeuer
had beene valiantly performed in Spaine by the horsemen, was done vnder the onely
leading of Massinissa, who shewed by his carriage and countenance, that he was a yong prince
of great hope. So hauing plighted their faith one vnto another, they parted, Scipio towards
Tarracone, and Massinissa to Gades: and to the end hee would not seeme to haue passed into
the firme land in vaine, he spoyled some of the neighbour countrey, neere the shore, with
Scipioes consent.
26 Mago being made frustrat of his conceiued hope, to repaire the Carthaginians affairs
in Spaine, by the Spaniards rebellion, vnder Mandonius and Indibilis, and the sedition of the
Romane souldiours, resolued to goe into Africke, when as being readie to depart, he receiued
order from the Senat of Carthage, by the which he was commaunded to passe with all the
shipping he had at Calis,Mag^, Hannibals brother, commaunded to passe into Italy. into Italie, and to leuie all the souldiours he could in Gaule, and along
the sea coast, and to joyne with his brother Hannibal, to the end the warre which had bin
begun with such animositie, might be continued with the like resolution. For the effecting
whereof they brought money from Carthage, and he for his part got all hee could from the
Gaditanes,Mago spoils the Gaditanes. hauing not onely exhausted their common treasure, but vnfurnished their temples
of their jewels and other riches, and forced euerie priuat man to bring him all the gold
and siluer he had. As he passed along the coast of Spaine, comming neere vnto new Carthage
he landed some souldiours, which forraged the countrey neere vnto the sea, and gaue an alarme
vnto the whole prouince. Then he approached neere vnto the towne, and hauing kept
his souldiours aboord the gallies in the day time, at night he put them on shore, towards that
part of the wall whereas the Romanes had entred; supposing that Carthage had not been verie
well manned with souldiours, and that haply some of the inhabitants might reuolt: but
the flight of the countrey-men, and the centinels (which had discouered the armie at sea the
day before) had alreadie giuen aduertisement to the town, who imagined that it was notwithout
some designe, that the gallies had cast anker so neere vnto them. Wherefore the garrison
kept themselues in armes, and stood readie at the port next vnto the poole, and towards

the sea.Mago makes a vaine attempt vpon new Carthage. The enemies came in troupes mixt of souldiours and mariners, vnto the foot of the
wall, with more brute than effect: and then the port was set open, whereas the Romans made
a furious ^allie vpon them, with great cries, wherewith they were so amazed, as at the first
charge, they turned their backes in disorder towards the sea, whither they were pursued with
great slaughter: and if their gallies had not beene verie neere to receiue them, there had not
any one escaped. Hauing gotten aboord, they were not yet assured, but feared that some of
the enemies gallies would come out of the port against them: wherefore they drew vp their
ladders and bridges speedily, and for that they would loose no time in weighing their ankers,
they cut their cables. And it happened, that many thinking to saue themselues by swimming,
not able to discerne their gallies, by reason of the darkenesse of the night, went out of their
way, and were drowned. This armie returned speedily towards the Ocean, from whence
they had parted. Day being come, the Romanes found aboue 800 men slaine, betwixt the
towne and the shore, and aboue two thousand cuirasses. To Mago (who thought to returne
vnto Gades) the entrie was refused: wherefore he returned vnto a place neere vnto it, called
Cimbis, from whence he sent certaine gentlemen vnto Gades, to know the reason why they
shut the gates against him, who was their friend and allie. To whom they answered, That it
had beene done by the multitude, who had beene discontented at the spoiles and insolencies
which the souldiours committed, when they imbarqued. Then he sought to draw their Suffetes
out of the towne (which were those that held the soueraign magistracie in that Phenician
nation) to parley with them,Suffetes, Magistrats of the Gaditanes. and with their chiefe treasurer. When he had them, hee caused
them to be scourged with rods,Magoes tyrannous rigour against the Gaditanes. and then to be hung vpon a gibet. Which done, he sayled
towards the Pytiuses (being islands some hundred miles from the firme land, and inhabited at
that time by Carthaginians) where both he and his whole armie were well entertained, the
which was not onely refreshed with victuals, but furnished with souldiors and armes by those
islanders. Mago relying vpon these things, came vnto the Baleares, some fiftie miles from
thence, thinking to winter in the greater of them, the which was rich, and full of men, with a
large and safe port; for now Autumne drew neere: But he found himselfe deceiued: for the
inhabitants of Majorca went in hostile manner against him, no lesse than the Romanes would
haue done, and with their slings kept them from landing, so as the Carthaginians were forced
to put out to sea, and went to Minorca, which is the other island of the Baleares, as fertile as the
other, but not so strong of men. There they landed, and without any great resistance became
masters of the towne and island: where they inrolled two thousand men of that nation, the
which they sent to Carthage to winter. When as Mago had left the Ocean,The Gaditanes yeeld vnto the Romans. to enter into the
strait, the Gaditanes yeelded vnto the Romans.
These were the affaires which passed in Spain, vnder the gouernment of P. Corn. Scipio, who
hauing resigned the prouince and the armies vnto L. Lentulus, and L. Manlius Acidinus, returned
to Rome with ten gallies:Scipio returnes to Rome. where being arriued, he made known vnto the Senat the great
exploits of warre which he had done, the battels woon, the townes taken, and the people and
countries subdued vnder the obedience of the Romans; finally, that in Spaine he had left no
enemie. These things were deliuered by him with great state, rather to see if they would grant
him a triumphant entrie into the citie, than to demaund a triumph: For in truth, vnto that day
there had not any captaine entred in triumph into the citie of Rome, how great soeuer his exploits
had beene, if it were not with the title of a Roman magistrat. Being entred into Rome,Proconsuls no magistrats in Rome.
he brought into the publique treasurie, of the remainders of the spoyle of Spaine, 14352
pounds of siluer in masse, and great store of coined money.




THE THIRD BOOKE OF
the Historie of Spaine.

The Contents.
1 A Discourse of the disposition of the auntient Spaniards, and the factions that were among them
after the departure of P. Com. Scipio.
2 A new reuolt of Mandonius and Indibilis against the Romane Proconsuls: their defeat and punishment.
3 The Saguntines obedience to the Romanes, and their fauour to them.
4 Couetousnesse of the Romane Gouernours in Spaine, and the great spoyles they carried to
Rome.
5 Spaine diuided into two gouernments, otherwise than before.
6 Warre betwixt the Romanes and Spaniards alone.
7 M. Portius Cato sent into Spaine with an armie. His exploits and militarie stratagems.
8 The good gouernment of P. Corn. Scipio, sonne to Cn. Propretor, in the further prouince, and
the vnfortunat successe of Sex. Digitius.
9 Exploits of C. Flaminius, and M. Fuluius, Pretors in Spaine.
10 The deeds of L. Emilius, Pretor in the further Spaine.
11 The exploits of L. Quintius Crispinus, and Caius Calphurnius Piso, Pretors.
12 Victorie of Q. Fuluius Flaccus, in the hither Spaine.
13 The deeds of Titus Semp. Gracchus, and L. Posthumius Albinus.
14 Accusation against the corruption of Gouernours, and the bad iustice done at Rome.
15 Reuolt of the Celtiberians, and the exploits of Q. Fuluius Nobilior.
16 Deeds of Marcus Marcellus, Consull in Spaine.
17 L. Lucullus Consul, and his couetous disloyalties in Spaine.
18 Mumius against Caesaras a captaine of the Lusitanians.
19 The wickednesse of Serg. Galba, Pretor in the further prouince, which made Viriatus take
armes.
20 Defeat of C. Vetilius by Viriatus.
21 Defeat of C. Plautius by Viriatus.
22 Victorie of Viriatus against Cl. Vnimanus.
23 C. Nigidius put to rout by Viriatus.
24 The deeds of C. Lelius against Viriatus.
25 The exploits of Q. Fab. Maximus Emilyen, in this warre of Viriatus.
26 The deed of Quintius.
27 The deeds of Q. Fabius Maximus Seruilianus, against Viriatus.
28 The exploits of Q. Cecilius Metellus, in Celtiberia.
29 A peace made with Viriatus.
30 Peace broken with Viriatus by Q. Cepio, and his death by the treason of his owne men.


THe 14 yere of the second Punick war, which, according vnto the most
certaine writers, was in the yeare 548 of the foundation of Rome, P.
Corn. Scipio and P. Licinius Crassus were chosen Consuls. During their
magistracie there grew a great war in Spaine; and from that time the
Roman affaires were nothing more quiet, notwithstanding they had
chased away the Carthaginians: For the Spaniards, who are naturally
enemies to rest,Concord the ground of liberty and desirous of libertie, and yet contemning the
onely meanes to maintaine it, which is, concord and good correspondencie, did mutine vpon
euerie light occasion. If they had beene as wise in that point, as they were valiant and hardie
in combats, the Romanes had laboured in vaine to subdue this countrey, where they imployed
much time, much policie, and the bloud of their best men. Vntill Scipioes departure, and some
time after, the Romanes had not tried the nations dwelling in the mountaines, which runne
through the middest of Spaine, nor those which were towards the North: they had not yet
extended their conquests farre from the Mediterranean sea, nor gone much beyond the riuer
of Betis. But afterwards they knew what difference there was among the Spaniards themselues,
when as they were mercinaries, and carried armes for anothers quarell, and when they
fought for their owne liberties, houses, and families. And as they past farther into the country,
they found the difference betwixt those who by their frequentation with strangers, had accustomed
themselues to gaine, and to hunt after honours and delights: and the others, who being
estranged from all commerce, had no other ambition, but not to be subject to any other
but to their own lawes; nor other couetousnesse, but of a prey conquered by arms, in the day
time, and in fight, thrust on by necessitie, without any other respect. These last for the most
part were of the race of the auntient Gaules and Celtes, which had crept into Spaine, and did
hold all that which we call at this day Nauarre, Biscaye, Alaua, the Asturians, Gallicia, Castillia
the old, and a great part of Portugall. All these did not know the Romanes, but as men
which laboured to take away other mens goods, to chase them out of their countries, or to
subject them as slaues, and to make their profit of them. They were long before they made any
alliances with them, louing them better farre off than neere. In the meane time all these
people of Spaine (who generally were couragious and hardie) wanted ciuilitie, and the
knowledge of justice, neither knew they how to practise and entertaine the lawes of friendship
among themselues: the which at length reduced them all into seruitude, they of whom
wee haue spoken, being the first which yeelded vnto the yoke, who had seene the Carthaginians
and Romanes among them, and had conuersed with them for some yeares. For besides
that they were before a mixt people,Whereas strangers abord, there vice and corruption abounds. by the accesse of Grecians, Phenicians, Africanes,
Celtes, and other nations, whose vices they had mingled with theirs, they were in
the end wholly corrupted, by the promises and persuasions of either of these mightie commonweales,
either of them seeking to draw aid and commoditie from them against the other,
during the warres; whereof they were glorious, proud, and ambitious, and if they were
not held in such estimation, as they thought they had deserued, they were discontented.
They were false and treacherous to strangers,The Spaniards were glorious, ambitious, enuious and treacherous. enuious among themselues, and alwayes apt
to rebell, and to breed quarels: of which vices the Romanes (seeing themselues freed from
the Carthaginian warre) could wisely make vse to subject them, who let them know, that
notwithstanding all their seeking of the Spaniards, and the fauours and gifts wherewith
they had honoured some of that nation, yet their meaning was alwayes to hold them in the
ranke of subjects, and not of companions: the which their foolish Spanish presumption
could not discerne, vntill they were taught it to their cost: as it happened to Mandonius and
Indibilis, princes of the Ilergetes, people of Cattelonia, where as Lerida and Huesca are
at this day.
These people being puft vp with pride, and full of ingratitude (as soone as they did see Scipio
out of Spaine, thinking there was not his like among the Romanes) in contempt of them
which remained,The last rebellion of Mandonius and Indibilis. they brake the peace, the which they had entertained onely through feare,
and admiration of his vertue: and knowing that the Romans were much troubled in Italy against
Hannibal, they presumed they would send him no more backe into Spaine, and that he
had carried away the best men with him, leauing onely new souldiors in Spaine, and those
that were of least vse for the warres. Wherefore thinking there could not be a better opportunitie

offered to effect their desires, and to make themselues kings of the other people of
Spaine, which vnto that time had beene subject, sometimes to the Carthaginians, and sometimes
to the Romans, and oftentimes to both; they acquainted their subjects, and the Ausetanes
their neighbours, with their designe: vaunting, That if they maintained themselues in
vnitie, they might easily expell the Romans out of Spaine, as well as they had chased away
the Carthaginians: With whom they preuailed so by their persuasions, as in few dayes they
had gathered together in the fields of Sedete 30000 foot,A great army of Spaniards against the Romanes. and 4000 horse, and there made the
bodie of their army. The leaders of the Roman army, were L. Lentulus and L. Manlius, who being
aduertised of this reuolt, meaning to preuent this mischiefe in time, went speedily to field,
and passing quietly through the Ausetanes countrey, as friends, they came whereas the enemies
were, and encamped within a league of them. There they tried first by messages and
embassages, to diuert them from their foolish enterprise, persuading them to lay aside armes:
but it was in vaine. Some forragers of the Romanes being charged by the Spanish horse, they
were forced to send some troups of horse to succour them, where there was an encounter that
day, but to no effect. The day following, at the Sunne rising, the Spanish armie aduanced in
battel, within a mile of the Romane campe. The Ausetanes held the middest, hauing the Ilergetes
on the right hand, and on the left some other Spaniards of small fame. They had left betwixt
the battailon in the middest and the two wings, a good large space, to giue passage to
their horsemen, when it should be time to come to the charge. The Romanes ordered their
armie after their accustomed manner,A battell betwixt the Romans and Spaniards. yet imitating the enemies therein, they left a space also
to bring in their horsemen. This done, L. Lentulus bethought himselfe, that they should make
best vse of those horsemen which should enter with them first into these spaces which were
betwixt the squadrons of the enemies foot: Wherefore he commaunded Ser. Cornelius, who
had charge of the Romane horsemen, to enter into those spaces of the Spanish armie. In the
meane time he hauing the twelft legion, being prest in the beginning of the battell by the
Ilergetes, on the left hand, made it good vntill they were seconded by the thirteenth legion,
the which he caused to aduance, to succour them in the front of the battell: and hauing thus
assured that part, he ran towards L. Manlius, who did his duetie, encouraging the souldiours,
and sending supplies where he saw any need; aduertising him, that the footmen on the left
wing behaued themselues well, and that hee had sent Ser. Cornelius with the horsemen, to
charge furiously into the enemies troups: the effect whereof did presently appeare: for Ser.
Cornelius being entred with his horse into the middest of the enemies, he made all their battel
of foot to wauer, and withall stopt the passage to the enemies horse, so as they could not
come to fight: which made the Spanish horsemen to leaue their horses. The Romane captaines
seeing the Spaniards in some disorder, they cried out, incouraged, and intreated the soldiours
to proceed valiantly, and to keepe them from joyning together againe. The enemies
began now to forsake the fight, if Indibilis leauing his horse, had not come and presented
himselfe in the head of the footmen. There was a long and bloudie fight, the which they
maintained, vntill that Indibilis and those that fought about him, were ouerthrowne and
slaine one vpon another:The Spanish army defeated. then they began to flie of all hands, and the Romans to pursue them,
of whom they made a great slaughter, and withall tooke their campe, and all their baggage.
There were 13000 slaine vpon the place, and about 800 prisoners. Of the Romans there died
two hundred, or not many more, especially on the left wing. The Spaniards being thus defeated,
the rest which escaped retired home into their countrey.
The Spaniards being afterwards called to counsell by Mandonius, they complained much
of their losses, and blaming the authors of this warre, they said, That they were of opinion to
send embassadors vnto the Romans, to beseech them to take them to mercie, and that they
would deliuer them their armes:The Spaniards sue to the Romans for mercie. the which they did, and excused themselues, laying the fault
vpon Indibilis, Mandonius, and others, which had solicited them. To whom the Romanes answered,
That they would take them to mercie, vpon condition they should deliuer vnto them
the authors of this rebellion aliue, else they would intreat the Ausetanes, Ilergetes, and other
their confederats, as enemies.
This answer being returned by their embassadours,The chiefe authors of rebellion do alwaies smart for the rest. Mandonius and the other authors were
taken, and sent to the Romanes to receiue the reward of their misdeeds. By this meanes the
troubles in Spaine were pacified, whereas they imposed a double tribute for that yeare, and a

contribution of corne for six moneths, with cassockes and cloakes for the souldiors: besides,
the Romanes forced about thirtie seuerall prouinces to giue hostages.
These things were done in Spaine, whilest that P. Scipio prepared to goe into Africke, to diuert
the warre which was betwixt the Romanes and Carthaginians in Italie, whither he had
sent C. Lelius, Mago on the other side being arriued at Genes in Italie, and vpon the coast of
the Ligusticke sea.
3 The Saguntines (for whose sake this second Punicke warre betwixt the Romanes and
Carthaginians had beene vndertaken) had sent embassadours to Rome with Scipio,The Saguntines send embassadors to Rome. to thanke
the Senate for the care they had of their faithfull allies, to protest of the loue and affection
the Commonweale of Sagunt had to the people of Rome, and to offer a crowne of gold to
Iupiter Capitolinus his Temple; who were honourably entertained, and rewarded by the Senat:
who hauing a desire to see Italie, were by a publicke decree conducted and accompanied with
a good gard wheresoeuer they would goe.
Some moneths after, Hannibal being out of Italie, the same Saguntines surprised in Spaine
certaine Commissaries and Carthaginian captaines, with a good summe of money, wherewith
they would haue leuied souldiors in that countrey, whom they sent to Rome with their
money, and presented them to the Senate. The Commissaries and captaines were detained
prisoners, but the mony was restored to the Saguntines, with thanks by the Senat: the summe
was 250 pounds of gold, and 800 of siluer.
The Spaniards were so entreated vnder the gouernment of L. Lentulus and L. Manlius, as of
the goods and reuenues of Spaine both Rome and Italie were often relieued, with come, apparrell,
armes, and all other prouisions which they drew from thence. In the end, the Romanes
hauing forced the Carthaginians to demaund a peace, after the defeat which Scipio
had giuen vnto Hannibal in Africke, and neere vnto Carthage, it was resolued in the Senat at
Rome, to call home the old souldiors which were in Spaine, to leaue onely a Legion of Romanes,
with fifteene companies of Latines their allies, and to send a new Gouernour thither.
Wherefore L. Corn. Lentulus returned to Rome:Ann. Rome 553 where hauing related what he had valiantly
and profitably performed, he demaunded leaue to enter the citie in triumph; the which they
refused him, being against the presidents of their auncestors: for whosoeuer had the conduct
of an armie,Dictators, Consuls, and Praetors were allowed to triumph. being no Dictator, Consul, nor Praetor, but onely holding the place of a Consul
or Praetor, did not enter in triumph into the citie: yet for that the exploits done by him were
great and worthie, they were content he should enter so in a sort; which was not altogether
so stately and pompeous as a triumph;Ouatio. the which in their language they called Ouatio. Hee
brought into the Treasurie 44000 pound weight of siluer, and 2450 pounds of gold, and of
the bootie there was giuen to euery souldiour 120 Asses, which make about a crowne and a
fifth part, besides their ordinarie pay. This was during the Consulship of Ser. Sulpitius Galba
and C. Aurelius Cotta: but the yeare following L. Corn. Lentulus was created Consull, with P.
Iulius Apulus, or P. Villius Tapulus; and in his place C. Corn. Cethegus was sent into Spaine, who
gaue a great defeat vnto the Spaniards in the fields of Sedeta, where there were about 15000
of the enemies slaine,A great defeat of Spaniards. and 78 ensignes taken. Cethegus and Manlius being afterwards called
backe to Rome, the people sent in their place Cn. Corn. Lentulus and L. Stertinius. The Senat
graunted to the Gaditanes (besides the conuentions which they had made with L. Martius
Septimius) That they should haue no Gouernour. L. Manlius Acidinus being returned out
of Spaine, demaunded of the Senate (for that he had well and vertuously gouerned the
affaires) That he might enter into the Senate with the solemnitie called Ouatio: but hee was
hindered by M. Portius Lecca, Tribune of the people, who opposed himselfe, for that he had
not beene in that gouernment in qualitie of a Magistrate, but as a Vice-gerent, being lesse
fauoured therein than Lentulus his companion: wherefore he made no entrie: yet he brought
in 1200 pounds of siluer, and some 30 of gold. Soone after C. Corn. Lentulus returned from
Spaine, bringing also vnto the publicke treasure 1515 pounds of gold, 20000 of siluer, and
3455 deniers of siluer coyned. L. Stertinius being also returned, brought 50000 pounds of
siluer out of the farther Spaine, and of the spoyles he caused two arches to be made in the Oxe
market before the Temples of Fortune and of the goddesse Matuta; and one in the great 
Lists, vpon the which he set Images gilt. So as these Romanes made sharpe warres against



the men,The Roman Gouernours great exactors. but more against their purses; by reason whereof the inconstant nature of the Spaniards
was now very wauering.
C. Corn. Cethegus and Quin. Minutius Rufus being Consuls at Rome,Ann. Rome 556 Spaine hauing vntill
 that time beene but one Consularie Prouince, gouerned by two Pro-consuls, was diuided into
two gouernments,The gouernment of Spaine giuen to two Praetors. and two Pretors sent thither, who had charge to make a diuision of their
jurisdictions, whereof the one should be called the hither Spaine, and the other the farther:
but not as before, when as the riuer of Ebro made the limit, for the hither Spaine passed much
beyond it. C. Sempronius Tuditanus was sent into the hither Spaine, and Marc. Heluius into
the other, for Pretors. Both of them were intangled with great and doubtfull warres: for against
Heluius there did rise Colca and Lucinius,The Spaniards rise against Heluius the Praetor. great noblemen of Spaine, who conspired with
many good townes, as Cardona, Bardona, and many others vpon the sea coast, which had not
yet reuolted. As for C. Sempronius Tuditanus, hee was defeated in his gouernment, and so
wounded, as he died soone after.
Wherefore L. Furius Purpureo and M. Claud. Marcellus being created Consuls, Qu. Fabius
Buteo and Q. Minutius Thermus were sent Pretors into Spaine, either of them with a legion
of Romane souldiors, and foure thousand foot and three hundred horse, Latines, of their allies.
Thus the warre reuiued in Spaine the fifth yeare, after the end of the second Punicke
warre; and from that time the Romanes had to deale with the Spaniards alone, without any
 support of the Carthaginians. The danger of this warre was so apprehended by the Senate,
that one of the two Consuls, with a Consular armie of two legions, fiue thousand
foot and fiue hundred horse of their allies, Latines, should goe in person with twentie gallies,
and such a number of other vessels, as should bee fit to transport his armie. L. Valerius
Flaccus and M. Portius Cato were created Consuls:Ann^ 558. Spaine was allotted vnto Cato, to whom
P. Manlius was appointed as Pretor in the hither part of Spaine neere vnto Gaule,M. Portius Cato Consul sent into Spaine. and Appius
Claudius Nero in the further Spaine. To these Pretors were appointed (besides the legion
 which either of the Gouernours in Spaine then had) two thousand foot and two hundred
horse, newly leuied.
Whilest these things were preparing, Q. Minutius Thermus came to battaile with Budares
and Besasides, two commanders of the Spaniards, neere vnto Turbe, where he defeated them,
and slew about twelue thousand of their men,The Spaniards defeated by Qu. Minutius Thermus. tooke Budares prisoner, and put the rest in rout.
These newes did somewhat reuiue the people of Rome, who were mightily perplexed for
these warres of Spaine. M. Portius Cato being Consull, passed into Spaine the sixt yeare after
the peace made betwixt the Romans and the Carthaginians, to reduce that Prouince wholly
vnto the obedience of the people of Rome: wherein his seuere carriage did much auaile: for
mildnesse is not alwaies fit for all nations, nor for all diseases. He embarked his armie in the
riuer of Genes, whither he had drawne fiue and twentie ships of warre, whereof there were
twentie of the state of Rome, and fiue of their allies, with a great number of others. They arriued
safely at Rosas, then called Rhoda, at the foot of the Pyrenees, where they chased away
a garrison of Spaniards which held the castle. From thence he passed to Empurias, and there
he landed his souldiors.A strange and enutious manner of liuing of the Empuritanes. At that time Empurias was a double towne, diuided with wals, the
one inhabited by Grecians issued from Phocea (from whence also the Marsilians came) the other
by Spaniards. The Greeke towne was in a manner all in the sea, and was not much aboue
foure hundred paces in circuit: the Spaniards habitation was much more, containing about
three thousand paces; alwaies liuing in jealousie one of another, assured onely by their diligent
gard, and continuall discipline of warre, as if the enemie had beene at their gates. The
Grecians entertained no Spaniard within their wals, neither did they goe out rashly towards
the land: the sea was free for all men. Amid these jealousies they receiued great commodities
one from another: for the Spaniards (who were very ignorant of nauigation) had many
strange commodities from the Grecians, and did furnish them in exchange with the fruits of
their countrey. This traffique was the cause that the Spaniards towne was open vnto the
Grecians, who for their better safeties were allied vnto the Romanes, and maintained themselues
with as great loyaltie in their friendship, as the Marsilians themselues could doe, although
they were not so mightie. The Consull Cato arriuing there, they receiued him with
all the honour and bountie they could. He stayed there some time to discouer what forces

the enemies might haue,Souldiors should be alwaies in action. and where they were; and for that hee would not spend the time in
idlenesse, he caused his souldiors to be trained. Catoes arriuall was in haruest: wherefore he did
forbid the purueyors and Commissaries to make any prouision of corne, but sent them backe
to Rome, saying, That the warre could maintaine it selfe. Departing from Empurias,A sharpe beginning of the war. he put
the enemies countrey to sacke by fire and sword, and filled all with terror.
At the same time M. Heluius meaning to retire out of base Spaine, which he had gouerned,
being accompanied with 6000 men, which the Pretor Appius Claudius had giuen him for conuoy,
he was encountred by the way with 20000 Celtiberians, neere vnto the towne of Illiturge
(either that which Scipio had destroyed,A notable victorie gotten by the Pretor Heluius. being repaired, or another of that name) whom
he did fight withall, and vanquish, and slew 12000 men: then he tooke Illiturge, where he put
all the inhabitants aboue the age of 14 yeres to the sword: and from thence he came vnto Catoes
campe: from whence hee afterwards passed to Rome; into the which he made a solemne
entrie, with ouation, for that hee had gouerned his prouince happily. Hee brought 14732
pounds of siluer in masse, 17000 Bigats (which is a piece of coyne, stampt with a chariot drawn
with two horses) and of the siluer of Osca 120438.Qu. Minutius Thermus triumphed first at Rome for his victories in Spain. Presently after Heluius, Q. Minutius Thermus
returned to Rome, who had the honour of a triumph; which was the first that was graunted,
by reason of his victories in the wars of Spaine: he brought also into the Treasurie 34800
pounds of siluer, 78000 Bigats, and 278000 of Osca.
In the meane time the Consul Cato was not farre encamped from Empurias, whereas three
embassadours came vnto him from Bilistages, Lord of the Ilergetes; among the which was
one of his sons, complaining, That their castles were besieged by the other Spaniards, whom
they could not resist, but with aid from the Romanes. That if it pleased him to send them fiue
thousand men, it would be sufficient to force the enemie to retyre. The Consull answered,
That he was moued with the danger wherein they were: but he had not at that time such forces,
as he might with safetie send away so great a number, especially being not farre from the
enemie, with whom he expected to fight euery day. The embassadours hearing these words,
cast themselues at his feet, and embracing his knees, besought him, not to abandon them in
their great necessitie, seeing the Romanes were the onely refuge they had in this world: they
let him vnderstand, That if they would haue falsified their faith, and conspired with others
that were reuolted, they might easily haue auoided that danger; but they would not doe it, although
they had beene sollicited with threats and terrifyings, hoping, that the support of the
Romanes should be their warrant: but if that should faile them, and that the Consull should
refuse to aid and defend them, they did protest before God and men, That they should be forced
to leaue the Romane partie, least they should fall into the miseries and calamities of them
of Sagunt. That day Cato made them no other answer, yet he did not leaue to meditate thereon
all night, to find some meanes to free the Ilergetes from this danger, and not to diminish
his forces: for that would haue stayed him from fighting with the enemie, as he desired, or else
in fighting he might be too weake and in danger. In the end he considered, that hypocrisie
and dissembling in warre haue oftentimes auailed much, and that those which attend succors,Dissembling in warre doth often import.
being persuaded to haue them speedily, haue often vpon this hope taken courage, and grown
so resolute, as they haue preserued themselues: Wherefore the next day he told the embassadours,
That he was content for their sakes to incommodate himselfe, and that notwithstanding
that he had great occasion to employ his souldiours, yet he would send them succours.
Hereupon he commaunded they should take the third part of all the companies, and that
they should prepare victuals and ships to embarke them the third day. Whereupon he sent
away two of these embassadours, to carrie newes to Bilistages and the Ilergetes, retaining the
third, who was sonne to Bilistages, making him good cheare, and honouring him with presents.
The embassadours before their departure saw the troupes embarked, and being very well satisfied,
went away, making great bruit of these succours. The Consull thinking that he had
made shew ynough, caused the souldiors to land againe, and to returne to the campe. And
for that the season began to grow vnfit to make warre, he caused Winter lodgings to be made
for the armie, within a myle of Empurias, from whence he sent the souldiors on euery side to
spoyle the enemies countrey. Leauing a sufficient garrison in the campe, he made them goe
forth in the night, that they might goe the farther without discouerie, and more easily surprise
the Spaniards. In this manner he did exercise his new souldiours, and surprised many of the

enemies, who durst no more goe out of their forts. Cato hauing by this meanes sufficiently
tried the hearts both of his owne men and of the Spaniards, he called the Captaines, Knights,
and Centeniers together,Catos speech to the captaines. and said vnto them: That it was now time to set their hands to the
worke which they had so much desired, to shew their vertue by a battaile, and not by raunging and
spoyling, as they had hitherto done, and that they must no more busie themselues with the prey of the
champian countrey, but prepare themselues to enioy the riches of townes. The estate of the affaires in
Spaine (said he) is reduced to that point, that whereas in the time of our predecessors, when as there
was neither captaine nor armie for the Romanes in this region, they did capitulate, That their power
and command should extend vnto the riuer of Ebro: and now when there is a Consull, two Pretors, and
three Armies, and that the Carthaginians haue beene wholly excluded for these tenne yeares, wee haue
not in a manner any thing on this side that riuer. We must then recouer it by our armes and valour, and
reduce this nation (which hath beene accustomed to begin warre with more rashnesse, than to maintaine
it vertuously) vnto the yoake, which they would shake of: wherefore goe and refresh your selues, and be
readie to depart this night.Cato seekes to make his souldiors hardie by constraint, taking all places of retreat from them. About midnight he dislodged, that he might encampe at his pleasure,
before the enemie should haue any intelligence. So as taking a long circuit, he marched
beyond the Spaniards armie; and when as day began to breake, he put his men in battaile, and
sent three companies of foot vnto the rampier of their campe.
The Spaniards being amazed to see their enemies behind them, ran to armes: then the
Consull said vnto his souldiors: There is now no more hope but in our valour, the which I haue done
of purpose; for the enemie lyes mid way betwixt vs and our lodging: all that is behind vs is the enemies;
wherefore there is no better safetie than to trust to our owne vertues. He then caused his companies
which were gone to skirmish, to retyre, as if they would haue fled, that he might draw
forth the enemie, as hee did: for the Spaniards (thinking that the Romanes had retyred for
feare) left their campe, and came out armed, filling the place betwixt their trenches and the
Romanes armie, and there put themselues confusedly and hastily into battaile: but the Consull
gaue them no leisure, but caused certaine troupes of horsemen to aduance, who came and
charged these Barbarians thus disordered: but the Romanes on the right hand were presently
repulsed, and, retyring in hast, had almost put the footmen in rout. The Consull perceiuing
this, he presently sent two bands of foot, who passing along the enemies right flanke, presented
themselues behind, before the battaillons of foot came to joyne: the which did so amaze
the enemies, as the partie which before was doubtfull for the Romans, by reason of the disorder
of their horse, was now almost equall: yet both the horse and foot on the right wing
were so troubled, as the Consull could hardly make them stand firme: yea, he was forced to
take some by the hands, to turne them against the enemie. Whilest they did fight with their
darts a farre off, the encounter was doubtfull: yea, the Romanes wauering on the right wing,
could hardly be kept in order. On the left wing and in front the Spaniards were sorely prest,
and besides, they feared those companies which came in the rere to charge them: but when
they were approched, and so joyned, as no blow fell in vaine, and that there remained no hope
but in their resolutions and valours, being come to the sword, and that Cato had refreshed his
tyred men with new troupes,The Spaniards defeated by Cato. which charged the enemie like lightening, then were they forced
and put to rout, so as they did what they could to saue themselues in their campe. Then
Cato galloping to the second Legion, which he had reserued for succours, he caused them
to aduaunce speedily towards the enemies campe, to force it, but with such order, as if any
one aduaunced too fast, or went out of his ranke, he beat him into his order with a jaueline
which he carried, commaunding the colonels and captaines to doe the like. Now did the Roman
armie giue an assault vnto the enemies rampiers and palisadoes, who defended themselues
valiantly, repulsing their enemies with stones, staues, and other arms: where a new Legion arriuing,
the combat was more furious, both parties growing more couragious; the one through
hope, the other through despaire. The Consull riding about the campe, obserued what part
was worst manned, or weakliest defended: and finding that the gate on the left hand was but
ill furnished with men, he sent some of the formost rankes of the second Legion thither, and
such as carried long staues, who forced the gard which was at this gate, and entred into the
campe. The Spaniards seeing the enemies within their trenches, leaue their armes and ensignes,
flye out of their ports, and cast themselues ouer their rampiers, euery man seeking
to saue himselfe, and one hindering another with hast, so as there was a great slaughter of

them that fled,A great slaughter of Spaniards. and their baggage was all taken. Some hold, that there died in this battaile
fortie thousand Spaniards. There are three commendable things noted in Cato in this action:
First, to take all hope of safetie from his souldiors, but by their armes and vertue, he had led
them far from their campe and ships, betwixt the enemies campe and his countrey: Secondly,
that he did send two companies behind the enemies armie, whilest that he charged them in
front: and for the third, that he had reserued the second Legion behind the rest, and led them
in good order to assayle the enemies campe, whilest that all the other troupes were disbanded
and busie in fight.
After this great victorie, he gaue his souldiors no great rest: for being a little refreshed in
their campe, he led them to spoyle the enemies countrey; the which they did ouerrun at their
pleasures, for that they were all fled. This was the cause which made the Spaniards of Empuria
to yeeld, and many other people thereabouts. There were many inhabitants of other
Cities and Communalties fled to Empuria, whom Cato caused to come before him, and
courteously entreated them, commaunding to giue them meat and drinke, and then he sent
them home to their houses. Soone after he marched with his armie towards Tarracone, and
in all places where he passed, he met with the embassadours of townes, which yeelded vnto
him; so as all Spaine on this side Ebro was reduced vnder the obedience of the people of
Rome before he came to Tarracone: and from all places there were presented vnto him and
freely giuen an infinite number of prisoners, Romanes, Latines, and other allies, which
had beene taken by diuers accidents. The bruite was, That hee would lead his armie into
Turditane, which is the furthest part of Spaine, towards the strait, and some sayd, That
he would passe vnto the mountaines and places vnknowne.The Spaniards alwaies apt to rebell. Vpon this false bruit, there
were seuen strong places in the countrey of the Bargistanes which rebelled, whom hee
subdued without any great toyle, or memorable combate: but soone after the Consull
being returned to Tarracone,Catos seueritie in the Spaniards relapse. they rebelled againe; so as hee leading his armie thither
againe, subdued them: but they escaped not so good cheape as at the first; for he caused
them all to be sold for slaues by the drumme, to the end they should trouble the peace
no more.
In the meane time the Pretor P. Manlius hauing receiued the armie from his predecessour
Qu. Minutius, and being joyned with that which Appius Claudius Nero had in the farther
Spaine, all old bands, he marched into the countrey of Turditania (the which is Andalousia)
and the countrey adjoyning. The Turditanians were esteemed the worst warriours among
all the people of Spaine; yet trusting in their multitudes, they came to encounter the
Romans: when the Romane horsemen disordered them at the first charge; then the Legions
arriuing, they put them wholly to rout. But the war was not thus ended: for the Turditanians
did entertaine in pay ten thousand Celtiberians, and continued to make warre with these
mercinaries.
The Consull being incensed at the double rebellion of the Bargistanes, vsed his naturall
rigor and seueritie against all the Spaniards which dwelt on this side the riuer of Ebro:
for he disarmed them all, thinking, that if they were armed, they would vpon any occasion
fall into rebellion. This was taken so disdainefully by these people, as many grew furiously
mad, and slew themselues:The Spaniards esteemed not the life which passed without armes. A nation in truth fierce and warlike, who esteemed
not that life which passed without armes: Whereof the Consull being aduertised, he caused
the Senatours of all the townes of that countrey to come vnto him, to whom he sayd:
That what hee had done, was more for their profites, than any interest of the Romanes: For when
they were to make warre, you know (said he) it was decided with more misfortune and losse for
the Spaniards, than trouble or paine for the Romanes: Wherefore to preserue you hereafter from
ruine, I thought there was but one onely meanes; which is, to keepe you from rebelling: Let vs then
bethinke our selues of the mildest course, and giue me your aduice; beleeue me I will not willingly entertaine
any, but what you shall giue. These Senatours demaunded time to aduise thereon: and
being called againe, they answered not any thing. Whereupon the Consull caused all their
townes to be demanteled in one day:Cato demantels the townes in Spaine. and from thence marched with his armie against their
neighbours, which were yet in armes, whom he brought to obedience, namely, Segestica,
a towne of great importance, and rich, the which he tooke by sappe. It was a greater difficultie
for Cato to subdue these people of Spaine, than it had beene for the first captaines

which came thither for the Romanes, when the Carthaginians did rule there: for at that time
if the Spaniards were wearie of the Carthaginians commaund, they had recourse vnto the
Romanes: but Cato making warre against them, they had no other refuge, but from an vsurped
libertie they must fall into slauerie. Finally, he found all this Prouince altered, some hauing
taken armes, some being besieged by their neighbours, to force them to take armes; who
(if they had not beene preuented in time) would haue also rebelled with the rest. This Consull
had such an actiue spirit, as all things both great and small must passe through his hands,
neither did he thinke it sufficient to resolue, discourse, and commaund that which he held fit to
be done, but he himselfe did execute many things; neither was he more strict and seuere to any
one in his commaundements, than to his owne person. There was not any one to be found in
his armie, that did watch, fast, and toyle more than himselfe. Finally, he had no aduantage among
those that he commaunded, but the honour to commaund.
The Turditane warre grew more difficult to P. Manlius, by reason of the mercinarie Celtiberians:
wherefore the Consull being called thither by letters from the Pretor, he marched
with his armie. At his arriuall he found, that the Turditanes had their campe diuided from
the Celtiberians:Cato seekes to corrupt the Celtiberians. being encamped, the Romans had continuall skirmishes and light encounters
with the Turditanes, who had alwaies the worst. As for the Celtiberians, he caused them
to be solicited by the colonels and captaines of his armie, propounding vnto them the choice
of three conditions: If they would turne vnto the Romanes, they should haue double the
pay which the Turditanes had promised them: or if they would retyre to their houses without
taking any partie, they promised them abolition of all which they had done: and for the
third, if they desired warre, they should come to field, and present themselues in battaile. The
Celtiberians demaunded respite to make answere, and then did communicate these propositions
in open Councell to the Turditanes; where there was great contention, but no conclusion:
so as many daies passed without any assurance of peace or warre: during the which, the
Romanes ouerrun the enemies countrey, and spoyled their townes, as if it had beene in open
warre: oftentimes making priuat treaties and accords, they entred, went and came into their
forts. The Consull Cato seeing that hee could not draw the enmie to battaile, hee first sent
some troupes with their ensignes, to spoyle that part of the countrey where they had not yet
beene: then hearing,Plinie makes mention of a Saguntia in the Betique Prouince, besides that which is now called Seguen^a. that the Celtiberians had all their baggage in the towne of Seguntia, he
went thither to take it; and yet could hee not draw them out of their campe. In the end hauing
mustered and payed his armie, he left all the forces with the Pretor, and returned with
seuen bands (which made about 3500 men) towards the riuer of Ebro. With these few men
he tooke townes, and forced obedience from the Sedetanes, Ansetanes, and Suessetanes. As
for the Lacetanes, (a people dwelling in a sauage countrey, and out of the way) besides that
their rough and barbarous disposition kept them in armes, they had highly offended the Romanes,
whilest that the Consull was busie in warre vpon the marches of the Turdules, ouerrunning
and spoyling the lands of their allies: Wherefore the Consull led vnto the siege of
their towne not onely the Romane bands, but also the youth of those allies, whom they had
wronged.This towne it may be is that which they now call Iacca. This towne was long, but not very broad. Encamping within foure hundred paces
of it; there he placed certaine chosen companies, commaunding them not to stirre, vntill he
returned vnto them, and then he led the rest of his forces vnto the other side of the towne.
There were a great number of Suessetane soldiors among the strangers allies, whom he caused
to march against the towne, and to assayle the wall. These being discouered by the Lacetanes,
and knowne by their armes and ensignes to be souldiors of Suesse, whose territorie they
had spoyled at their pleasure, and many times defeated their troupes, they sallied out vpon
them: but the Suessetanes scarce seeing them approach, crying out and shaking their armes,
fled, and the others pursued them. The Consull, who expected no lesse, gallopped along the
wals vnto the companies which he had left on the other side; and whilest the townesmen pursued
the Suessetanes, he seized vpon their towne being vnmanned, and tooke it, before the
townesmen were returned from the chase, forcing them to yeeld vnto his mercie. Presently
after this exploit, he went against a strong towne, called Vergium, which was the receptacle of
all the theeues in the countrey, who robbed and spoyled all men which dwelt thereabouts, or
passed that way. The Lord of the place came foorth presently to meet with the Consull, excusing
himselfe, That neither he nor his subjects did wrong any man, but that certain theeues

being receiued into the towne, they had made themselues masters thereof. The Consull
said vnto him, That if it were so, he should returne into the towne, and find some meanes
(when he should giue an assault) to seize vpon the citadell or fort, with them of his faction,
whilest the theeues were busie to defend the walls.Vergium taken by Cato. This was cunningly put in practise, and
the theeues which held the towne were surprised in diuers places, being encountred on the
one side by the Romane armie, and on the other side by them of the fort. Thus Cato woon
this place, and hauing pardoned them which held the fort, with their kinsfolkes and friends,
graunting them their liues and goods, he commaunded the Treasurer to sell all the rest of the
Vergestanes for slaues, to them that would giue most: and as for the theeues and robbers, he
caused them all to be hanged.
By these actions the Consull Cato had reduced the Prouince to more quietnesse,Cato disposeth of the reuenues of Spaine. and then
he began to dispose of the publicke reuenues for the Romanes in these countries, renting
out the mynes of yron and siluer, which made it rich. The yeare of his Consulship being ended,
he returned to Rome, whereas P. Corn. Scipio the second time, and Titus Semp. Longus had
beene created Consuls. There he entred in triumph, and brought into the Treasurie 25000
pounds of siluer in masse, 123000 Bigats, and 540 of Osca,Anno Rome 559 with 1400 pounds of gold. Besides,
there was payed vnto euery footman 370 Asses, and thrice as much to euery horseman,
Cato saying, That euery one must tast of their spoyles.
8 There were sent into Spaine for Pretors P. Cor. Scipio,P. Cor. Scipio and Sex. Digitius sent Pretors into Spaine. sonne to Cn. cousin to the other,
for the further Spaine, and Sex. Digitius (it may be it was he which was honoured with a murall
crowne at the taking of new Carthage) into the hither part. As for the armies, that of
the Pretors was entertained, and the Consuls cast. One of these Gouernours was more fortunate
than the other: for P. Scipio did not onely defend all that which belonged vnto his prouince,
but put the Lusitanians (who came to assayle him) to rout. Sex. Digitius had many
great troubles in his gouernment, and many vnfortunate encounters,Sex. Digitius vnfortunat. so as he deliuered not
halfe the men which he had receiued at his comming, to his successor: and without doubt all
Spaine had risen, if the other Pretor had done no better. P. Corn. sonne to Cn. by his judgement
and dexteritie did so terrifie the enemies in the farthest parts of Spaine, as aboue fiftie
Townes and Communalties yeelded vnto him. After the expiration of his gouernment,
attending his successour, he set vpon certaine Lusitanian theeues, who returned with a great
bootie, which they had taken from the subjects and allies of the Romanes: and although he
were in great perplexitie and danger in this charge, despairing almost of the victorie, for the
which (if he did obtaine it) he did vow games to Iupiter Olympicus:A great victorie of P. Cor. Scipio, sonne to ^n against the Lusitanians. yet he woon it, and (being
much inferior in number of souldiors) defeated the Lusitanians; where hee slew twelue
thousand vpon the place, tooke fiue hundred and fortie prisoners, all horsemen, and carried
away an hundred thirtie foure Ensignes, hauing lost very few of his men. This encounter
was neere vnto the towne of Ilipa, whither the Pretor went with his armie, and
brought foorth all the bootie that was recouered, suffering euery one to carrie away the
goods and cattell which had beene taken from him by the enemie, and causing the rest to
be sold, with the which the souldiors were recompenced. Scipio obtained this victorie in qualitie
of Vice-Pretor.
9 L. Corn. Merula and Q. Minutius Thermus being created Consuls at Rome,Ann. Rome 560 C. Flaminius
was chosen Pretor for the hither part of Spaine, and M. Fuluius Nobilior for the further:
C. Flaminius should succeed Sex. Digitius, to repaire the bad successe which had happened during
his gouernment. He demaunded of the Senat, That he might take one of the Legions appointed
for the citie, and that mingling with them such souldiors as he should leuie, he might
chuse out of the whole number 6500 foot and 300 horse; and that with this Legion thus made,
he might vndertake the affaires: for he did not much relye vpon those forces which remained
with Sext. Digitius, the which were in a manner ruined, saying, That the warre growing hote
in Spaine, they might not goe vnfurnished; speaking of the good and bad successe of that
Prouince, as well by himselfe, as by his friends, much to his owne aduantage. The auncient
Senatours were not of opinion,The wisdome of the Romans respected no common bruites in matters of state. That the Senat should make any decrees vpon the reports
of priuat men in fauour of magistrats, and that they must not giue credit to that which was
spoken touching matters of gouernment, if it were not aduertised by the Gouernors themselues,
or embassadours sent to relate the successe. Finally, the Senat resolued, That if there

were any troubles in Spaine, they should leuie men there: yet they write, That C. Flaminius
went into Sicile, where he enrolled certaine bands; and that passing from thence into Spaine,
he was cast vpon the coast of Africke, where he tooke an oath of some souldiours which he
found there, being the remainders of the armie of P. Scipio Africanus: and that besides all
these, he leuied men in Spaine. But whatsoeuer he did, yet he found not the affaires of Spaine
so difficult as they had giuen it out. Being in his gouernment (which extended vnto the Oretanes)
he tooke the towne of Ilucia, and hauing lodged his souldiours to Winter, there
were many light skirmishes betwixt him and the Spaniards, whereas he had not alwayes the
better, but lost many of his men.
The other Pretor which gouerned the further Spaine did great exploits: for he fought a
battaile with the Vacceans, Vectons, and Celtiberians all together, neere vnto Tolede, put
them in rout, and defeated them, taking their king Hilerme aliue. The yeare following the gouernment
was continued to these two Pretors. Flaminius tooke the towne of Litabrum by
force, the which was strong and very rich: he also tooke Corribilo, a nobleman of great fame,
prisoner.The happie exploits of Fuluius Nobilior. Fuluius in the further Spaine did fight happily with two armies, tooke the townes of
Vescelia and Holo from the Spaniards, with many castles, some by force, and some by composition:
and then passing by the Oretanes country, he seized vpon Nobilia and Cusibis, and came
vnto the riuer of Tayo, on the which Toledo stood, a small town, but strong of situation: whilst
he did batter it, an armie of the Vectons came to succour it, but he defeated it: then continuing
his siege and batterie, he tooke the towne. This done, he returned to Rome, L. Emilius Paulus
being chosen to succeed him, when as P. Cor. Scipio, sonne to Cn. and M. Attilius Glabrio were
Consuls. He entred into Rome with the solemnitie of Ouation, bringing into the common
treasurie 130000 Bigats of siluer, 12000 pounds of siluer in masse, and 127 pounds of gold. C.
Flaminius was continued in his Pretorship in the hither Spaine.
10 But whereas other Pretors had but six officers which caried rods and axes before them,
L. Emilius had twelue,P. Emillius Pretor with Consularie authoritie. so as his Pretorship was equall with the honor and dignitie of a Consul.
To either of these Pretors (besides the armies which were in the countrey) were appointed a
supplie of 3000 foot and 300 horse, newly leuied; two third parts of them of their allies, and
the other third part of Romane citizens. Paulus did twice defeat the barbarous Spaniards in
battaile, and slew 30000, hauing taken his aduantage vpon the passage of a riuer. He brought
vnder the obedience of the Romanes 250 places, by their voluntarie yeelding, and yet with
the honour of all these gallant exploits he returned to Rome,The great integritie of P. E. milius in his gouernment. P. Emilius tut to rout by the Spaniards. hauing not enriched himselfe
one dragma during his gouernment; the which is a rare thing in a man of commaund. His
gouernment being then continued for another yeare, he did somewhat blemish the glorie of
his victories, by a notable rout which he had in the Bastitanes countrey, whereas he lost 6000
men vpon the place, the rest of his army recouered their campe with great difficultie, and then
was forced with long marches to retyre himselfe into places of more safetie: but afterwards
attending the comming of L. Bebius, who should succeed him, he was reuenged of the Lusitanians
for his former losse, of whom, he slew 18000, tooke 330, and woon their campe, with
their baggage.
L. Bebius had beene chosen at Rome to succeed him: but as he marched by the riuer of the
Ligusticke sea, he was set vpon by certaine Ligurians, who slew most part of his men, and himselfe
being wounded,The vnfortunat encounter of L. Babius. hee was forced to saue himselfe in Marseilles, with a small number, and
without vshers, whereas the third day after he died. These newes being sent to Rome by them
of Marseilles, the Senat appointed, That P. Brutus in the Pretors place should take the gouernment
of the further Spaine, and leauing the armie and prouince of Tuscane to one of his lieutenants,
he should speedily depart. In the other part of Spaine,Ann. Rome 564 neerer vnto Gaule, L. Plautius
Hipseus was appointed in C. Flaminius place, whose gouernment was reasonably quiet.
M. Valertus Messala and C. Liuius Salinator being made Consuls at Rome, the hither part of
Spaine was giuen to L. Manlius Acidinus,Anno 565. and to C. Catinius the farther: who continued in the
same charge the yeare following: in the which the Lusitanians and Celtiberians troubled the
peace, and went armed to field: the which being written to Rome by the Pretors, they did chuse
L. Quintius Crispinus, who had that part of Spaine which lyes beyond the riuer of Ebro, and C.
Calphurnius Piso for the other part.C. Catinlus defeats the Lusitanians. Whilest they prepare, C. Catinius came to fight with
the Lusitanians in the territorie of Asta, whom he defeated in battaile, woon their campe,

and slew 6000 vpon the place: but as he gaue an assault to the towne of Asta (the which was
taken without any great resistance) he was wounded, and died soone after. L. Manlius the other
Vice-Pretor had an encounter with the Celtiberians in his gouernment, yet no man knew
who had the victorie;He that leaues the field, consesseth he is vanquished. onely the Celtiberians dislodged the night following, confessing thereby,
that they were vanquished. The Romans being masters of the field, had leysure to burie
their dead, and to gather vp their spoyles.
Within few dayes after the Celtiberians hauing augmented their forces, they came and assayled
the Romanes neere to Calaguris, which now is Calahorra, but they were beaten, and
lost 12000 men vpon the place,The Celtiberians defeated. 2000 were taken prisoners, and they were chased out of their
campe, and lost their baggage. And such was the heat of this victorie, that if they had not
beene restrained by the comming of the new Pretors, the Celtiberians had beene wholly subdued.
Quintius and Calphurnius, as soone as they were within their prouinces, lodged their
armies to Winter. L. Manlius being returned to Rome, made his entrie with the ceremonie
called Ouatio, whither he brought 52 crownes of gold, 132 pounds of gold, 16300
pounds of siluer, and declared in open Senate, That besides all that, his Treasurer Qu. Fabius
brought 10000 pounds of siluer and 80 pounds of gold, to be put into the common
Treasurie.
11 The Spring time being come,Beturia now called Estre^^ Dura. the two Pretors went to field with their armies, and
joyned together in Beturia, marching towards the Carpetanians countrey, where the enemies
were then in field. The beginning of their exploits was not very successfull, but in the
end they made reparation of their errors. The fight began betwixt the forragers on either
side, neere vnto the townes of Hippo and Tolede; to whose succours there came some from
either army, and in the end all their forces came thither: so as the Spaniards seeing themselues
in a conuenient place for their manner of fighting, the two Romane armies were defeated
in this vnexpected skirmish,The Romans defeated, but the Spaniards cannot pursue the victorie. and repulsed with great disorder and amazement, within their
pallisadoes and rampiers, and yet the enemies could not follow their good fortunes. The
Pretors fearing to be assaulted, dislodged in the night: and at the breake of day the Spaniards
presented themselues before the trenches; but seeing no shew of any enemie, they entred into
the campe, whereas they made bootie of that which the Romanes could not carrie away with
them. This done, they stayed there some dayes, without attempting any thing. The Romans
lost in this combat and in the flight about fiue thousand men, of their citizens and allies, with
whose spoyles the Spaniards armed themselues, and marched towards the banks of Tayo. All
the respite the Romane Pretors had, they employed it to fill vp their bands with Spanish souldiors
of their friends and allies, and to assure the rest which had bin beaten. Wherefore when
as they did see their forces reasonably well repaired, and their souldiours hearts reuiued (who
demaunded nothing more than the enemie, to reuenge the disgrace which they had receiued)
they came and encamped within twelue miles of the riuer of Tayo: when as a good part of the
night was spent, they tooke vp their ensignes, and came by the breake of day to the riuers side,
whereas they put themselues into a square battaile. The enemies were on the other side, encamped
on the side of a hill, and the Romans hauing found a foord in two places passed ouer;
Quintius on the right hand, and Calphurnius on the left,The Spaniards know not how to embrace the occasion. but the enemie moued not: who being
amazed at their suddaine arriuall, spent time in consultation what they should do, when they
might haue disordered all the Roman armie, being troubled at the passage of this riuer. In the
end all passed, both souldiors and baggage, the which they laid all together: for they neither had
any conuenient place, nor any leisure to make any trenches, nor to plant their campe, for that
the enemie began to arme, so as they put themselues in order to fight, placing the strength of
their armie (which consisted in two Legions) in the middest. The field betwixt both enemies
lay open, which did assure them from ambushes and surprises. The Spaniards seeing these
two Legions in two great squadrons, put themselues in battaile on the riuers side where they
were, thinking to disorder them before they should be able to joyne with the bodie of their
armie; wherefore they went and gaue them a furious charge. The fight in the beginning
was fierce, the Spaniard being puffed vp with pride for his former victorie, and the Romans
mad with desire to deface the ignominie to haue beene vanquished, contrarie to their custome.
The two Legions in the middest fought valiantly, and could not be forced: wherefore
the Spaniards resoluing to pierce through them by some means, they sent a great troupe

in forme of a wedge,A battaile betwixt the Romanes and Spaniards. to breake this battaillon. The furie of the fight was great, and Calphurnius
feared the Legions should not be able to resist: wherefore he sent T. Quintius Varus and
L. Iuuentius Thalua (two Lieutenants) vnto them to aduertise them, That there was no means
to hold Spaine, nor to saue themselues, neither euer to see their houses, nor Italie; no, not to
get vnto the other side of the riuer of Tayo, if they did not vanquish their enemies: and he
at the same instant, with the horsemen of the two Legions, went and charged this pointed
troupe in flanke, and Quintius came on the other side with a certaine number of horsemen,
but with lesse courage than Calphurnius, who fought in the middest of the preasse: so as by
reason of the Pretors presence, and the danger whereinto hee thrust himselfe, the legionarie
souldiours and all the rest were greatly encouraged to doe their duties; so as they first put
their enemies to rout, and then to flight, towards their campe: whither they were pursued
by the horsemen, who entred pell-mell with them that fled; where they were sorely prest by
them that had beene left to gard the baggage, so as they were forced to leaue their horses, and
to make head against them, vntill the fifth Legion arriued, and the other bands, one after another,
who freed them from this danger, and put all the Spanish armie to the sword: so as of
fiue and thirtie thousand which were in the beginning of the battaile,A notable defeat of Spaniards. there escaped but foure
thousand; whereof three thousand recouered a neere mountaine, and a thousand being naked
and disarmed, wandered vp and downe the fields. The Romans carried away an hundred thirtie
three of the enemies ensignes: they themselues lost in this conflict little aboue six hundred
men, and about an hundred and fiftie Spaniards of their confederats. Fiue Colonels and
some Romane knights (which were slaine there) made the victorie seeme lesse fortunat. The
Romane armie was lodged in the enemies campe, for that they had no time to rampier their
owne. The day following Calphurnius did highly extoll the souldiors valour, and gaue them
gifts in testimonie of their vertue: to knights he gaue caparisons, shewing, that by their valour
chiefely the battaile had beene woon: many captaines of the two Legions were also rewarded.
These two Gouernours returned to Rome, A. Terentius Varro and P. Sempronius being
chosen in their places, during the Consulship of P. Claudius Pulcher and L. Portius Licinius.
They brought many crownes of gold, and readie money, with gold and siluer in masse, whereof
the number is vncertaine; and they triumphed for the victories which they had gotten against
the Lusitanians and Celtiberians.
A. Terentius had the hither part of Spaine,Ann. Rome 568 and Sempronius the further: they also had prolongation
in their charge for the yeare following. Varro had some encounters in this second
yeare with the Ausetanes, a people inhabiting in the countrey of Cattelogne, not farre from
the riuer of Ebro, and against the Celtiberians, whom he vanquished, and tooke some strong
places and townes, which they made their retreat in those marches. As for Sempronius gouernment,
it was quiet: for the Lusitanians stood in awe of the Romans fortune, and the Pretor
was continually afflicted with a troublesome disease, which made him vnfit for all publicke
gouernment, and in the end killed him in Spaine. P. Manlius did succeed him, who had once
beene Pretor in the hither Spaine, when as Cato was Consull, and Quintus Fuluius Flaccus succeeded
Varro.
The hither Spaine was in armes, and had need of a captaine and souldiors to suppresse the
enemie: but in the other prouince the Romanes had no worse enemies than themselues: for
that by reason of Sempronius long infirmitie, the souldiors were idle, and in a manner without
a head,Idlenesse and ease an enemie to vertue, corrupt the Roman armie. all were corrupted, insolent, and without any militarie discipline; the which they must
chiefely remedie. The Senate therefore decreed, That there should be foure thousand foot
and two hundred Roman horse newly leuied, to be sent into Spaine, with seuen thousand foot
and three hundred horse of their allies.
Terentius Varro yeelded vp the prouince and the armie to Qu. Fuluius Flaccus, who besieged
a towne called Vrbicua, whereas the Celtiberians came to assaile him, making diuers skirmishes
to rayse the siege, in the which many Romanes were slaine or hurt. But Fuluius continued
firme, and by his perseuerance woon the towne, the enemies (tyred with fighting) being
forced to retyre. The towne being destitute of succours, was within few dayes taken
and sacked. P. Manlius did no other thing in his gouernment, but gather together the
dispersed souldiours, so as both he and Fuluius after the taking of Vrbicua lodged the armies
to Winter. Terentius being returned to Rome, entred in pompe, and brought into the

treasure 9320 pounds of siluer, 80 pounds of gold, and two crownes of gold of 67 pounds
weight.
The yeare following these two Pretors were continued in their gouernment, and the
warre grew hoter in Fuluius prouince than euer: for the Celtiberians went to field with thirtie
fiue thousand fighting men: against whom, Fuluius fortified himselfe with all the Spaniards
he could leuie among the Romane confederates: but hee did not equall the enemies in
number: yet hee marched into the Carpetanians countrey, and encamped neere vnto Ebura,
into the which he put a garrison. The Celtiberians approched soone after, and planted their
campe within halfe a league of the Romanes, at the foot of a hill; whereas the Pretor sent to
discouer them by two companies of their confederats horses, being led by his brother M. Fuluius,
commaunding him to approch neere vnto the enemies trenches, and to obserue of what
compasse they were, and if they came forth to charge them, they should retyre without fighting:
the which he executed accordingly. Some daies were spent without any action of importance.
In the end the Celtiberians resolued to goe foorth with all their forces, who presented
themselues in battaile, in the plaine which was betwixt the two armies, and there attended
the Romanes: yet Fuluius stirred not, but kept his men foure dayes together within
his campe; during the which, the Spaniards shewed alwaies the same countenance: then seeing
that the Romans lay still, and that there was no means to fight with them, they kept themselues
also quiet for a time; onely the horsemen went forth, keeping themselues readie, if the
enemie should make shew to assayle them. The forragers on both sides went foorth behind
their armies without any let. This hauing continued some dayes, the Romane Pretor (thinking
that he had made the enemie secure) commaunded L. Acilius to march with six thousand
Spanish foot of their allies, and some of the horsemen of the left wing, about the hill vpon the
enemies backe, and there he should attend vntill he heard the crie of the Legionaries and the
rest of the armie, and that then he should come and assayle the enemies campe. Acilius parted
in the night, because he would not be discouered. Fuluius at the breake of day caused C. Stribonius
Colonel of the Latines, to march towards the Celtiberians trenches, accompanied
with the extraordinarie horsemen of the left wing. The enemie seeing him better accompanied
than the day before, sallied presently foorth with all his horse, being followed by their
footmen. Stribonius seeing them come, turned head, as he had beene commaunded, and retyred
towards the Romanes campe. The Celtiberians pursued them speedily both with horse
and foot, persuading themselues, the day should not passe, before they were masters of the
Romanes campe, being now within fiue hundred paces. Then Fuluius seeing that hee had
drawne them farre ynough from their fort, he made way for his armie, being readie in their
trenches, causing them to fally foorth by three seuerall ports at one instant, commaunding
them to make great shouts and cries, not so much to giue courage to the souldiors, as it was
their custome, as to aduertise them that were in ambush behind the hill, attending a signe to
assayle the enemies campe. When as they heard the crie, they ran vnto their rampiers according
vnto their directions: The Celtiberians had onely left fiue hundred men to gard it,
who made no great resistance, being amazed both at their own small number, and at the multitude
of those that came suddainely to assayle them. Acilius hauing woon their campe, hee
presently set fire on such places as lay open to the enemie. The flame appearing, did much
daunt the Celtiberians, and gaue courage vnto the Romans, being assured thereby, that their
campe was taken. Notwithstanding, the Celtiberians seeing themselues destitute of a retreat,
fought like desperat men,A memorable victorie of Qu. Fuluius Flaccus against the Celtiberians. and did much annoy the Romanes: but in the end being oppressed
both with the first troupes and with fresh supplies, and by Acilius, who returned from the taking
of the campe, and by the garrison of Ebura, who sallied forth in the heat of the battell,
they were vanquished, and great numbers slaine vpon the place, and afterwards wholly defeated,
the horsemen pursuing them that fled. They write, That in this battaile there died
23000 Spaniards, and 4800 prisoners taken: the Romanes tooke aboue 500 horse, and
88 ensignes. Doubtlesse the victorie was great, yet not without bloud: for there were
slaine about 200 legionarie Romanes, 830 Latines, allies, and 2400 strangers.The number of the dead. Which
done, the Pretor brought backe his victorious armie into his campe. Acilius was sent
vnto the campe which hee had taken, and the next day they gathered vp the enemies
spoyles, and the souldiors being publickely assembled, euery one was rewarded according

to his merits: then hauing left the wounded men at Ebura, the Legions were led to Contrebia,
by the territorie of the Carpetanians. This towne being besieged, they sent to demaund
succours of the Celtiberians,Contrebia taken by the Romanes. but the towne was yeelded before they came. There had
fallen such aboundance of raine at this season, as Fuluius was forced to lodge his armie
within the towne. The Celtiberians, who could not come by reason of the high waters and
the badway, knew nothing of the yeelding of this towne, vntill they were charged by the
Romanes which were within it: for seeing no signes of a campe about it, they imagined the
enemie had beene gone; so as they approached the towne without order, fearing no danger:
from whence the Romanes sallied forth vpon them with great furie, and put them to
flight: and although the field was spacious, and the commoditie great to saue themselues,
yet there died twelue thousand men,Another defeat of the Celtiberians by Fuluius. fiue thousand were taken prisoners, foure hundred horses
of seruice, and sixtie two ensignes gotten. These Celtiberians being dispersed, they aduertised
their companions which came vnto them, of their defeat: whereupon they returned,
and all this preparation went to smoake. In the further or West part of Spaine, the
Pretor Manlius did also fight happily against the Lusitanians. After these exploits Q. Fuluius
sent L. Minutius his Lieutenant to Rome, with two Colonels. T. Meuius and L.
Terentius Massaliota, to carrie newes, That the Celtiberians had beene wholly vanquished
in two great battailes, and that the Senate should not need to make prouision of money
or any other thing for the entertainment of their souldiors that yeare, for that (sayd they)
the warre was ended. They demaunded also, That the Pretor might haue leaue to bring
backe the armie, which he and others before him had so happily managed and employed:
the which (they sayd) was not onely reasonable, but very necessarie, for that euerie
one demaunded leaue, speaking openly, That if it were not graunted them, they would
take it.
13 At the first generall assembly A. Posth. Albinus LuscusAnn. Rom^ 573 and C. Calphurnius Piso being
made Consuls, they also created new Pretors to send into Spaine:New Pretors sent into Spaine. the hither part by Ebro
fell to T. Sempronius Gracchus, and L. Posthumius had the West part. T. Sempronius was not
much pleased with the request made on Fuluius behalfe, to whom he should succeed: whereupon
he protested, That if they sent him thither with an armie newly leuied, hee would
keepe himselfe within his garrisons, and not expose vnexperienced souldiours against an enemie
so long trained vp in warre. Thereupon the Senate did decree, That they should
rayse a Legion of fiue thousand two hundred foot, and three hundred Romane horse, and besides
it a thousand Romane foot and fiftie horse; and the Latines their allies should be enjoyned
to furnish seuen thousand foot and foure hundred horse: and that with this armie
Sempronius should goe into Spaine: giuing leaue vnto Qu. Fuluius to bring backe the souldiors
which had beene sent thither before that Sp. Posthumius and Qu. Martius were Consuls;
which was six yeares before: and moreouer, when the new leuie were come into the
countrey, it should be also lawfull for him to bring all backe that were aboue two complete
Legions, of tenne thousand foure hundred foot and six hundred horse, Romanes, and twelue
thousand foot and six hundred horse of their allies, Latins, of those souldiors with the which
Fuluius had gotten two victories against the Celtiberians.
Whilest these new Pretors were expected in Spaine, Qu. Fuluius in qualitie of Vice-Pretor
vndertooke to goe and assayle the Celtiberians lying a farre off, for that they had not
yet reconciled themselues vnto him. This did rather incense the Barbarians than amaze
them: wherefore going to armes, they seized vpon the strait or passage called Manlian, by
the which they knew the Romane armie must returne. Gracchus had giuen charge to L.
Posthumius Albinus, going to his gouernment in the further Spaine, to aduertise Qu. Fuluius,
That hee should come and meet him with the armie at Tarracone, where hee would
discharge the old bands, distribute the supplyes which he had brought, and dispose of the
whole armie; appointing a short time vnto Fuluius for the effecting thereof. Vpon which
newes he was forced to depart suddainely out of the Celtiberians countrey: which made
the people surmise, that he had some intelligence, that they did secretly arme, and that
he retyred for feare:The Romanes charged by the Celtiberians in a strait. Wherefore they began to gard the passage more straitly and proudly
than before. The Romane armie being entered into this passage at the breake of day,
they were assayled in two seuerall places at one instant, Qu. Fuluius giuing order for all

things, according to the time and place, and making a briefe exhortation to his souldiors, he
assured them. The fight began to grow hot, but not with like aduantage: for the legions and
the Latines vpon the wings did fight valiantly, but their Spanish souldiours could not resist
their countrey-men, who were better souldiours than they. The Celtiberians seeing they
could not vanquish the Romanes, fighting hand to hand with them in a set battell, they had
recourse vnto their accustomed fashion, which was, to shape their troup like a wedge. Being
thus ordered, they are more firme and violent, and can hardly be withstood: by this meanes
they had almost disordered the legions.The Romans distressed. The which the Generall perceiuing, hee ran presently
to the legionary horsemen, asking them, What they did there, and what succour might be expected
from them? To whom they answered, That they were readie to obey whatsoeuer hee
should command. Ioyne then (said he) all the horses together of the two legions, and with a full carriere
breake through that wedge of men which doth force our squadron; yea take the bridles from your
horses, is our auncestors haue often done with good successe, that you may ouerthrow them with more
violence. Whereunto the horsemen speedily obeied, and setting spurres to their vnbridled
horses, they passed and repassed through this troupe of the enemies, breaking their staues,
and making great slaughter of them.Another great defeat of the Celtiberians by Qu. Fuluius. When this wedge was broken and dispersed, in the
which the Spaniards did wholly relye, they had no other thought but vpon flight. The Latin
horsemen moued with the valour of the Romanes, without any further commaundement, fell
vpon the enemies already broken, so as there was a great slaughter made in the flight throughout
all the strait. For this victorie the vice Pretor did vow a temple vnto Fortune, and games
vnto Iupiter. There died in this encounter seuenteene thousand Celtiberians,The number of the dead of either side. aboue three
thousand prisoners, and two hundred threescore and seuenteene ensignes taken, and about
one thousand and one hundred horses gotten. The victorious armie did neither intrench
nor rampar for that day: But this victorie was not without losse to the Romans, for there were
foure hundred threescore and ten citizens slaine, a thousand and nineteen Latines, and of Spaniards
and other strangers, their allies, three thousand. Thus this armie hauing redoubled her
fame by this victorie, it arriued at Tarracone, whereas Sempronius the Pretor (who arriued
there but two dayes before) went forth to meet him, and did congratulate with Fuluius and
the souldiours, their happie exploits for the commonweale. Then did they louingly and with
great concord, discharge and retaine what they thought fit among the souldiours, according
to the decree of the Senat: And for that yeare there was little done in Spaine by the new gouernours,
for that they arriued late by reason of the death of one of the Consuls, and the
subrogation of another, which staied their expedition. The yeare following they were continued
in their gouernments.
Q. Fuluius Flaccus being returned to Rome,Anno Rome 574 when as he stayed without the towne, to haue
order for his triumph according to the custome, he was chosen Consull with L. Manlius Acidinus,
and then he entred in triumph, with the souldiours which he had brought out of Spaine.
He brought into the publique treasurie one hundred and twentie foure crownes of gold, 31
pounds of gold, and 173200 deniers of coined money of Osca, besides he gaue fiftie deniers,
being about fiue crownes, to euerie footman, twice as much to the centeniers, and thrice as
much to the horsemen, as much to the allies and Latines, and to all in generall double pay.
This yeare the Gouernors in Spaine diuided the warre betwixt them, so as Albinus should
goe and assayle the Vaccens by the country of the Lusitanians, and from thence should come
into the marches of the Celtiberians. Gracchus should enter into the heart of their countrey,
for that the warre was hottest there. There he first tooke the towne of Munda by force, hauing
set vpon it suddenly in the night, and hauing taken hostages, and put in a garrison, he battered
some castles, and did forrage and burne the countrey vntill he came vnto another strong
towne called Certima: whereas hauing begun to plant his engines to batter it, deputies came
vnto him from the inhabitants, who vsed a simple kind of speech vnto him, after the auntient
manner, without any dissembling,The f^ee simplicitie of the Spaniards. telling him freely, That they would make warre if they had
meanes, desiring that they might haue leaue to goe vnto the Celtiberians campe, to demand
succours: the which if they could not obtaine, they would then take counsell of their affaires
distinctly from the other nations. Gracchus yeelded to their demaund:Gracchus his facilitie and courtesie to the Barbarians. and within a few daies
after they returned, bringing with them ten other deputies. It was about noone. The first
words which they spake vnto the Pretor, were, That they intreated him to commaund some of

his people to bring them drinke: which done, they demaunded more, making all the assistants
to laugh at their grosnesse, and want of ciuilitie. Then the eldest among them began to speake,
saying, That they had beene sent vnto him by them of their nation, to know, vpon what
ground he was come to make warre against them. Gracchus answered, That it was vpon the
assurance of a goodly armie, which he had, and if they would see it, to make a more certaine
report vnto their men, he would suffer them, commaunding some captaines to cause them all
to arme, and to make them march and skirmish together. These deputies reported vnto their
people what they had seene; which diuerted them from sending any succours to the towne
besieged: The inhabitants whereof (seeing themselues abandoned) yeelded, paying the value
of 62000 crownes, and gaue fortie knights, of the noblest among them, not in shew as
hostages (for they put them among their bands to carrie armes) although in effect they were
as pawnes of their promises and accords. From thence Gracchus led his armie to Alce, a town
whereas the Celtiberians (who had sent the ten deputies vnto him) were camped, against
whom for some dayes he sent his light horsmen, to tire them with light skirmishes, euen within
their gards, sending more men daily, to the end he might draw them out of their trenches
to battell. The which succeeding according to his desire, hee commaunded the Generall of
the allies, to begin the fight, and that presently turning their backes, and making shew to bee
oppressed with multitudes, they should returne with all speed towards the campe. He in the
meane time put his armie in battell within the rampars, neere vnto euerie gate, and suddenly
when he saw his men turne head towards the campe flying, as he had commanded them, and
the enemie following with no lesse speed; hauing retired his men, he drew forth his armie by
all those ports, with great cries, so as the enemies could not make any resistance: and it happened,
that those which came running to take the Romanes campe,Gracchus victorie against the Celtiberians. could not defend their
owne; for presently they were repulsed, put to rout, and beaten into their palisadoes, where
they were soone after forced. There were nine thousand slaine that day vpon the place, three
hundred prisoners, 112 horses of seruice, and 37 ensignes woon. On the Romanes side there
died but 109 men. After this defeat Gracchus led the legions to spoyle the countrey of the
Celtiberians, wasting and carrying all away. Wherefore many, either for feare, or otherwise
forced, yeelded vnto him: so as in few dayes he reduced vnder the Romanes obedience
one hundred and thirteene townes,Some of the antient said these 113 town^ were but farmes, or doue^^ouses, to eclips the glorie of Gracchus. and tooke great spoyles. From thence hee returned againe
towards Alce, and began to assaile it. The inhabitants endured the first assault, but afterwards
seeing them prepare their engines to batter it, distrusting in their owne strength,
they retired all into the castle, the which yeelded soone after, submitting themselues to
Gracchus his mercie. The spoyle was great, and many noblemen and of good houses were
taken prisoners; among the which there was a sonne and a daughter of Thurtus, who was
the greatest nobleman of the countrey,Thurtus a pettie Spanish king lord of Alce. and to whom the place belonged. Hearing what
was happened, he came with a safe-conduct into the armie to Gracchus: of whom he demanded
life, both for himselfe and his, whereof Gracchus assured him. Then he desired to be admitted
to carrie armes with the Romanes, the which was granted him: and from that time he
shewed himselfe faithfull and valiant in their seruice, and did greatly aduance the Romane
affaires in Spaine.
Ergauica a mightie and famous towne, being amazed with the miseries and ruines of her
neighbours, opened the gates to the Roman armie. Some write, that these yeeldings were not
done faithfully, and that as soone as the legions were gone, they entred into rebellion, so as the
Pretor had two encounters with the Celtiberians,Caunus, ^^ount Ca^o at this day. the one neere vnto mount Caunus, where
the fight continued six houres, with great slaughter on either side, neither partie confessing
himselfe to be vanquished. The second time (which was the third day after) the Romans had
an assured victorie* where there were 22000 of the enemies slaine vpon the place, and 300 prisoners,
and as many horses, and 72 ensignes taken. By which defeat the war was ended in that
countrey, and the Celtiberians demaunded peace, the which they did faithfully entertain for
a time, without rebelling. They write, that L. Posthumius had at the same time woon two battles
of the Vaccens, others say, of the Brecaires, which are betwixt Minio and Duero, and had
slaine 35000 of the enemies, and tooke their campe.
At Rome M. Iunius Brutus, and A. Manlius Volso being chosen consuls,Ann. Romae 575 M. Titinius and T. Fonteius
Capito were created Pretors and gouernors of Spain: Titinius had that part which was neerest

vnto Gaule, and Capito the Westerne part: and then Sempronius Gracchus and L. Posthumius
came to Rome, who had the honour of a triumph granted them, for that they had gouerned
the affaires of the commonweale wisely and valiantly. Gracchus entred first in triumph for the
Celtiberians, bringing into the treasurie fortie thousand pounds weight in siluer. His companion
entred some dayes after, triumphing for the Lusitanians, and other neighbour people,
who also brought twentie thousand pounds. To euerie one of the souldiours was giuen fiue
and twentie deniers, which is worth two crownes and a halfe: to the centeniers double, and
to the horsemen treble as much, and to the souldiours of their allies as much as to them of
Rome.
Spaine tyred with warre, was quiet during the gouernment of the new Pretors, who continued
there two yeares.
The third yeare Cn. Corn. Scipio Hispalus,Anno 577. and Q. Petilius Spurrinus being Consuls, M. Corn.
Scipio Maluginensis,The new Pretors refuse their charge in Spain^ and P. Licinius Crassus, were chosen Pretors in Spaine: Crassus had the hither
Spaine, and Scipio the further; but either of them pretended excuses not to go, and therefore
Titinius and Fonteius were continued in the gouernment as vice-Pretors, to whom there
was appointed to fill vp their armies, three thousand foot, citizens of Rome, and two hundred
horse, and fiue thousand Latins of their allies, with three hundred horse: yet there is no mention
of any tumult in Spaine, during their abode, nor after they were changed, vntill the Consulship
of Sp. Posthumius and Q. Mutius, which was two yeres after, in the which the gouernment
of the hither Spaine fell to P. Furius Philo,Anno Rome 579 and the further to Cn. Seruilius Cepio. We read
that whilest these Pretors prepared themselues to go into their prouinces, the Celtiberians
being in armes, App. Claudius Cento (who was vice-Pretor there) gaue them a great defeat, so
as they were forced to submit themselues vnto the yoke. They began their rebellion by a sudden
assault which they came to giue vnto the Romanes campe at the breake of day: Being
discouered by the centinels, they cried to armes, so as the souldiors were presently armed, and
readie to sallie forth, as they did by the ports: but the Celtiberians were so neere, as they kept
them long from comming forth, so as the combat was in a manner equall. But the formost
ranks being thrust on by their companions, in the end they got out of their palisadoes into the
plaine,The Celtiberians defeated. where they had meanes to draw out their front, and the wings of their battell, equal to
that of the enemies, with the which they were in a manner compassed in: but they behaued
themselues so well, as they repulst them, and in lesse than two houres put them to flight, with
the losse of aboue fifteene thousand of their men; so as the warre was ended: for such as escaped,
submitted themselues soone after to the Romanes yoke, so as the new Gouernours had
not any warre.
The next yeare L. Posth. Albinus, and M. Pompilius Lenas, being Consuls, Cn. Fabius Buteo,
and M. Matienus were chosen to gouerne Spaine: and then arriued App. Claudius, who entred
the citie with the pompe of ouation, bringing ten thousand pounds of siluer, and fiue
thousand of gold. Fabius Buteo, who had the hither Spaine, going vnto his gouernment, fell
sicke at Marseilles,Publique charges affected for priuat profit. where he died, so as P. Furius Philo was continued in his gouernment, and
Matienus came into the further prouince. As it is a thing too well knowne, that gouernments
are not affected but to get authoritie and wealth: so it falls out often, when as Gouernours
find not matter to maintaine their greatnesse among the enemies by the warre, they can hardly
doe justice to their fellow citizens and allies in time of peace: then they begin to molest the
richest families, by false accusations, to faine necessities, to exact vpon the publique, and to
vse other such practises, to fill their cofers, and enrich their ministers with the ruine and desolation
of the commons. Thus did the Pretors and lieutenants of the people of Rome in
Spaine.
These two Gouernours Furius and Matienus, either in his jurisdiction, hauing (by reason
 of the peace) no other prey but those that were giuen them in gard,The Spaniards complaine of their gouernours couetousnesse. they polled them in such
sort, as not able any longer to endure their extortions and fraud, the poore Spaniards were
constrained to send embassadours to Rome, after that the Pretorship was ended: who hauing
audience, casting themselues vpon their knees, they made a pitiful complaint of the pride and
couetousnesse of their Gouernours, beseeching the Senate not to suffer their friends and allies
to be oppressed and spoyled by them with greater violence than if they were enemies. Many
crimes were objected by them, but concussion was best verified. The Senat decreed, That

Lu. Canuleius (to whom the gouernment of Spaine was fallen) should chuse judges from among
the Senators,Spaine made one gouernment, and L. Canuleius Pretor alone. to examine the fact; and that the parties should chuse aduocates of the
same order. Titinius, who had beene Pretor, during the Consulship of A. Manlius and M.
Iunius in the higher Spaine, was drawne in question: but when as they had pleaded two
seuerall dayes, he was absolued: but P. Furius Philo (who had beene Gouernour in the same
prouince) and M. Matienus in the further Spaine, being accused of diuers crimes, and their causes
often pleaded, when as it was againe to be heard, they were excused, being absent, for that
being loath to attend the sentence, they had voluntarily retired themselues, the one to Preneste,
the other to Tybur: and so the matter was left vndecided.
Canuleius desiring to suppresse this pursute, to the end that many should not bee molested
by the Spaniards, began to giue order for the affaires of his gouernment, and to inroll souldiours,
to lead them into the prouince which was appointed for them, and so he parted. The
Senat letting passe what had beene formerly done, prouided for the future, that the Romane
magistrats should set no taxe vpon corne, and that they should not force the Spaniards to sell
the twentieth part at their pleasures, which was a certaine tribute: and that they should send
no more Commissaries into their townes to leuie money.
At the same time there came another kind of embassage to Rome, from them that had bin
borne of Romane souldiours and Spanish women, and not maried. These were about foure
thousand men. The Senat commaunded they should giue in their names, and be inrolled by
L. Canuleius the Pretor: and that such as he should make free, should be conducted vnto Carteia,
vpon the Ocean sea, to dwell there. That the inhabitants of Carteia that would remaine
there, should be receiued,A colonie of Libertines. and portions of land assigned them: and this colonie should be held
for Latines, and be called the Libertines.
It seemes that the Romanes hauing no warres at that ime in Spaine,Spaine diuided againe into two gouernments. were resolued to reduce
it to one gouernment, and to send but one Pretor. After Canuleius mention is made of
Claudius Marcellus, and then of P. Fonteius: of whose deeds there is no mention in auntient
writers; so as it is to be presumed, this prouince continued quiet. But in the yeare 586 of the
foundation of Rome, Q. Aelius and M. Iunius being Consuls, they did againe create two Pretors,
which were Cn. Fuluius on the hither part, and about the riuer of Ebro; and C. Licinius Nerua
in the further. After which the Romanes contenting themselues for many yeares, with
their conquests in Spaine, they sought as it seemed to make them whom they had subjected,
or drawne vnto them, ciuile, and to fashion them by little and little to the manners and inclinations
of the Romanes: without seeking the other people which were more barbarous, who
also for their parts were glad to be left in peace, being terrified with the Romanes power,
whom they would not incense, neither had they any care to seek their friendship, because they
hated them, as violaters of the lawes of nature, and oppressors of mans libertie.
15 In the yere 600 of the foundation of Rome,Ann. Rome 600 Q. Fuluius and T. Annius being Consuls, the
Celtiberians (who had beene vanquished and subdued by T. Gracchus fiue and twentie yeares
before) began againe to stirre,The Celtiberians and other people repaire the demanteled towns. the inhabitants of Sediga, a towne of the Areuaces, hauing (against
their capitulations, and the commaundement of Gracchus) repaired the walls of their
towne, and refused to pay tribute vnto the Romanes: by reason whereof other people being
also rebelled in Spain, the Senat resolued to send an armie, and a Consul to be the General, so
as Q. Fuluius was sent, who was not verie fortunat in the beginning. This yeare by a new custome
the Consuls entred into charge the first of Ianuarie,The Romane Magistrats change the day of entring into their Charges. whereas before they did not begin
their magistracie vntill the fifteenth of March: whereunto they were induced by the rebellion
of the Spaniards: the which was afterwards continued. Of this beginning followed the
warre of Numancia, which lasted twentie yeares. The Senat of Rome hauing first forbidden
them of Segida to raise their walls, and then commaunded them to goe to the war with their
Consuls and Pretors, according to the pacification made by Gracchus, they answered, That
they had capitulated,The stronger construe treaties as they please. not to make any new forts, but not to repaire their old. And as for going
to the warre, they were exempt from that charge, by the treatie of Gracchus: the which was
true. But the Senat added a glose to these conditions, that is, As long as it shall please vs: the
which the Spaniards would not heare of. Wherefore seeing that Quintus Fuluius Nobilior
came against them with an armie of thirtie thousand men, they left their towne, which was
not yet in defence, sent their wiues and children to their neighbours, and vnder the conduct

of one Carus, they assembled to the number of 20000 foot,Carus a captaine of the Spaniards and 5000 horse, and came and camped
in a place couered with wood, verie fit to surprise their enemies, whom he met withall in
the woods, and both gaue and took many wounds. Afterwards in a great encounter Carus had
the victorie, hauing slaine 6000 Romans, wherewith being growne insolent and carelesse, the
Consull had means to haue his reuenge, sending his horsemen to charge the Spaniards which
were scattered and out of order: who put 6000 to the sword, and more had bin slaine, if night
had not seperated them. This made the Celtiberians more circumspect. The same night the
people of the countrey assembled at Numance,A conspiraci^ of the Spaniards at Numance. and being resolued to resist the Romanes, they
made choice of Ambo and Leuco for their captaines. The Consull Fuluius hauing receiued
300 horse, with some Elephants, from king Massinissa, a Moore (an auntient friend to the people
of Rome) marching forward, he came and offered battell to the enemies vnder Numance.
He had placed his Elephants behind the first rankes, that they might not be seene, thinking to
terrifie them suddenly, and to defeat them by that meanes; but it fell out otherwise: for being
come to joyne, and the ranks opened, when as the Elephants shewed themselues, they did
somewhat terrifie the Spaniards and their horses, which were not accustomed to see such
beasts; so as turning their backes they went towards the towne: But one of these Elephants
comming neere the walls, being hit on the forehead with a stone, he entred into such a rage, as
turning against the Romanes themselues, he trode them vnder his feet; after whose example
the rest began to run through the Romane troupes, and disordered them: For it is the nature
of these beasts,Elephants held by the wise to be common enemies. when they are terrified, they know neither friend nor foe: wherefore many
call them common enemies. The Spaniards which were within Numance, seeing this confusion,
sallied out vpon the Romanes, and slew foure thousand men, and tooke three Elephants,
and many ensignes; yet they lost two thousand of their men.
The Consull hauing refreshed himselfe somewhat after this rout, he was repulsed againe
at the fort of Axenium, the which he assailed, to haue the victuals which the enemie had in it,
and in this misfortune the Romans receiued a third rout, whereas Biasius a leader of some
horse of their allies, was slaine, with many good souldiours. These many losses did moue the
inhabitants of Ocilis,Ocelon reuolts from the Roman partie. or Ocelon, allies to the Romanes, and gardians of the money and victuals
of their campe, to reuolt, and to follow the Celtiberians partie. So as vanquished
with so many misfortunes, the Consull Fuluius could take no better course, than to fortifie
his campe for to winter: the which hee did with the greatest want that might be, besides,
haile, snow, raine, and all the rigour of the season, so as many of his souldiours perished
for cold.
16 The yeare following M. Claudius Marcellus succeeded Fuluius,M. Marcellus Consull sent into Spaine. and brought 8000 foot
and 500 horse into Spaine. This man was more politique than his predecessor, to keepe himselfe
from the surprises of his enemies, leading his armie safely to Ocilis, the which hee tooke
in few dayes, and pardoned their offence, paying a fine of thirtie talents, and some hostages,
which he demaunded of them. This clemencie of his made the Nertobriges, another nation,
to send embassadors vnto him, to demaund peace and pardon: to whom he made a pleasing
answer, demaunding an hundred horsemen of them; the which they promised. But during
this treatie, they sent certaine troupes, which fell vpon the Romanes baggage, and spoyled
some of it. Hereupon the hundred horsemen, which the Consull had demaunded, arriued,
whom he committed to prison, and sold their horses, by reason of their treacherie. Then he
led his armie against their towne.
The inhabitants seeing themselues inuironed with ditches and trenches,Ceremonies of the Barbarians when they are suters. sent forth a herauld
attired in a wolues skin (a ceremonie vsed by the Barbarians in such supplications)
crauing pardon. To whom hee made answere, That hee would not grant it, if the Areuaces
and the other rebels their allies did not sue for it all together. Which being knowne
vnto them, they all sent their embassadours to intreat the Consull Marcellus to referre them
to the accord made in former time with T. Gracchus, imposing vpon them (according to his
clemencie) a tollerable punishment.
There were some people allyed vnto the Romanes, which hauing beene wronged by
them, opposed themselues to this demaund: wherefore Marcellus sent them all to the Senat
of Rome. The Senat made no other answer, hauing heard their debate, but that Marcellus
should tell them what they were to do.

17 In the meane time,Ann. Romae 602 in the yeare 602, Spaine fell by lot to the Consul L. Lucullus, and
then they began first to inroll souldiours by lot. Lucullus led with him P. Scipio Aemiltanus (he
that made himselfe famous by the euersion of Carthage the great, and of Numantia.) Marcellus
hauing aduertised the Celtiberians of the comming of this Consull, and of the warre
which was prepared, he aduised them, before they attended any greater extremitie, to yeeld
to his discretion, promising them all good vsage, and reasonable conditions; for he desired to
end this war before the comming of Lucullus: the which they did. This Marcellus (as Strabo
writes) did build the citie of Corduba,Corduba built by M^^tellus. and imposed a tribute of six hundred talents vpon
Spaine, continuing his gouernment a good while after that Lucullus was chosen Consull, gouerning
as Proconsull.
Lucullus finding nothing to doe at his arriuall,Lucullus being couetous seekes occasion of war. he laid the foundation of a new warre, being
as desirous to make some spoyle (for he was but poore) as to get honour. He entred therefore
as an enemie into the Vaccens countrey, who had in no sort offended the Romanes: and hauing
passed the riuer of Tayo, he went to besiege Cauca. The inhabitants demaunded what
he would of them, and why he besieged them. He answered, That they had wronged the
Celtiberians, allies to the Romanes, and that he came to reuenge it. Whereupon they retired
into their towne, and put themselues in defence. Soone after they sallied forth suddenly
vpon them that went to forrage, and slue a great number. But the Romane souldiours going
forth to succor them, they repulsed the Spaniards, beating them euen vnto their town gates,
whereas they smothered one another with the multitude, so as there were aboue three thousand
slaine. Those which remained being amazed with this losse, they sent the next day the
most antient among them, with girlands of oliue branches, desiring Lucullus to receiue them as
friends,(...) burthens laid vpon them of Cauca by Lucullus. and to set downe the conditions; who imposed an hundred talents of siluer, and hostages,
commaunding them to send their horsemen to the warre with him: which hauing
granted, Lucullus said, That he would haue them receiue a garrison into their towne: wherevnto
they were also willing to obey, so as presently there were two thousand of the best souldiours
in the armie sent, with commaundement to seise vpon the ports, towers, and strongest
places of the towne: which they did. Then Lucullus drew in all the rest of the souldiors, and
by the sound of the trumpet,Lucullus treacherous crueltie against the inhabitant^ of Cauca. did most cruelly put all the inhabitants to the sword, sparing neither
age nor sexe: yet some slipping ouer the walls, and creeping through the prease, escaped,
who proclaimed the Romanes treacherie, couetousnesse, and crueltie, throughout all Spaine:
whereupon all those that dwelt in the champian countrey, and in places of easie accesse, retired
vnto the mountaines, or into fortified townes; carrying with them what was good and
precious: and what they could not carrie they burnt, being loath to leaue any spoyles to so
cruell an enemie.
Cauca being thus ruined, Lucullus led his armie through a great part of the countrey which
was barren and desart, vntil he came to the towne of Intercatia, where there were some twentie
thousand foot and two thousand Spanish horse, gathered together: of whom Lucullus demaunded
indiscreetly,Truth breeds hatred and furie in the wicked when they are touched. If they would not come to composition with him. But they asked, If
he would receiue them with the like faith as he had done them of Cauca? reproaching vnto
him with opprobrious words, this treacherous and inhumane fact. Wherewith Lucullus being
incensed (as commonly all those are which find themselues touched) he spoiled all their
countrey, and then besieged them. They knowing there was no reason to come to battel with
the Romane armie, maintained themselues with skirmishes and sudden sallies. During this
siege a Spanish caualier richly armed, and brauely mounted, shewed himselfe often betwixt
the armie and the towne, challenging some Romane to the combat, and seeing that no man
durst come forth, he scorned them. But Scipio Aemilianus being then verie young, grieued to
see the Romane knights thus dishonoured,Sclpio Aemilianus combats with a Spaniard and conquers him valiantly. and hauing leaue from the Consull, he went to encounter
him, and vanquished him: the which bred admiration in both parties, considering the
inequalitie of the stature of the combatants; for Scipio was little, and the Spaniard wonderful
great and strong. The Romanes conceiued good hope of this victorie: but in the night they
were troubled with the cries of certaine horsemen of the towne, which were gone forth before
that Lucullus did inuest it, who being the same night returned, about the palisadoes of the
Romane armie, made great cries and shouts, to whom the besieged made answer: so as the
Romanes were forced to keepe themselues in armes, not knowing what part to gard: besides,

they were tyred and growne weake, for that they wanted both bread, wine, oyle, salt and
vinegre, liuing only vpon venison, hares, or pouldred flesh, the which bred fluxes, wherof many
dyed. Continuing their batterie, they made a great breach, but comming to the assault,
(whereas Scipio was one of the formost) and being in a manner masters of the towne, they were
sharpely repulsed: and in their retreat many through ignorance of the place fell into certaine
priuies, where they were swallowed vp. The besieged hauing repaired their breach, seemed
resolute; but hunger pressing either partie, they could not long dissemble their necessities: so
as Lucullus persuaded the Spaniards to yeeld, with the best words hee could, promising he
would not deceiue them,Intercatia taken by composition. so as in the end they gaue him credit, and yeelded, vpon condition
to send six thousand archers to the warre with him, giuing a certaine number of cattell, and
some hostages.Couetousnesse, and no desire of honour, brought Lucullus into Spaine. Gold nor siluer (the desire whereof had drawne Lucullus into Spaine) there
was not any: for the people of that countrie had neuer esteemed it. Matters being thus compounded,
the Romane armie was led against Palantia, a strong and well fortified towne, whither
many of the champian countrey, and lesser townes were retired. Most of the colonels
and captains were of opinion, That they should not striue in vaine against so mightie a town:
but Lucullus, a couetous man, knowing it to be exceeding rich, would neuer leaue it vntill
that hunger forced him, the horsemen of the towne (which were verie many) sallying out daily
vpon the Romans which went to forrage.Lucullus retire^ from Pa^enza with shame. Being thus pressed, he put his armie into battell,
and retired, the Palantines following him in the taile, and pursuing him vnto the riuer
of Duero, where they left their pursute, and returned. Lucullus passing on, led his armie to
winter in the countrey of the Turditanes. Thus ended the warre against the Vacceans,Lucullus making war without authoritie, is not punished. for the
which (although that Lucullus vndertooke it without authoritie or commandement from the
Senat and people of Rome) he was neuer called into question.
18 About that time the Lusitanians, and people of the further Spaine, liuing vnder their
owne lawes, had made incursions vpon the friends and allies of the people of Rome, hauing
a certaine Africane for their captaine, and chased Manlius and Calphurnius, Romane captains,
killing aboue six thousand of their men,Romans defeated by the Lusitanians. with Terentius Varro, their Questor or Treasurer.
Wherewith this Africane growne proud, he went with a companie of Vectons, a neighbor
people, to assaile the town of the Blastophenicians, a people who, they said, were brought and
left in Spaine by Hannibal. This captaine being slaine there with a stone, they did presently
make choice of one called Caesaras to be head of their armie: who gaue battell vnto Mumius
which had beene sent from Rome with an armie; but he lost it: yet seeing that Mumius pursued
his victorie inconsideratly, he turned head, and repaired his losse, so as he slew nine thousand
of the Romane armie vpon the place,Mumius defeats the Spaniards, and is beaten by the vanquished through his own negligence. and not onely recouered his owne baggage, but
tooke the enemies, and carried away a great number of ensignes, which the Lusitanians dragged
vp and downe in scorne of the Romanes. Mumius hauing gathered together fiue thousand
souldiours which remained, and reuiued them as well as he could, he found an opportunitie
to charge the enemie going to forrage,Mumius reuengeth his losses. and did so well, as he slew a great number, and
recouered his ensignes.
The Lusitanians which dwelt beyond the riuer of Tayo, hauing in like maner proclaimed
warre against the Romanes, and tooke the towne of Conistorgis by assault, a great and strong
towne, confederat to the Romanes, they being led by a captaine called Caucene: and not content
to make a tumult in Spaine, some of them passed the strait at Hercules pillars, and went
to spoyle Africke: the rest went to assaile Ocile. But Mumius arriuing with a thousand foot
and fiue hundred horse, slew about fifteene thousand forragers, and made them to leaue the
siege of Ocile. Then going against others, who thought to escape with the prey, hee left not
one aliue to carrie newes of their defeat. Hee distributed the bootie which was portable among
his souldiours, and the rest (being consecrated to those gods who hee thought did preside
ouer the warres) he burnt. After all this, he returned to Rome, and triumphed.
Attilius, or Acilius Balbus, succeeded Mumius, who at his first arriuall cut seuen hundred
Lusitanians in peeces, and tooke Oxthraca, being the greatest and richest towne they had, striking
terrour in all the neighbour people, which submitted themselues to his deuotion as far
as the Vectons. But when as Acilius had lodged his armie for Winter, they rebelled, and
began to annoy them that were friends and confederats to the Romanes: Against whom Ser.
Galba sent Pretor to succeed Acilius, meaning to succour them, made a march of 15 leagues,

and being come in sight of the enemie, without giuing rest to the souldiours, he led them
to fight,Galba being victor is defeated by his rash pursute. and vanquished happily. But as the Romanes pursued the flying enemie in disorder,
and made many stands being wearie, the Lusitanians turning head, slue seuen thousand,
and forced Galba to flie with his horsemen into Carmel, whither many that had escaped
were retired: who hauing rallied them together, and leuied twentie thousand men of their
confederats, he wintered at Cunes. The Consull Lucullus who wintered in Turditania, hearing
that the Lusitanians were in armes, he sent the best of his captaines against them, and slue
foure thousand of them, and afterwards hauing made a new head neere vnto Gades, hee cut
fiue thousand and fiue hundred in peeces. And as Galba on his side pressed these people, they
sent embassadors vnto him. seeming desirous to enjoy the accord made before with Attilius.
Galba made shew to pitie them, and to excuse their excesse for that pouertie had made them
to breake the treaties, and to steale: saying, That he knew well that the Barbarians of the
countrey was the cause of these inconueniences: but if they had a true intent to be friends,
he would diuide them into three troupes, and send them into fertile places to liue in. The
Lusitanians being woon with these promises, put themselues into three troupes, and suffered
themselues to be led to the places assigned by Galba, who spake vnto the first, as if they were
in full peace,The treacherous cruelfie of Serg. Galba. injoyning them to leaue their arms; which hauing done, he caused them all to be
massacred: and with the like fraud and crueltie he defeated the other two troupes, before they
could haue any newes of the slaughter of their companions. Many slipping through the armed
troupes, escaped; among the which was Viriatus, who reuenged the trecherie and crueltie
of the Romanes against his country-men. Galba shewing himselfe as treacherous, and it may
be more couetous than Lucullus, hauing filled his cofers with the spoyles of Lusitania, wherof
he did defraud both his friends and souldiours, returned to Rome, where he was called in
question for his abuses: but being the richest man in the citie, he escaped by bribes.
20 The Lusitanians which remained of Lucullus and Galbaes treacheries, assembled together
to the number of ten thousand, and did ouerrun the countrey of Turditania: against
whom the Pretor C. Vetilius was sent; who hauing joyned the armie which hee brought from
Rome, with the forces he found in Spaine, he went against them which spoyled their friends
countrey, and slew many of them, forcing the rest to retire to the side of a hill, where he besieged
them, so as they must either end their dayes by hunger or by the sword: wherefore they
resolued to sue for mercie, and to intreat him to appoint them a countrey to dwell in; the
which he willingly graunted. But Viriatus being in this besieged companie, who had escaped
from Galbaes slaughter, began to speake in this manner.Viriatus incourageth his companions not to trust the Romans How wretched are we, that hauing so
often tried the treacherie of these Romanes, we will againe offer our throats vnto them, and bee murthered
by them, vnder the sweetnesse of their false promises? Do we not know that they with whom we
haue now to deale, are the same who by their notable treacherie haue slaine our brethren and companions?
Were it not better to keepe our armes, and selling our liues at a deere rate, let them feele that wee
are men, than suffering our selues to be disarmed by a foolish credulitie, to bee afterwards slaine like
beasts at the slaughter? No, my companions, let vs not commit so grosse an error, as to despaire in that
sort: let vs rather trie to force vs a passage, and you shall find the difficultie is not so great as you imagine,
if you do what I shall aduise you. This souldiour speaking with a great courage, reuiued their
spirits,Viriatus chosen captaine by the Lusitanians besieged, deceiues the Pretor. who with one voice cried out vnto him, That in a good houre he should be their captaine,
and that he should lead them whither he should thinke good. Then he put them all in
battell, except some thousand of the best appointed, which he kept with himselfe, and then
he commaunded euerie one to flie, appointing their Rendezuous at Tribola. Vetilius was in
doubt to pursue them that fled, thinking it the safest course to assaile Viriatus, and his thousand
souldiours which were in battell on the side of the hill. But they hauing spent that day and a
part of the next, in making a shew that they would fight with the Romanes, easily freed themselues,
being well mounted, and knowing the countrey; and then came to Tribola: and so this
Spanish armie was preserued by the judgement and resolution of Viriatus, who of a shepheard
became a huntsman, then afterwards a theefe, lastly he was head of an armie, and was in possibilitie
to make himselfe king of Spaine.The Pretor Vetilius defeated and taken prisouer by Viriatus. This action did win him much credit and reputation
among the neighbour nations. Vetilius meaning to pursue him, fell into ambushes which he
had laied in a certaine passage couered with wood: so as being charged in front by Viriatus his
horsemen, and on either side by his footmen, the Roman armie was wholly defeated, and the

Pretor Vetilius found among the prisoners, who being scorned as a man of no value by him
that had taken him, for that he was old and fat, he was instantly slaine. The Romanes which escaped
at this rout,An other defeat of the Romanes. gathered head at Tartesse, being some 6000 men, whom Vetilius, Questor
or Treasurer, caused to rest for a time: and hauing made a new leuie of 5000 of their allyes,
he sent them all to encounter Viriatus, but there returned not one, being all cut in peeces:
whereupon the Questor kept himselfe within the wals, attending to be relieued by some other
Roman armie. In the meane time Viriatus spoyled the fertile fields of the Carpetanians.
21 Then came C. Plautius for Pretor, bringing ten thousand foot, and thirteene hundred
horse from Rome: Whereof Viriatus being aduertised, hee made shew to flie, after whom
Plautius sent 4000 of his best men,C. Plautius defeated by Viriatus. who were suddenly charged by them that fled before
them, and were in a manner all slaine. Viriatus passing beyond the riuer of Tayo, went and
campt in a certaine mountaine full of oliues, called Venus mount: whereas Plautius burning
with desire of reuenge for their former losses, was vanquished again with great losse, and forced
to retire before his time, and winter in his forts, not daring to shew himselfe in field: so as
Viriatus did run ouer all the countrey at his pleasure, and ransomed the townes which would
saue their corne, and other fruits which was readie to gather; else he set fire of it.
22 Claudius Vnimanus,Cl. Vnimanus defeated by Viriatus. an other Pretor, being sent against this captain, was also defeated, increasing
the disgrace receiued by his predecessors: where he lost all the forces which he had
brought. The rods and axes, the coats of armes of Captaines, and other spoyles taken from
the Romans, were hung vp by Viriatus in the mountaines, in signe of his victories. And soone
after 300 Lusitanians hauing encountred 1000 Romanes in a certaine strait, the Romanes
lost 320 of their men, and the others but 70: besides, as the Romane horsemen pursued
some Lusitanians on foot which retired, one of the troupe turning head, thrust a Romanes
horse through with a pike, and presently strucke off the mans head with his sword; whereat
the rest being amazed, they staied, and pursued not this Lusitanian, who retired softly mocking
them.
23 After C. Vnimanus mention is made of C. Nigidius, who was sent Pretor into the further
Spaine, and was as vnfortunate as the rest.
24 Q. Fabius Maximus,An. Romae 608. and L. Hostilius being Consuls, C. Lelius was sent Pretor into Spaine,
against Viriatus, who mannaged the warre with great wisdome; but as the daunger increased,
and manie people of Spaine moued with the valour and fortune of Viriatus rebelled, the
Senat of Rome decreed that one of the Consuls should goe in person to that warre, with a
Consular armie: so as Q. Fab. Maximus Aemilianus,Qu. Fab. Max. Consull sent against Viriatus. sonne to Paulus Aemilius (who subdued
Perseus king of Macedonie) was sent thither; a Captaine instructed in the seuere discipline of
 his father: who hauing leuied two legions of new souldiors, with some bands of their allyes,
he led some 15000 foot, and 2000 horse into Spaine. Being arriued at Orsone, a towne in
Spaine, he would not expose his new souldiors, which had not been tryed in any incounters,
but kept them within their forts, and by little and little trayned them with light skirmishes:
but Viriatus carried awaie both spoyle and honor for the first yeare. But Fabius charge being
prolonged, and he remaining Proconsull in Spaine, supposing that his armie was now sufficiently
trayned,Qu. Fab. Max. defeats Viriatus. he went to field, and vanquished Viriatus in a set battaile, tooke two townes
from him, and pursued him to a place called Becor. After this exploit hee led his armie to
winter at Cordoue.
26 Viriatus finding himself neither so safe nor so strong as he was wont, he solicited the Areuaces,
Belles, and Titthes, a warlike people, and drew them from the Romanes alliance.
These did raise a long and dangerous warre, which was called the Numantine, by reason of
Numance one of their townes. Viriatus had Quintius, a Romane captaine, against him in an
other quarter, by whom he was put to rout, and forced to retire into his fort on mount Venus:
yet making roads from thence hee slue 1000 of Quintius souldiours at one time, tooke
some ensignes, and in the end made the enemies armie retire: besides, he chased away the
garrison which was in Ituca, and spoyled the Basitans country: during which disorders Quintius
kept himselfe within Cordoue, either for cowardise, or want of judgement, sending a
captaine of the towne of Italique in Spaine against the enemie. Q. Metellus the Consull, was
sent into Celtiberia, who subdued the Vacceans with great expedition, and continued his
gouernment aboue a yeare.

27 Q. Fab. Maximus Seruilianus,Ann. Rom^ 610 being Consul, succeeded Quintius, and went into Spaine
with an armie according to his dignitie, making about 16000 foot and 1600 horse: he also
sent to Micipsa king of the Numidians for elephants. As this Consull conducted a part of his
armie to Ituca, Viriatus came and charged him with 6000 men, making horrible cries, and
wearing long locks, after the accustomed manner of these barbarians in their warres, whom
the Romanes withstood with great difficultie:The Consul Seruilianus defeats Viriatus in Spaine and is but to rout by him. but when as the rest of their armie was ioyned
with them; and that ten elephants were arriued out of Lybia with 300 horses, the Consul Seruilianus
went and prouoked the enemie to fight, vanquished him, and put him to flight: yet
he could not so well conteyne his men, but they pursued in disorder and confusion, as it fals
out often: so as Viriatus watchfull vpon all occasions, turned head vpon them that pursued,
slue a great number, and pursued the rest vnto their campe: the which he attempted to force,
and without the vertue of Fannius,Fannius defends the Romane campel from Viriatus. father in law to C. Lelius, he had entred; to the totall ruine
of the Romane armie. Night approching, made the enemie retire, leauing the Romanes
much troubled and amazed. But afterwards Viriatus, a man without rest, molested them day
and night, sometimes by his souldiours lightly armed, sometimes by his horsemen, vntill that
he forced the Consull to dislodge, and to retyre to Ituca. Then he tooke the waie of Lusitania,
being in some extremitie for want of victuals, and his forces decreasing. The Consull
following him, and not able to ouertake him, made warre against the Beturians, dwelling in
the countrie which is now called Extrema Dura: and caused fiue townes to be sackt, for that
they had giuen ayde and fauour to Viriatus: then he retires to Cunes, from whence he marched
soone after against Viriatus in Lusitania;The exploits of Qu. Fab. Max. Seruilianus as Proconsull. and incountring Curius and Apuleius, two
captaines of theeues vpon the waie, hauing with them 10000 fighting men, the Romane
armie was somewhat troubled; yet Curius was slaine in the fight: after which the Romanes
got the aduantage, so as Seruilianus tooke Escadie, Gemelle, and Oboliola, by force, with other
places held by the garrisons of Viriatus, whereof some were abandoned to the spoyle, others
were pardoned: he tooke tenne thousand prisoners, whereof fiue hundred were beheaded,
the rest he caused to be sould:Se^ere Execution of Spanish prisoners. and with this good fortune he retyred his armie the second
time to winter, and then returned to Rome.
28 Q. C^cilius Metellus hauing prorogation of his charge in the hither Spaine or Celtiberia,
in qualitie of Proconsull, he besieged Trebia, a rich towne of that countrey, the which
he tooke by his politike stratagems. It happened during this siege, that fiue companies being
set in gard in a certaine place,Metellus seueritie against souldiors whi^h had abandoned their gards. were dislodged by the enemie: Metellus shewed himselfe
so seuere, as he would not receiue them, but commaunded them to returne to the place, vnlesse
they would be vsed as traitors, and as men that had abandoned the armie: the which he
did to make them feele the paine of their cowardise, commaunding to cut them in pieces
that should flie towards the campe. These souldiours forced by necessitie, shewed themselues
valiant, and recouered the place from whence they had bin chased. Besieging Centobrica,
the chiefe man within the towne, called Rhetogenes, retyred to the Romans campe, wherewith
the inhabitants being much incensed, they set this fugitiues children vpon the walles,
whereas the Romanes engins did batter:His humanitie to poore Innocents. the which did so moue Metellus to pitie, as he left
the siege, forbearing rather to take the towne, than to kill these poore innocent creatures,
which act of humanity, did much daunt the Celtiberians, so as from that time they were more
tractable. Being demaunded to what end hee made so manie turnings and windings with his
armie, he answered, that if he thought his shirt knew his conceptions he would burne it. The
glorie of his great exploits in Spaine, were blemished by the enuie he bare to Q. Pompeius his
enemie, who he vnderstood should succeed him in his charge: to the end hee should find all
things difficult, he gaue leaue to all souldiors that demanded it, without inquirie of the cause:
he suffered them to spoyle the victuals and munition which remained;Metellus seekes to dishono^r his priuat enemie, with the preiudice of the publike. he commaunded the
Candiot archers, to breake their bows and arrows, and did forbid to giue the elephants their
ordinary allowance. Hauing thus satisfied his spleene, he did frustrat himselfe of his triumph,
which hee had deserued by so many glorious deeds, knowing better how to surmount his enemies,
then his owne choler.
29 Q. Fab. Maximus Aemilianus, or Seruilianus according vnto some, Proconsull, made
warre in the meane time against Viriatus: and hauing taken a commander among the theeues
called Connoba, by his voluntarie yeelding, he pardoned him: but he caused all his souldiours

hands to be cut off,Fab. Max. doth cruelly execute the Spaniards. and afterwards punished as many of the reuolted as he could take, in the
like manner. He besieged the towne of Erisane, into the which Viriatus found means to enter
by night: from whence at the breake of day he sallied with great furie, with a troupe of their
best men, and not onely chased away such as wrought in the ditches and trenches, but also some
companies which were set there to gard them, with great slaughter: Yet Viriatus thinking
now of the change of humane things, and of the miseries which doe often follow prosperitie,
vsing his good fortune with modestie,Viriatus fauoured by the Senat of Rome, who gaue him peace. he began to giue eare to conditions of peace, the which
he obtained verie fauourable, both from the Proconsull and Senat, whom they called a friend
to the people of Rome, and decreed, That such as had followed him, should enjoy the lands
they then held: wherfore this dangerous war seemed to be ended, but soon after it was renued.
30 Q. Cepio Consul being come into the further Spaine,Anno Romae 613 successor to the Proconsul Q. Fabius,
began to blame the capitulations made with Viriatus, as vnworthy of the honor and greatnesse
of Rome, and had now got leaue of the Senat, to molest Viriatus vnder hand, that hee
might take some subject to rebell. Then by his importune letters and many messages, hee obtained
a decree,Qu. Cepio breaks the treatie made with Viriantus. to proclaime war against him: whereupon he went to besiege Arsa, the which
yeelded, Viriatus hauing abandoned it. Who marched into Carpetania, which is the jurisdiction
of Toledo, spoyling and burning all he left behind him: yet hee was followed and ouertaken
by the Consull, but being a politique captaine, he would not hazard a battell, being
but weake in regard of the Roman armie, but gaue leaue to most of his souldiors to slip away
by certaine vallies couered with woods; and he himselfe in the meane time presented himselfe
vnto the enemie in a strong place, with some troups to keepe them occupied, vntil he thought
his men were retired into a place of safetie. Then he suddenly vanished by secret passages, best
knowne to himselfe, leauing the Romans amazed which way he should fly. Cepio marching towards
the Vectons, and the Callaiques, spoiled their fields. At the same time did rise other
troups of theeues in Lusitania, after the example of Viriatus, against whom (according vnto
some) Brutus was sent. Viriatus desiring to come vnto the former accord, foreseeing that in the
end he should not be able to resist the Roman power, sent Audax, Ditalcon, and Minure, three
of his most familiar friends, vnto Cepio, to treat an accord with him: but Cepio corrupted them
with great gifts and promises,Barbarians easie to corrupt with money. persuading them to murther their captaine; the which they did
execute in this manner. Viriatus was one that slept little, and for that hee would be readie for
all accidents, he slept most commonly armed, giuing free accesse in the night to all his friends.
Audax and his confederats imbracing this opportunitie, came into his tent, vnder colour of
speaking with him concerning some great affaires: and finding him asleepe all armed but the
throat, they stabd him in that place, and slew him. And then without any noise (being assured
they had dispatched him) they retired to the Consul Cepio:Viriatus treacherously murthered to the dishonour of the Romans, and of the Consul Cepio Traitors deceiued by him that suborned them. who gaue them leaue to enjoy the
possessions which they then held, but as for gifts and recompences which he had promised, he
sent them to the Senat. At the breake of day, Viriatus seruants and the whole armie, wondering
that he slept so long, contrarie to his custome, some going in, found him wallowing in his
owne bloud; which filled the whole campe with griefe and teares, who besides their heauinesse
for the vnworthy death of so valiant a man, they were in care of their own preseruations, and
for the dangers which did inuiron them. Besides, they were the more discontented, that the
traitors were escaped. Wherefore taking his bodie, and wrapping it in a rich cloth, they laid it
vpon a high pile, and hauing sacrificed many beasts, they did celebrate his funerals, after their
manner, the souldiors both horse and foot running about the fire, and filling the aire with the
name of Viriatus, vntill the fire had consumed all: after which in memorie of his name, they
had sword plaiers which did fight for their liues. Thus Viriatus ended his dayes, being desired
and lamented of all his souldiors,Viriatus lamented of his souldiours for his valour and bounti^ for that in war he was the first in danger, but when it came to
diuide the spoyles, he was but equall, and it may be inferiour to all the rest: and he had that happinesse
aboue most captaines, that hauing an armie of diuers nations, he led them to the wars
for the space of eight yeares, without any mutinie or sedition among his souldiors; who in Viriatus
place chose Tantalus for their captaine, verie contrarie to him in manners and vertue.
This fact did purchase no lesse infamie to Cepio, than to the traitours which did execute
it. Tantalus was so prest by him, as he left both armes and armie, vpon composition, to whom
there were certaine lands appointed; so as for a time the Lusitanians contained themselues in
peace.




THE FOVRTH BOOKE OF
the Historie of Spaine.

The Contents.
1 WArre ill managed by Q. Pompeius against the Numantines.
2 The exploits of M. Pompilius Lenas his successour.
3 The deeds of D. Brutus in Lusitania and Galatia.
4 The miseries of Mancinus and his companion M. Aemilius Lepidus, in the Numantine warre.
5 The gouernment of P. Furius Philus, by whom Mancinus was deliuered vnto the Numantines.
6 The Numantine warre ended by P. Scipio Emilianus.
7 The expedition of Q. Caecilius Metellus, and his victories in the islands of the Baleares.
8 The gouernment of C. Marius and other Pretors in Spaine, vnto L. Corn. Dolabella.
9 The acts of the Consull T. Didius.
10 Fuluius Flaccus.
11 Retrait of M. Crassus, flying the Romane sedition in Spaine.
12 Sertorius warre in Spaine, begun by Q. Caecilius Metellus, and ended by Pompey.
13 Death of Cn. Piso in Spaine.
14 Gouernments of Calid. Tubero, and C. Iul. Caesar.
15 Pompey perpetuall Proconsul in Spaine.
16 Caesar disarmes Afranius and Petreius in Spaine.
17 Caesar constraines M. Varro to yeeld vnto him.
18 Warre betwixt Caesar and Pompeyes children.
19 Lepidus triumphes for Spaine, hauing done no exploit of warre there.
20 The deeds of Augustus in Spaine, and the absolute conquest thereof.
21 Spaine vnder Tiberius.
22 Christian religion preached in Spaine.
23 Saint Iames sonne to Zebedee.
24 Seneca and other learned Spaniards put to death by Nero.
25 Galba, Otho, Vitellius, Vespasian, Titus, Domitian, and the persecutions of the Church of God
vnder them.
26 Cocceius, Nerua, Traian, and his edict to ruine the forts of Spaine.
27 The peopling of Spaine by Iewes, vnder Adrian.
28 Spaine vnder the Antonines.
29 The Empire of Seuerus, Caracalla, and others vnto Claudius.
30 The enterprises of Tetricus vpon Spaine and the Gaules.
31 Spaine vnder Aurelian, Tacitus, and others, vnto Dioclesian.
32 Cruelties of Dioclesian against the Church of God, and of his companions in the Empire, and
their ends.
33 Constantine the Great his children, with Iulian and Iouinian, Emperors.
34 Valentinian and Valence, vnder whom the Gothes inuaded the Roman Empire in the East.
35 Theodosius, Arcadius, and Honorius, his children, vnder whom the Gothes assailed Italie, and
the prouinces of the Westerne Empire.


1QVintus Pompeius Aulus Consull, in the yeare 612 comming very late in
his Prouince, and hauing receiued an armie but in bad equipage from
the hands of Q. Metellus, he went to beseech the Numantines; for of
all the townes against whom Metellus had made warre, only Numantia
and Thermancia continued in armes: Thermancia was strong by
nature, situated among the woods and betwixt two riuers, and therefore
of hard accesse:Numantia attempted in vain by Qu. Pompeius. wherefore hee went first to Numantia, in the
which there were eight thousand of the best and most resolute souldiours that were in all
Spaine, as the Romanes found by experience. The Romane armie was in all about thirtie
thousand foot and two thousand horse. Being at this siege, the Romane forragers were charged
by a suddaine sally of the besieged, so as many of them were slaine vpon the place. Pompey
was then absent; who being aduertised of this rout, hasted to the campe: but the Numantines
notwithstanding his diligence retired without losse, and continued daily to skirmish with
the souldiours, and to haue the aduantage: wherewith Pompey being discontented, he left it,
and would attempt Thermancia, to see if he could repaire his honour, and get some profit:
but he lost seuen hundred of his best men at the first encounter, and they chased a Colonel,
which conducted victuals to the campe. Soone after hee had a third rout, with the losse of
many horse and foot, and with such an amazement of all the rest of the armie, as they stood all
night in armes; and day being come, the Thermantines running vnto their trenches, and prouoking
the enemie, they fought with equall aduantage all day long, vntill night. Whereupon
Pompey did also dislodge from thence,Qu. Pompeius retyres from Thermancia. and marched towards Malia, a little towne held by
a garrison of the Numantines; the which was yeelded by the treason of the inhabitants, hauing
slaine the souldiors which were set there to gard it: where hauing left some companies,
after that he had disarmed the inhabitants, he marched towards Sedetane, to defend it from
the spoyles of Tangin, captaine of the theeues, whom he defeated and tooke prisoner, with a
great number of his souldiors, but he could neither draw ranson nor seruice from them: for
these Barbarian captiues entred into such a rage,The Barbaria^ impatient of seruitude, kil themselues. as in a manner they all slew themselues, or
murthered their masters which had bought them; being vnable to endure seruitude: yea, some
were so malicious, as passing the riuers, they made holes in boats, so as they sunke with their
burthens. After all this, Pompey would needs returne to Numantia, where he sought to diuert
the course of the riuer of Duero, which passed along the towne, that hee might cut off
their passage for victuals. The inhabitants and souldiors within the towne fighting against his
designes, repulsed both them that were at worke, and those that garded them, or that came
to succour them; and in many skirmishes and sallies they slew many Romane horsemen, with
Oppius, a Colonell of a thousand foot: and in another place, at a trench which the Romanes
had made, the Numantines sallying forth suddainely, slew foure hundred men, with the ouerseer
of the worke.
During these exploits, there arriued certaine Romane Senatours at the campe, with some
new bands, to supply the places of the old souldiors, which desired to be dismissed, hauing serued
six yeares in those warres. Pompey being ashamed of his bad successe, did that which his
predecessors had not yet done, continuing his siege before Numantia all the Winter: so as
many which were not accustomed to the raine, snow, and cold of that Region, died of collicks
and paine in their bellies. Besides, he had another rout, seeking to succour his souldiors which
were gone to forrage, whereas he lost many, as well of the Roman nobilitie, as of priuat souldiors:
so as tyred and wasted with so many losses, he was forced to retyre and to lodge his armie,
attending him that should come to succeed him in the Spring.Negligence and cowardise of captaines punished sometimes at Rome. But fearing to be censured,
for that hee had managed that warre so ill, hee resolued to make a kind of composition
with them of Numantia: who being much weakened with the miseries which they had endured,
and fearing they should be distressed for victuals, liuing in a barren countrey, they consented
to send embassadours to Pompey, who in open shew demaunded, That they should yeeld
vnto the Romanes discretion;Dissimulation of Pompey to couer his faults. but vnder hand he graunted many of their demaunds, drawing
from them some talents, certaine hostages, and them that were reuolted. There remained
yet some part of the composition money to pay, for the which Pompey stayed,Ann. Romae 614 when as M.
Popilius Lenas a Consull arriued in Spaine to succeed him. Then Pompey being freed from
the care of the warre,Pompey doth impudently deceiue the Numantines. denied that he had accorded any thing vnto the Numantines, notwithstanding

 that many captaines and Romane Senatours did affirme the contrarie: Whereupon
Popilius sent this controuersie to Rome vnto the Senat,Popilius Lenas vnfortunat in the warre of Numantia. whereas the embassadours of Numantia
and Pompey did plead: but the Senate was of opinion not to confirme any thing that Pompey
had done, and that the warre should continue against the Numantines. Popilius then continuing
warre against them, did nothing that was memorable, although his charge were prolonged,
but lost his honour, and many good souldiors.
3 During his time,Ann. Rom^e 615 the Lusitanians hauing rebelled againe, D. Iunius Brutus was sent into
the further Spaine. Others say, That he did execute that which followes, vnder the Consull
Q. Cepio, and that he was sent by him as his Lieutenant, by reason of the distance of places betwixt
the riuers of Betis, Anas, Tagus, Durius, and Lethes, by the which the theeues escaped,
and made suddaine incursions, not onely molesting them that pursued them, but also putting
them out of hope to take them,Exploits of D. Brutus the Consul. by reason of the strength of the places. Brutus therfore tooke
this course, he would not trouble himselfe in running after these nimble fellowes, who knew
all the meanes to escape; but went directly to their owne countrey, that he might in one expedition
both punish them, and enrich his souldiors with their spoyles; assuring himselfe, they
would come to defend their holes: wherein he was nothing deceiued: for both men and women
came running to repulse the Romane armie, fighting with a desperat furie: so as being
halfe dead,The obstinate courage of the Barbarians. dismembred, or couered with wounds, they were neuer heard grone: yet many
lesse couragious, taking vp as much as they could carrie, fled to the mountaines, whom Brutus
afterwards (vpon their suite) pardoned. Hauing passed the riuer of Duero, he subdued many
people,Brutus the first Roman that entred with an army into Galicia. and tooke hostages, and was the first of all the Romans which led an armie beyond the
riuer of Lethes, called Limia, where he assayled the Brecaires, a people of Galicia, who had
spoiled the victuallers comming to his campe. This nation was accustomed to lead their wiues
to the warre,Women in Spain warriors and valiant. and both men and women did fight so obstinately, as they were neuer seene to
turne their backs, nor cast out any cries vnworthie of souldiors for any wounds which they receiued.
The women that were taken prisoners, slew themselues and their children, rather than
to be slaues. Many of their towns and retreats yeelded vnto Brutus, but he was constrained to
subdue them againe; for finding him somewhat retyred, they rebelled againe. The inhabitants
of Talabrica in another part of the prouince made triall of the magnanimitie and clemencie
of the auncient Romanes: for being often reuolted, and hauing abused the pardon
which he had giuen them, Brutus hauing forced them to yeeld to his discretion, demaunded
first the fugitiues, and then the prisoners taken in warre. Then he disarmed them, and tooke
the chiefe among them for hostages: which done, hee made them all goe out of the towne,
with their wiues and children, and hauing caused them to be enuironed by the armed bands,
hee spake vnto them,Brutus magnanimitie and clemencie to rebels. reproching them with their many rebellions and ingratitudes; for the
which they attended no lesse than the sentence of death: but he ended his speech with reproches
and bitter words, and then beyond all hope sent them home to their houses, depriuing
them onely of their armes, horses, and other equipage for warre, and of their common treasure.
They write, That he did assigne lands for them that had serued Viriatus in the warre, and
that he gaue them the towne of Valence in Lusitania to dwell in.A worthy punishment of a cowardly captaine. This yeare C. Matienus being
accused at Rome, That he had abandoned the army, whereof he had charge in Spaine, was
beaten with rods, and sold for a Sesterce (which in our English money is a penny) by a decree
of the people.
As for Popilius, who made warre against the Numantines, or rather they made warre against
him, he returned to Rome, at the comming of the Consull C. Hostilius Mancinus, who was altogether
vnfortunat in his enterprises; the which was signified vnto him by presages, before he
came out of Italie: for as he tooke shipping at Port Hercules, there was a strange voice heard,
saying,Hostilius Mancinus vnfortunat is Spaine. Mancinus stay; and as hee tooke port at Genes, there was a great Snake found in his
ship, the which escaped. He was beaten euery where by the Numantines, hauing thirtie thousand
men in his armie. Being terrified with a bruit, That the Cantabrians and Vacceans came
to succour Numantia, he fled in the night into desart places, whereas Nobilior had encamped
in former time, and there without any munition or rampier, he was the next morning found
and besieged by the enemie, and constrained to capitulate a peace with them vpon like conditions,
ingaging his faith to make them be ratified by the Senate. Tib. Gracchus (who was afterwards
slaine) being Tribune of the people, then Questor in this armie, was the negotiator

of this peace: who was so fauoured by the Numantines, as they hauing spoiled the Romanes
campe, and among other things carried away the accompts, quittances, and other papers of
Gracchus,Mancinus called to Rome to answer the ignominious accord made with the Numantines. they restored them to him againe very willingly. Although this composition were
ignominious, yet did it saue the liues of twentie thousand Romane citizens: Which being
knowne at Rome, M. Aemilius Lepidus the other Consull was presently sent into Spaine, and
Mancinus called home to Rome, to giue an account of his action, the Numantine warre remaining
for a time suspended. By reason whereof, M. Aemilius being impatient to remaine
in the Prouince idle (for captaines neuer goe to the warre, but to get honour and profit)
whilest that Mancinus processe was in hand, and that hee had receiued newes, hee began to
molest the Vacceans,M. Aemilius the Consul attempts warre rashly against the Vacceans. saying, That they had relieued the Numantines, and vnder that pretext
besieged Palantia, their chiefe towne, being strong and rich, calling D. Brutus his father in
law to assist him at this worke, who had his charge proroged in qualitie of Proconsull of the
further Spaine. The Senate aduertised hereof, sent Cinna and Caecilius embassadours into
Spaine, to let him vnderstand, That the Romanes did not hold it conuenient (after so many
losses) to attempt a new warre, and presented vnto him the Senates decree, by the which he
was forbidden to make warre against the Vacceans. Aemilius (who had alreadie begun the
siege) answered, That the Senate was not well informed how matters passed in Spaine, nor
how that he had joyned his forces with those of Brutus: and that he was well assured, that
the Vacceans had relieued the Numantines with victuals, men, and money: that if he should
retyre in that sort, it would be a dishonour, and that many of their allies would take occasion
thereby to quit the Romanes friendship, and to contemne them. With these reasons (the
which the Consull did also write vnto the Senat) Cinna returned. Then did the Consull
AEmilius Lepidus and Brutus the Proconsull busie themselues to plant many engines to batter
the towne, and to furnish their armie with victuals. Flaccus (who was Commissarie generall
of the campe) causing great store of corne to be brought, was surprised by the enemie,
and so enclosed,The policie of Flaccu^ Commissarie of the victuals. as it was impossible to escape: but he by a singular policie caused it to bee
bruited among his troupes, That the Consull had taken Palantia, the which did so amaze the
enemies, as with a foolish credulitie they quit their prey, and retyred. The siege of Palantia
growing tedious, the Romane armie began to suffer so much, as both men and beasts perished
for hunger:A shamefull retreat of two Romane (...) from before Palantia. so as in the end he was forced to leaue the siege, and retyre in the night, in
great disorder: for there were many sicke men, who desired them not to abandon them to
the enemies sword; which mooued all men to pitie: and therefore it was a great hinderance
vnto the armie, being pursued by the Palantines: who loosing this wished opportunitie, returned,
as if some Angell had stood before them, to preuent the totall ruine of the Romane
armie: yet Paulus Orosius writes, That there were six thousand men slaine, and that the rest
were put in rout,Aemilius Lepid^ punished for his disobedience. and saued themselues without armes. M. Aemilius Lepidus being called to
Rome by reason of these errours, was degraded and condemned in a great fine. Brutus continuing
in his charge of Proconsull in the further Spaine, spent much time to order things in his
Prouince, and afterwards triumphed at Rome: he was afterwards called Callaique or Gallique,
for that he had subdued the people of Gallicia.
As for the question betwixt Mancinus and the embassadours of Numantia,The Romanes discharged of their bonds, in deliuering the magistrates which made then. it was judged,
That the accord made without the authoritie of the Senat should bee void, and they decreed,
That Mancinus, who was bound vnto the Numantines, should be deliuered vnto them,
to dispose of him at their pleasure, after the example of the auncient Romanes, who had for
the like offence deliuered twentie captaines vnto the Samnites. According vnto which decree,
Mancinus was brought into Spaine by P. Furius Philus or Philo, Consull in the yeare
617, and was deliuered by him naked and bound vnto the Numantines,Mancinu^ deliuered bound vnto the Numantines. who refused him.
This Furius in a brauerie made Q. Metellus and Q. Pompeius Consular men, and his enemies,
come with him into Spaine, to serue him as his Lieutenants: and this yeare the warre was
managed in Spaine with three Consular armies: but P. Furius did nothing that was memorable.
After whom, Q. Calphurnius Piso came into the Prouince: who hauing ouerrun
the territorie of Palantia, and taken some little prey, hee spent the rest of his time
shut vp in Carpetania: and this yeare the Romanes receiued a rout by them of the towne
of Numantia.

6 The people of Rome being wearie of this Numantine warre, which grew daily more
difficult,Scipio Aemilianus sent into Spaine. in the yeare 619 they did chuse P. Corn. Scipio AEmilianus, called Africanus, Consull,
for that some few yeares before hee had ruined the mightie citie of Carthage; vnto
whom Spaine was giuen without lot: whither he went with some voluntaries, and a small
number of his friends, being some foure thousand men; for Spaine had too many souldiors,
and wanted onely good captaines. He gaue this troupe in charge to Buteon his nephew, and
he himselfe went speedily before. Being arriued in Spaine, he found what he had heard before;
That the armie was very ill disciplined: Wherefore holding it a part of great wisedome
first of all to reforme the corrupt manners of the souldiors, as soone as he arriued, he
chased out of the campe all merchants,Scipio reformes the armie. strumpets, tellers of fortune, and the new superstitious
sacrificers; to which things the souldiors were too much giuen: he cut off their carts
and baggage, forbidding them to bring any thing into the campe that was not necessarie.
He did forbid beds, and he himselfe gaue example vnto others, lying vpon couerings spred
vpon girts. Finally, he set such an order among the souldiours (submitting himselfe vnto
the rigour of his owne ordinances, as in a short time they became modest, temperat, and
obedient. Then hee began to traine them in warlike exercises, remoouing his campe often,
whereas he caused the souldiours to digge and make rampiers, himselfe being alwaies
present, from the day breake to the Sunne set; and commonly he made them to march in
a square battaile,The pattern^ of a good and wise captaine. punishing any one that went out of his ranke. Hee went about his armie
to see if they marched in good order, and if he found any sicke or tyred, he set them
on horsebacke, causing others to alight: and he was no lesse just vnto beasts: for if there
were any horses ouerladen, he distributed their superfluous burthens among the footmen,
Hee appointed euery man his charge and office, and limitted a time for the finishing of
their workes, which they might not neglect. When as he found his souldiours sufficiently
inured to labour, and accustomed to obey their commaunders, then he came to encampe
neere vnto Numantia, whereas he would not lodge his armie in quarters,A good beginning is of great importance in matters of war. as others before
him had done, but kept it all vnited, that the enemie should get no aduantage of him
in the beginning; the which is of great consequence. He had no will to suffer any one to
goe foorth to skirmish, vntill he was well informed how to make warre with that people,
of the opportunities he must seeke, and of their manner of proceeding, their counsels and
resolutions; keeping the enemie by that meanes from straying abroad, and maintaining
the countrey, which was behind his armie, assured for his forragers: saying alwayes, That
light skirmishes affected vpon brauerie, without necessitie, should bee rejected by a wise
and expert captaine, who should respect nothing but necessitie, profit, and occasion, and
then he should shew himselfe courageous and hardie. When as he saw a conuenient time,
hee marched with his armie, and taking a great circuit, he came and encamped in the territorie
of the Vacceans, from whence the Numantines had their victuals. There hee wasted
the countrey, burning all that could not serue to feed his armie. Not farre from Palantia
is a place called Coplain,The Palantihes mightie among the Spaniards. where behind a hill the Palantines had lodged a great
troupe of men, hauing in the meane time sent out some companies against the Romanes,
which went to forrage the countrey: for whose gard Scipio sent Rutilius Rufus
with foure bands of horsemen, who repulsed the enemie, but with such an inconsiderat
heat, as they were carried pell-mell vnto the top of the hill, where they discouered the
enemies which lay in ambush: Then Rufus commaunded his men to make a stand, and
to cease their pursute, for they were to defend themselues: from which danger they
were freed by the Consull Scipio, who arriued with the rest of the horsemen: for hearing
that the enemie began to flye at the sight of Rufus, hee doubted there was some stratageme.
Being aduertised, that there were some ambushes prepared at the passage of the
riuer, which was full of mud, he tooke another way, and spared not his souldiors paines
to free them from danger.The (...) of Scipio. In this long and drie passage he digged Wells for to ease his
souldiors, being oppressed with the violent heat, but they found the waters bitter. In the
end he came into a more fertile countrey, with the losse onely of some horses and beasts
of carriage.
Passing by the territorie of Cauca, whereas Lucullus had made that great slaughter, hee

made proclamations,Scipio repaires Lucullus faultes. That the Caucians which were absent might returne freely to their
lands, and from thence he led his armie to winter in the territorie of the Numantines, whereas
Iugurthe, grand child to Massinissa, came vnto him, bringing certaine companies of archers
and casters with slings, with twelue Elephants. In this place some Romanes forraging and
spoyling the neighbour countrey, were surprised in a Bourg, behind the which the enemies
lay hidden in a valley; who were repulsed by Scipioes speedie comming to assist them, but he
had no will to pursue them. Approching soone after to Numantia, he besieged it with two
campes; one of the which was commaunded by Q. Fab. Maximus his brother. There the besieged
made many sallies, prouoking the Romanes to skirmish: but the Consull laughed at
them, saying, it had beene a great indiscretion in him to fight with desperat and mad men,
whom he was assured to take in a short time by famine. He vndertooke to cast a ditch and a
rampier of a league and a halfe compasse about the towne:Scipio shut^ vp the Numantines for the defence of which worke,
hauing set gards in conuenient places, he commaunded euery man to be carefull in his quarter,
and that when as the enemie should offer to charge in one place, that suddainely they
should in the day time hand vp a red cloth on a pike, and in the night make a fire, that he and
his brother might come to succour them. This worke being finished, without it he drew another
ditch, making a wall with piles, of eight foot broad and ten high, the which he flanked
with towers a hundred and twentie foot one from another: and for that there was a marish
ground on the one side, he caused a causey to bee raysed of the height of this wall, which
joyned vnto it. The riuer of Duero running through these rampiers, brought great commoditie
to the besieged; for that way men went both in and out, and boats entred by fauour
of the wind and swiftnesse of the streame:Scipio seekes to take away the vse of the riuer from the Numantines. to take away the vse whereof, Scipio built two forts
vpon the bankes, from the which he cast pieces of timber into the water, from one banke vnto
the other, in the which were fastened great pikes of yron, which went very deepe into the
water; and these beames were so tied together, as they did turne continually with the force
of the streame, so as not any one could passe, either by boat or swimming: for Scipio held it
a good course to amaze the enemie, to take from him all meanes to haue intelligence from
abroad, and withall to cut off his victuals. For the gard of these fortifications hee appointed
thirtie thousand men, being the one halfe of his armie; to succour the which, hee ordained
twentie thousand more, reseruing the other tenne thousand for a third supplie: which
vpon a signe giuen should come vnto their quarters, without confusion. The Numantines
attempted often to force these rampiers, but they found too great resistance, the Consull
himselfe going the round day and night, and visiting the whole circuit, being almost two
leagues; making his account, that the enemie wanting victuals, armes, and succours, could
not long hold out. Matters being in this estate, Rhetogenes, surnamed Caraunius, one of the
chiefe and most resolute men within the towne,Resolution of Rhetogene^ the Numantine. aduentured with fiue of his friends, and so
many seruants, all well mounted, to come in a darke night vnto the enemies rampiers,
where they mounted and slew the enemies sentinels, and with certaine engines which they
carried, passed ouer their horses: hauing sent their seruants backe, they dispersed themselues
in the countrey of the Areuaces, where they besought those people, That as
friends, kinsmen, and allies to the Numantines, they would succour them. Many fearing
the Romanes, commaunded them to depart out of their countries, refusing to heare them:
but the young men of Lutia, a rich towne, some tenne leagues from Numantia, pitying
these poore creatures besieged, did solicite the people to relieue them: whereof Scipio being
aduertised by the auncients of the towne, went thither with some troupes, and within
eight houres space shewed himselfe about their walls, commaunding, That the chiefe of
these seditious young men should bee deliuered vnto him, threatening (if they fayled) to
sacke their towne:Scipioes (...) execution upo^ rebel. so as no excuse preuailing, about foure hundred were brought vnto
him, whose hands hee caused to bee cut off, and the next day returned to the campe. The
Numantines prest with hunger and all other extremities, sent fiue of their citizens vnto
Scipio, to vnderstand if hee would receiue them vpon any reasonable conditions. Auarus,
the chiefe of this embassage,An^ill aduised and importune embassadour. comming before him, began to discourse of the vertues
and generous disposition of the Numantines, with high wordes maintaining, That it
should not bee imputed vnto them for a crime, if they had so eagrely defended their liberties,
their wiues and children, for the which they were now fallen into that calamitie.

Wherefore (said he) it is reasonable, o Scipio, that (according to thy singular vertue) thou pardon
our braue and valiant race, and that thou propound vnto vs such honest conditions, as we may endure
them: for it is in thy power to haue the towne by this meanes, or to trie what souldiours (who esteeme
their libertie more than their liues) can doe. To whom Scipio made no other answere, but that
they must deliuer themselues, their towne, their armes, and all they had, at his discretion, for
he was sufficiently aduertised by prisoners, in what estate they were. When this answere was
brought vnto the besieged (although they expected no better) they entred into such a rage against
these poore deputies,Brutish furie of the Barbarians. as they cut them in pieces, being jealous that they had made
some agreement with the Romanes for their owne particular. Then resoluing vpon all extremities,
after that their victuals were consumed, hauing deuoured raw hides, and such like
things, in the end they fed vpon dead mens flesh: and they fell into such miserie, as the stronger
oppressed the weaker,Miseries of a place besieged. euery man regarding his own particular, being also consumed with
pestilent diseases, which grew through the extremities which they endured, and from the corruption
and stinke of dead carkasses. Wherefore vanquished with all these calamities, in the
end they tooke counsell to yeeld, and came and presented themselues to Scipio like hideous
suppliants,Numantines reduced to extremitie. deformed, filthy, and torne; their haire and beards long, clotted and staring, resembling
rather sauage beasts than reasonable creatures: whom Scipio commaunded to deliuer vp
their armes that day, and the next day they should all yeeld themselues in a certaine place appointed
them. To this they demaunded a dayes respite, for that many were yet remaining
within the towne, being resolued to die rather by the sword or famine, than to yeeld, but vpon
honest conditions. So being returned, and hauing consulted what was to be done, they
resolued, after they had once glutted themselues with that small store which remained, they
would sallie out vpon the enemie, and die fighting vertuously for their countrey. But Scipio
knowing, that he had to deale with mad men, restrained his souldiors all he could: the which
did the more enflame the Numantines, who notwithstanding all that he could doe, issued
forth, and forced the Romanes to defend themselues, hauing great need to bee commaunded
by a wise and valiant captaine; for they were more than once forced to fight flying: yet in the
end the Numantines were repulsed, hauing lost their best men; notwithstanding they retired
without disorder:Despaire of the Numantines. their last remedie was to flye out of the towne with their armes: but that
being stopt, they shut their gates, and slew one another, by sword, poyson, or fire, and by all other
kinds of deaths: so as Scipio entring into the towne, he found all consumed with fire, and
not a man liuing. Others write, That Scipio burnt and rased the towne without the consent
of the Senate, and not the Numantines, for the hatred which he did naturally beare to them,
which he tooke by force: besides that, by the destruction of such famous townes he made his
renowme greater, or else that he held it to be expedient and profitable for the Commonweale:
they said also, That but some of them slew themselues, and the rest were sold for slaues, onely
fiftie were reserued, to lead them in triumph.
Thus the taking of Numantia is diuersly written, the which did so long resist the Romans,
and gaue them so many routs, hauing in the beginning but eight thousand men, the which in
the end were reduced to lesse than foure thousand; which notwithstanding did greatly importune
their enemies. The territorie of Numantia was afterwards diuided among the neighbour
people; and Scipio (being then Pro-consull) hauing visited the countrey, and done right
to all men, punishing the inconstant allies by words or threats, and some by pecuniarie fines,
he returned to Rome,Ann. Romae 621 where in one yeare he triumphed of the Numantines, and D. Brutus of
the Lusitanians and Gallicians. The Senat deputed ten Senators to go into Spaine, to dispose
of the affaires of that Prouince. Thus the troubles were pacified, without any alteration for
some yeares.
7 In the yeare 630, Q. Caecilius Metellus and T. Quintius Flaminius being Consuls, the inhabitants
of the Islands of the Baleares, which we call Maiorca and Minorca, liuing by pyracie
and theeuing by sea, ministred occasion to the Romanes to send the Consull Metellus, eldest
sonne to him that was called Macedonicus, who after a great slaughter of these theeues
brought them to a more ciuile life;Metellus makes warre against the Maiorquin^. where hauing left some Colonies of Romans, he triumphed
at Rome.
8 C. Marius (he that was afterwards seuen times Consull) about the yeare 640 had the
charge of the further Spaine as Pretor, where hee cleansed the whole countrey of theeues:

which trade those people could not forget, holding it in old time to be very honourable. Q.
Seruilius Caepio was also sent with the like charge, who fought with the Lusitanians, and did
triumph. A while after there did arise new tumults among the Celtiberians: for the appeasing
whereof Calphurnius Piso was sent, and after him Sergius Galba, Pretors: but for that the
Romanes were much troubled with the warres of Italie, as well against the Cimbrians (a nation
comming from the borders of the Northerne Ocean) as against the slaues which were in
armes againe, and forraged Sicile, they sent certaine Commissioners to pacifie the troubles
without armes, if it might be. These Cimbrians being vanquished a little before by the Consull
Carbo, had fallen vpon the Gaules and Spaine, from whence they had beene repulsed, and
in the yeare 644 returned againe to inuade Italie, where they defeated the armie of M. Syllanus
Consull:Anno 648. but the Lusitanians in the yeare 648 (P. Rutilius Rufus and C. Manilius being Consuls)
defeated a Romane armie:The Lusitanians reuolt and defeat the Romans. the Authors speake not of his name that was the Generall,
nor of his that was sent to suppresse them, in the yeare 652, who subdued them. It may be it
was D. Iunius Silanus. And they stayed not long to minister matter of triumph to the Romane
captaines, hauing rebelled againe in the yeare 654, against whom L. Corn. Dolabella a Pretor
was sent, who vanquished them and triumphed. The Consull T. Didius, at the same time, after
that the Cimbrians had beene driuen out of Italie, hauing had the gouernment of Spaine 
about Ebro,Thermise taken and rased by T. Didius Consul. slew in battaile 20000 Areuaces and Vacceans, and tooke the towne of Thermise,
which was great and strong by situation, commaunding the inhabitants for a punishment
of their ordinarie rebellion to dwell in the plaine, and not to inwall themselues: after
seuen moneths siege hee also tooke the towne of Colenda, and sold the inhabitants. Other
people of the Celtiberians continuing in their theeuing, were by him condemned to die, by
the aduice of tenne Commissioners, which were then in Spaine for the people of Rome. Hauing
then gathered them together, vnder colour that he would giue them land to manure, he
caused them to be enuironed by his souldiors, and cut in pieces: for which deeds he triumphed
at his returne to Rome.Qu. Sertorius. In the armie of this T. Didius was at that time Q. Sertorius, who had
charge of 1000 men, a man of judgement and valour, whereof he made good proofe, when as
vnder this Consul Didius, the Castalonians attempted, with the help of them of Girize, to cut
his regiment in pieces which wintred in their town, for that during the tumult he rallied them
together which escaped the slaughter, with the which he reuenged the death of his souldiors,
putting all the conspirators which he found armed to the sword: and hauing attired some of his
men with their apparrell and armes, he marcht speedily towards Girize, where being let in by
reason of this disguising, he made a great slaughter of the inhabitants, and sold the rest.
10 The Lusitanians and people of the further Spaine in the yeare 656 drew against them
the Consull P. Licinius Crassus,Fuluius Flaccus defeats the Celtiberians. who triumphed in like manner. And in the yeare 659 Fuluius
Flaccus being sent against the Celtiberians, who had rebelled, he slew 20000 in battell, and restrained
the rest by justice, euen those which had burnt their owne Senators, opposing themselues
against the rebellion which they had intended; rasing and demanteling some townes.
Spaine by means of these executions remained quiet, vntill the ciuile dissentions betwixt Marius
and Sylla, which ministred occasion of new warre.
11 Whilest this Marian sedition continued, M. Crassus hauing seene his father and brother
slaine by Cinna and Marius, fled into Spaine, where he had been in time past at the warres with
his father,A friend is tried in need. and there had gotten some friends: but finding that euerie one stood in feare of
Marius, he retired to a countrey house belonging to Vibius Paciacus, where he hid himselfe in
a caue, causing some to sound Vibius mind, who hearing that Crassus was escaped, he caused
him to be secretly fed there eight moneths by a slaue of his, vnto the death of Cinna.
12 After the ciuile warre betwixt Marius and Sylla, the infection of this madnesse past into
Spaine,Sertorius warre in Spaine. by the means of Q. Sertorius, who hauing held the partie of Cinna and Marius, after the
defeats of Carbo, Scipio and Norbanus by Sylla, he retired into Spaine, where he had been vnder
the Consull Didius, and there he fortified himselfe against the enterprises of the Dictator Sylla,
causing Iulius Salinator to keepe the passages of the Pyrenee mountaines, with 6000 foot,
but it was not long before that Sylla sent C. Annius, who not able to force the enemie in a
place of such aduantage, obtained the passage by the death of Salinator, whom Calphurnius
Lanarius (that did maligne him) slew in treason. This made Sertorius retyre, who had
but three thousand men remaining in new Carthage, from whence he passed into Affricke,

and from thence the barbarians chased him: afterwards thinking to returne, he was repulsed
from landing in Spaine: wherefore he seazed vpon one of the islands of Pytiuses, in dispight
of C. Annius garrison: but he was chased from thence also, so as being accompanied
with some foists of Cicilian pirats, he was forced to put out to sea for some daies. In the
end he passed the strait,Settorius hauing endured manie crosses, resolues to goe and liue at the fortunat islands at Canaries. and put to land aboue the mouth of the riuer of Betis, where hauing
information by some mariners of the fortunat islands, he began to resolue to liue there in
rest: whereupon these pirats disliking his designe, abandoned him, and put themselues in pay
vnder a Moore, named Ascalius, who contended with an other for the kingdome of the Marusians,
whose partie Sertorius maintained. Comming to fight Ascalius was defeated, and
after him one of Syllias captaines, called Paccianus, who came to succo^r him: after which Ascalius
was besieged in the towne of Tingis, and taken. By this good successe Sertorius
augmented his armie with the remainders of the vanquished enemies souldiors, which came
to serue vnder him. He did so win the harts of the Moores, vsing this victorie modestly, as
they were afterwards al at his commandment: but as he was in great care what course to take,
there came embassadors vnto him from the Lusitanians,Sertorius called by the Lusitanians. intreating him to be their Generall;
for that the Romans of Syllas partie made war against them, and therefore they had need of a
man of judgment and experience, which honor they did according to his merits offer vnto him:
vpon which summons he left Africke, leading with him about 2500 souldiors, which he called
Romans, and yet they were for the most part Africans; with the which hauing ioyned 4000
Lusitanians and 700 horses,What forces were against Sertorius in Spaine. he made head against foure great Romane captaines, vnder
whom there were aboue 120000 foot and 6000 horses, and had in a manner all the townes of
Spaine at their deuotion.
At the beginning of this war,Cotta, Didius and Thoranius defeated by Sertorius. he defeated Cotta in a sea fight, neere vnto the towne of Mellaria,
and put to rout Didius or Fidius, Pretor of Betica, neere vnto the riuer of Betis, where he
slue 10000 of his men: and by the diligence of his Questor Hertuleius, he also defeated Thoranius,
lieutenant to the Consull Q. Metellus Pius, to whom that prouince was assigned in the
yeare 673. Afterwards he had to deale with Metellus himselfe, and did so annoy him being a
great and an expert captaine, as Manlius the Proconsull of Gaule was forced to come to his
succours, with three legions and 1500 horse: but Manlius being encountred by Hertuleius
Sertorius Questor,Sertorius defeats Manlius, and kils L. Domitius. was defeated, put to flight, and forced to saue himselfe in a manner alone
within Lerida. L. Domitius was more vnfortunat, who was slain vpon the place in an other incounter:
all which exployts were done by surprises, and in flying or retiring, the Romane captains
not being able to draw Sertorius to fight in a pitcht field: whereupon the Senat of Rome,
considering that Metellus age (which was somewhat aduanced) made him more slow, and
therefore not fit to incounter Sertorius, who was in the flower of his age, accompanied with
souldiours as light as the wind, inured to labour, hunger, thirst, and all the discommodities of
war,Pompey sent into Spaine to assist Metellus. were of opinion to send Cn. Pompeius vnto him, as an assistant and companion with like authoritie.
In the mean time Metellus besieged the towne of the Langobriges, thinking to take it
without difficultie, for want of water, knowing there was but one onely well in the whole
towne: but Sertorius prouided for this inconuenience; for hauing promised a reward to such as
would carrie goats skins filled with water, the Moores and other aduenturous people went in
with a great quantitie: so as Metellus (who had victuals but for fiue daies) was forced to retyre,
after that Aquinus one of his lieutenants, whom he had sent to forage with 6000 men, had bin
defeated by Sertorius, who lay continually in ambush.
About that time M. Perpenna arriued in Spaine, with a great armie, the which he ioyned to
that of Sertorius, not of his owne free will, meaning to make war apart, but by constraint, for
that the souldiours hauing a better conceit of Sertorius than of him, would not follow him:
which made Perpenna to enuie and hate Sertorius.Vertue (...) alwaies enuied. With these forces in a manner al Spaine beyond
Ebro, was conquered by him. When as Pompey was come to Metellus camp, many throgh
his fame, which was great, began to doubt of Sertorius affaires, and manie townes which were
allyed vnto him began to wauer; but that which hapned at Lauronne did confirme them: for
Sertorius hauing besieged Lauronne,Lauronne besieged and taken by Sertorius in Pompeyes presence. and Pompey comming thither to raise the siege, when as the
armies were neere, and that Pompey expected to giue him battel, he perceiued that at one instant
Sertorius held both the towne and his armie besieged; for he had lodged 6000 men behind Pompeys
army, watching an oportunitie to compasse him in, so as he was forced to be more carefull

how to saue himselfe, than to deliuer the Lauronitanes, whose towne he did see taken and burnt
before his face: the which Sertorius did, not vpon any crueltie (for in the whole course of his
life he was neuer noted of that excesse, if it were not by constraint) but to let them know (who
made so great esteeme of Pompey) that he knew more than he; whom he tearmed a yong man,
and Syllaes disciple; and in this act of Lauronna, he said, That a wise captain doth alwaies looke
more to that which is behind, than before. And to say the truth, Sertorius was one of the politickst
captaines of his time, as it appeared in this warre, whereas he maintained himselfe and
those he led, alwaies inuincible, being neuer beaten but by his Lieutenants, through whose
errors he receiued many prejudiciall losses: the which he repaired afterwards with great honor,
as the defeat of Hirtuleius by Metellus, neere vnto the towne of Italica, where he lost twentie
thousand men.
After the taking of Lauronne, the armies of either side hauing wintered (the one in Lusitania,
the other neere vnto the Pyrenees) they began to seeke one another: and it happened, that
Pompey hauing encountred Herennius and Perpenna neere vnto Valence,Battell betwixt Pompey and Sertorius, wheras Sertorius had the better. he defeated them, and
in like sort Hirtuleius, who was slaine at that time: wherewith growne proud, he marched towards
Sertorius, and without attending Metellus and his forces, hee came to fight with him,
neere vnto the riuer of Sucro or Xucar, whereas Pompey was put to flight, and hurt. Metellus
arriuing, caused Sertorius to retyre; with whom he did afterwards fight in the territorie of Sagunt,
whereas Memmius, Pompeyes Questor, was slaine, and Metellus wounded: but Sertorius
seeing that he had the worst, retyred himselfe cunningly, suffering himselfe to be besieged in
the towne of Calaorre, a strong towne in a mountaine country, where he did more annoy the
enemie, than they did him: in the meane time leuying men in the townes of his allies, hee
made a furious sally, and dispersed his enemies; so as Metellus went to Winter in Gaule, and
Pompey in the territorie of the Vacceans: where hauing besieged Palantia, Sertorius made
him to rayse his siege. In this countrey Pompey found himselfe much distressed, so as he was
forced to demaund money, clothes, and come for his armie, from the Senat, else hee should
be forced to bring it backe into Italie: Whereupon the Consull Lucullus gaue order hee
should be furnished, fearing, that if he brought his armie backe into Italie, he would sue
vnto the people for a Commission to make warre against Mithridates, which charge hee
affected.
During the Consulship of L. Lucullus and M. Cotta,Ann. 679. the Proconsuls Metellus and Pompey did
all they could against the townes allied to Sertoriusi who did so terrifie them, as Metellus despairing
euer to vanquish him with all the force of the Romans during his life, made a proclamation
by the sound of the trumpet, to giue 100 talents to him that could kill him, amounting
to 60000 crownes,Sertorius life set to sale, contrarie to the vertue of the ancient Romans. and besides, 20000 acres of land, if he were a Romane; if a banished man,
restitution to all his goods and honours. The banished Senatours of Rome, which followed
Sertorius army, did all malice their Generall, wherunto Perpenna (alwaies jealous of his glory)
did still incite them: wherefore they began to crosse him vnder hand in many gallant designs,
abusing the authoritie which Sertorius had giuen them ouer the Spaniards, proudly, couetously
and cruelly, vnder colour of justice, exacting extraordinarie tributes; so as many towns did
mutine, and the loue which they did beare vnto Sertorius, was turned into hatred: wherefore
Sertorius was forced (for the suppressing of many tumults which did arise) to shew himselfe
seuere, against his owne nature,Sertorius grows cruell against his nature. and at the last became cruell: so as in the end he put to death
many children of noble houses, whom he held in the towne of Osca, vnder colour to instruct
them in learning, and to teach them the manners of the Romans; the which (to speake truly)
were so many hostages: and others he sold, to punish the infidelitie of the Spaniards,
which he discouered daily; the which did much blemish the lustre of his vertues. Perpenna
through his malice drew him to this excesse, and did procure him infinite enemies, as well
Romanes as Spaniards, and hauing found many confederats, he conspired with Aufidius Graecinus,
Manlius, Antonius, and others, to murther him; the which he put in execution, hauing
inuited him to supper in his lodging,Perpenna and his adherents murther Sertorius trecherously with the whole troupe of conspirators, where they
stabbed him with their daggers. Such an end had this great captaine, by the treason of his
owne followers; the which being published, all the people of Spaine sent embassadours
vnto Metellus and Pompey, and yeelded vnto him. The inhabitants of Ebora attribute the
foundation of their towne to Sertorius, where there are certaine inscriptions to bee seene,

making mention, that he was buried there. He had many times made offer to Metellus, to lay
aside armes, so as he might be called home by a publique decree: for he protested that he made
not warre for the Spaniards greatnesse, but to maintaine the people of Rome, whom he loued
and honoured: so as there is no doubt but he was of a mild and gentle disposition, but that
necessitie had forced him to this contumacie and rebellion, and the violent and ambitious
pursute of his fellow citizens. Perpenna thinking to doe some great exploit, made vse of Sertorius
forces,Perpenna puninished for his treason. but hee was deceiued: for it soone appeared, that he was not fit to commaund,
being in a short time vanquished, taken, and slaine by Pompey. This traitor to redeeme his life,
offered Sertorius papers vnto Pompey, where there were many letters from the Senatours of
Rome, persuading Sertorius to passe with his armie into Italy: but Pompey tooke these papers,
and would not once read them, but burnt them all, and so put Perpenna to death, to the end he
should not name any one, nor reueale that which was contained in them; the which might
haue raysed a new ciuile warre:Pompeyes wisedome to extinguish the ciuile warre. which was no act of a young man. Of all the towns in Spaine,
Auxima, at this day Osma, and Calagurri, held out for a time against Pompey: but in the end
they were taken by force and ruined; Auxima by Pompey, and Calagurri by Afranius: and so
this Sertorian warre was ended: the last exploits whereof were about Osca and Ilerda in Catelogna,
tenne yeares after the beginning thereof,Anno 682. in the yeare 682: in the which, Metellus and
Pompey for their successefull exploits in Spaine triumphed. At that time Pompey was but a Romane
knight; and they say, That he afterwards erected his trophies in the Pyrenee mountains,
where he caused to be written the names of 871 townes in his victories,Pompeyes trophies, and the beginning of Pampelone. among the which, he
would not put that of Sertorius. This was the beginning of Pampelone, according vnto some.
There were found in those dayes, in the vallies of Andorre and of Altauaca, certaine great
buckles of yron, soldered into the rockes with lead, which were held to be the trophies of Pompey.
A yeare after we find mention made of M. Puppius Piso Pretor, who triumphed also for
some victories gotten in Spaine.
13 In the yeare 688 L. Aurelius Cotta and Lucius Manlius Torquatus being Consuls,Cn. Piso slaine in Spaine. Cn.
Piso a young man, audacious, poore, and seditious, suspected to haue conspired with Cateline,
was sent into Spain with charge (vnder pretext to do him honor, but the true cause was to get
him out of Rome) where he was slaine, troubling the prouince with exactions, and other excesse:
 and some say it was plotted by Pompey. Then mention is made of Q. Calidius a Pretor in the
yere 692: and after him, of Tubero in the further Spaine, who gaue the Prouince to Caius Iul.
Caesar his Questor, in qualitie of Pretor, Q. Metellus and L. Afranius being Consuls at Rome, in
the yeare 693 of the foundation thereof: whereas in few dayes he subjected vnder the Romane
yoake all that was to be subdued in Galicia,Clul. Casars exploits in Spaine being Pretor. Brecaire, and Lusitania: among others, he
destroyed Brigantium in Galicia (the which is Bragance, if it be not the Port of Corugna,
or the Groine, called in old time Portus Brigantinus:) He dispersed the Herminian mountainers,
inhabiting betwixt the riuers of Duero and Minio, and forced them to retyre into the
islands of Cincies, which are those of Bayonne of Minio. And if hee shewed himselfe
actiue and valiant in matters of warre, hee woon no lesse honour in administration of justice,
and other actions of peace: aboue all things hee pacified many suites, commenced by
vsurers against their debtors; the which he so ordered, as the creditors should haue two third
parts of their debtors goods, and the rest they should haue for their maintenance, vntill the
debt were payed: and he made many other good ordinances, for the which he was much honoured.
After Caesars returne, he being Consull, there was a complot made betwixt him,
Crassus, and Pompey, who diuided the Romane Prouinces betwixt them: whereof Spaine fell
 to Pompey; the which he gouerned by his Lieutenants: then P. Lentulus was sent thither as
Proconsull, and after him Q. Metellus Nepos: in whose time the Gaules of Aquitania made
warre against Caesar and the Romanes, employing the captaines and Spanish souldiors which
had carried armes vnder Sertorius.
From that time Spaine was gouerned by Pompey, or men of his faction: so as vpon the beginning
of the ciuile warre betwixt him and Caesar, L. Afranius, M. Petreius,Pompey perpetuall Gouernour in Spaine. and M. Varro did
gouerne it for him: against whom Caesar marched, after that he had chased Pompey out of Italy;
knowing well, that Spaine was a seminarie for souldiors, and if he tooke it not from Pompey, his
designes would proue but vaine: being well aduertised, that Pompey had sent Vibullius Rufus
thither, to keepe that great prouince at his deuotion, and to oppose him against Caesar in those

parts. The lieutenants vpon Vibullius comming put themselues in order, euery one in his gouernment.
Petreius made a leuie of horsemen in Lusitania:Great preparations to resist Caesar in Spaine. Afranius did the like among the
Celtiberians, and that part of the Cantabrians, where he commaunded. They joyned their
forces together on this side the riuer of Ebro, making their store-house for the war at Ilerda,
hauing in their armies fiue Romane legions, almost 80 companies of Spaniards, and about
5000 horse. Caesar being resolued to fight with them, and to chase them out of Spain, had sent
C. Fabius with three legions to seize vpon the passages of the Pyrenee mountaines: then he followed
with about 6000 Italian foot, which had alwaies serued him in the wars of Gaule, and
3000 horse, and the like number of other souldiors leuied in Aquitania, most of them of the
mountaines; of whom he had politickely borrowed all the money they had to pay his armie:
where he found, that Fabius and the Pompeians were neere, and often skirmished about the riuer
of Sicoris or Sigro, whereas Fabius had made two bridges, by the which he sent his souldiors
to forrage, for all neere vnto him was consumed, Petreius and Afranius lying beneath the enemie.
It happened, that Fabius meaning to passe two legions ouer one of his bridges, to second
his forragers, when as the souldiors were past, and the baggage following them, the bridge
was so ouercharged with weight, as it brake; so as Fabius armie was diuided, and these two legions
ingaged, and cut off by the riuer from the rest of their horse and foot: which the enemies
(who lay beneath them) perceiuing by the timber and other stuffe which came down with the
streame, Afranius did suddainly cause foure legions and all his horse to passe, to charge Fabius
two legions, which were led by L. Plancus: who hauing put them into a long forme of battell,
least he should be enuironed by these horsemen, he endured the shocke of these foure legions,
vntill that C. Fabius came to succour him, and to vngage him: for when he saw the bridge broken,
he doubted what the enemies would doe, and therefore had caused all the rest of his army
to passe by the other bridge, which was a good league aboue it. Hereupon Caesar arriued with
his armie, and marched towards the enemies to draw them to battaile, but he could not: skirmishing
for three daies together vnder the towne of Ilerda, with losse on either side, Caesars armie
(which lay then in a country about seuen leagues compasse, betwixt the two riuers of Sicoris
and Cinga, which were not to be waded through) was much annoyed with raine and
tempests that fell, wherewith (the riuers being much risen) the bridges which Fabius had repaired
were carried away; so as they could not bring any victuals from their confederat townes,
nor out of Gaule nor Italie, neither yet goe to forrage: and if any did stray out farre to
seeke victuals, they were compassed in by the waters, and could not returne to the campe.
And on the other side, Afranius and Petreius armie liued in abundance: and to encrease Caesars
miseries, great store of victuals, stayed by the riuers which were ouerflowne, being
conducted out of Gaule, with a good number of foot and horse, were stopped and dispersed
by Afranius, who departed in the night with three legions and all his horsemen to defeat
them. But the Gaules defended themselues so valiantly, as most of them escaped in the
mountaines, the which Caesar (hauing found meanes soone after to repaire his bridges) receiued,
with their leaders. Many daies were spent in light skirmishes, and to cut off them that
went for forrage: in the meane time there were many secret practises; so as Caesar drew vnto
him fiue townes and nations; Osca, Calagurri, Tarracone, the Lacetanes and Ausetanes:
and in the end, the Spaniards which were in Afranius campe began to disband, and to flye to
Caesars campe, yea, whole bands of the Ilurgauonians: And after the example of these neere
townes, those that were farthest off sued to Caesar for his friendship; who making many ditches
and trenches, drew the riuer of Sigro or Sicoris into so many streames, as his horsemen
might wade through it. Afranius and Petreius being amazed thereat, resolued to dislodge,
and passe the riuer of Ebro, to retyre into the Celtiberians countrey, where they did thinke
to get many horsemen, victuals, and other commodities. According to this resolution, they
dislodged in the night from Ilerda, where they left a good garrison, and marcht towards Ebro.
Caesar hauing passed his horse, followed them in the rere, and in the end he was so importuned
by the legions, as he caused them to wade through the riuer whereas the horsmen had passed,
and made such speed, as he ouertooke the enemies in the morning, so as the armies were again
neere together, yet did they neither fight nor march, spending some time to discouer the countrey;
yet Caesar in the end found meanes to get (but not without a sharpe encounter) certaine 
straits, whereby he stopped Afranius and Petreius designe for their going to Ebro.

Whilest they consult what they had to doe,C^sar disarmes Afranius and Petrei^^. and how to preuent Caesars surprises, their armie
wearie of them, and woon with Caesars fame and reputation, was easily corrupted by the Caesarian
souldiors: the which Afranius and Petreius sought to hinder; yea, Petreius vsing his
absolute authoritie, slew many of them that parled. Thinking afterwards to returne towards
Ilerda, and to passe the riuer Sicoris, but being hindered by Caesar, they put their armie in battaile
readie to fight: but Caesar holding them as it were besieged, reduced them to that extremitie,
as they demaunded their liues of him, resigning their Legions vp vnto him, and all
the Prouince.
17 M. Varro,Varro followes the time and occasions. who was in the further Spaine, hearing the successe of the affaires in Italie,
in the beginning, he did hold Pompeyes ruine to be most certain: wherefore he spake very honourably
of Caesar, and seemed to desire to be a neuter in these quarrels: but when as he vnderstood,
that Afranius and Petreius were gone to field with so great an armie, and in what difficulties
Caesar was vnder Ilerda for want of victuals, he then changed his mind, and followed
Pompeyes partie; and filling vp two legions which he had, to the which he joyned about thirtie
bands of allies, he began to make prouision of great store of corne to send to Afranius, and in
like manner to the Marsilians, whom Caesar caused to be besieged: and assuring himselfe of the
citie of Gades, he caused all the gold, siluer, and jewels which were in Hercules Temple, to be
transported thither, making Caius Gallonius, a Roman knight, Gouernor thereof, with six companies
of Spaniards, carrying all the citizens armes into his lodging. Then he began to change
his speech of Caesar, and of his exploits, contrarie to that which he had of late vsed: wherefore
the citizens of Rome being dispersed ouer the Prouince, being amazed, did easily suffer themselues
to be taxed in a great summe of money, for the seruice of the Commonweale, not sparing
(as it is to be conjectured) the townes which he thought to be affected vnto Caesar.Varro ^andies himselfe against Caesar. And
if there were any one which durst speake against them that followed Pompey, he did confiscate
their goods, forcing euery one to take an oath to him and to Pompey, and so he prepared himselfe
to the warre, making his account to lodge with his two legions in Gades, vpon all euents,
and to bring all the corne thither, and to gather together all the shipping of that prouince, the
which he knew to be too well affected vnto Caesar. Finally, he persuaded himselfe, That hee
might prolong the warre in this island as much as he pleased. Caesars affaires prest him to returne
into Italie, yet holding it necessarie to disarme all those that held Pompeyes part in Spain,
he sent two legions towards Betica, vnder the commaund of Q. Cassius, Tribune of the people;
after the which he went with some troupes of horse, hauing in the meane time order for the
calling of a generall assembly at Cordoua: whither deputies came from all the townes, and in
a manner all the Romanes that were in those marches, being much enclined to do what Caesar
should commaund them. M. Varro was excluded by the assembly of Cordoua, who set gards
in their ports and towers, and they of Carmone chased away the garrison which Varro had
placed there, which made him hast the more to bring his two legions to Gades, least he should
be preuented: but he was not farre aduanced, before he receiued letters, by the which he was
aduertised, That the Gaditanes hauing agreed with the captaines of the garrison which was
within their town, had forced Gallonius to depart, protesting, That they would keepe the town
for Caesar: whereupon one of Varroes legions resolued to leaue him, taking the way towards
Seuille.Varro disarmed by Caesar. Wherewith Varro being amazed, and seeing himselfe coopt vp in that countrey, so as
he had no meanes to passe into Italie, he resolued to yeeld vnto Caesar, deliuering vp his legion
which remained, with all the money and victuals that was in his power. Caesar held an assembly
at Cordoua, and thanked the deputies of towns, the citizens of Rome, and all the captains
and others which had shewed themselues fauourable to his cause: hee restored euery man to
his goods that had been spoyled, and filled all men with hope by his promises. From Cordoua
he passed to Gades, and restored to Hercules Temple the gold and jewels which had bin taken
away: and hauing left Q. Cassius with foure legions to gouerne the Prouince, he passed by sea
to Tarracone, where the deputies of all that part of Spaine attended him: with whom hauing
conferred, and disposed of the affaires, he went by land towards Narbone, and from thence to
Marseilles, which his lieutenants did besiege. This was in the yeare 704.
18 At Marseilles Caesar had news,Ann. Rome 704 Cassius crueltie and couet^^snes thrusts Caesar into a new war. That he was created Dictator at Rome by M. Lepidus the
Pretor: after which time Spain was gouerned in his name by M. Lepidus and Q. Cassius his lieutenants:
But they of Corduba oppressed with the crueltie and couetousnesse of Cassius, forsooke

(with two legions) Caesars party; whereby the war was reuiued in Spain by Pompeyes children,
after the defeat and death of their father, in the yeare 708. This Cassius being couetous, and a
great exactor, did incense the souldiours against him; who hurt him, and had like to haue
stabd him with their daggers: The authors of this excesse were L. Rucilio, Annius Scapula, and
Minutius Silo: yet he was cured; and as he thought to passe into Africke by Caesars commandement,
almost all his souldiours abandoned him, and did chuse one Thorus, of the towne of
Italica, for their leader. To this Thorus (who made a shew to besiege Cordoua) Marcellus did
joyne, but they did inuest Mia (which is likely to be Monte-Major at this day:) thereupon M.
Lepidus came from Rome, where he had proclaimed Caesar Dictator, who kept them from forcing
and taking Cassius. Marcellus referred their quarels to Lepidus: but Cassius being loath to
trust him, was content to leaue the prouince, and to giue place to Caius Trebonius. Being imbarqued
at Malaca, with all that he had gotten in Spaine, to passe into Italie, his ship was cast
by a tempest vpon the coast, where it perished, not farre from the mouth of Ebro.
These two legions were somewhat pacified by C. Trebonius, who succeeded Cassius Longinus,
yet they feared to be punished for their rebellion: wherefore they solicited Scipio, who
held Africke for the Pompeyan faction, to send Cn. Pompeius, sonne to the great Pompey, into
Spaine; who went thitherward: but he staied long at the islands of the Baleares, as well to
subdue them, as by reason of sickenesse. The legions hearing afterwards of Scipioes defeat in
Italie, and that Caesar sent Didius with an armie against them, fearing to bee oppressed before
Pompeyes comming, they did chuse T. Quintius Scapula, and Q. Apponius, for their commaunders,
chasing C. Trebonius out of the Betique prouince.Cn. Pompeius gets the further Spaine to be at his deuotion. Hereupon Pompey arriued, whom they
acknowledged for their Generall; so as in a short time he reduced the further Spaine vnder
his deuotion: with whom there came Actius Varus, and Labienus. Caesar aduertised of these
things, being in Italie, he sent Q. Pedius and Q. Fabius Maximus into Spaine: but they were
not able to resist Pompeyes forces; so as Caesar being solicited by the townes that were allied
vnto him (especially by them of Corduba) he went in person into Spaine. Then did Sextus
Pompeius, the younger of the brethren, hold Cordoua, the chiefe towne of the gouernment,
with a good garrison, and Cn. the elder brother besieged Vlloa, into the which Caesar found oportunitie
to put some succours, by the meanes of a great wind and raine, and by the dexteritie
of L. Iunius Paciecus, a Spaniard, to whom he had giuen the charge: which put Cn. Pompeius
out of hope to take it: whereupon he dislodged, and led his armie towards Cordoua, whither
Sextus his brother, fearing to be forced by Caesar, did solicite him to approach. Hauing incountred
Caesar vpon the bankes of Betis, there were many bloudie skirmishes, with variable
successe. Caesar dislodged in the night, and went to besiege Ategua, whither Pompey went,
and camped betwixt Ategua and Vcubis, hauing thirteene legions in his armie; yet he made
no account but of three, for all the rest were composed of fugitiues, and men of no value.
Caesar was much stronger in horse, and Pompey had no will to fight, but was willing to prolong
the warre all he could: yet being desirous to force a certaine garrison which Caesar had set to
keepe a peece of ground which was commodious for either of them, there was a great skirmish,
Caesar comming himselfe to second his men with three legions; so as the Pompeyans
had the worst, and were repulsed. Wherewith Pompey being amazed, there being new supplies
of horse come to Caesars campe, hee dislodged, and retired towards Cordoua, being followed
by Caesars horse, whereof he slew many, being ingaged in one of his legions. Some past
from his campe vnto Caesar,Ategua taken by Caesar. among the which were Q. Martius and C. Fundanius. Ategua being
sorely battered, and well defended for many dayes, in the end yeelded. The which Pompey
vnderstanding, he marched towards Vcubis, where he caused a search to be made for all the
inhabitants which fauoured Caesar, cutting off the heads of seuentie foure, and casting many
women and children ouer the walls; which made many to flie to Caesars campe, yea captaines,
and heads of bands, and the souldiours of some legions, with some townes. Wherefore Pompey
fearing that by his delaies he should loose both his allies, and his armie it selfe, hauing spent
some dayes in turning vp and downe, in the end he resolued to giue Caesar battell neere vnto
Munda. In both armies, besides Romanes and Italian allies and Spaniards, there were many
Moores:Moores in both the armies of Caesar and Pompey. for Boechus a Moorish king, had sent two of his sonnes to succour Pompey; and Bogud
another king of the same nation, was in person in Caesars armie: yet the battell was fought
in a manner by the Romanes alone. On Caesars side the souldiours were encouraged by their

Generals presence, and did wonderfull deeds of armes. In Pompeyes armie, whereas the sugitiue
legionaries were,Battell betwixt Caesar and Pompey. despaire to get their pardon made them to fight resolutely. Being
come to joyne, the allyes of either part turned their backes presently, so as the Romanes
must trie it who should haue the better, the which was done with great obstinacie on either
side; so as there could no grones nor lamentations be heard, of any one that was dying or
wounded, but onely striking and killing, one encouraging another, and shewing themselues
more prompt with their hands than tongues. The battell was long doubtfull, neither could
Caesar or Pompey judge which had the better, who after they had long beheld it in great perplexitie,
they came among them to encourage their souldiours, whereof there was no great
need. King Bogud was the cause of Caesars victorie, who standing without the battell with
his Moores, went vnto the trenches of Pompeyes campe, to spoyle it: the which Labienus perceiuing,
he went out of his ranke to make head against him: but the rest of Pompeyes souldiours
taking it to be a flight, with the apprehension thereof they were all put to rout; and although
they did soone after find their owne errours,A mistaking is the cause of Pompeyes ruine. yet could they not rally themselues together
againe, but some fled to their campe, and some towards the towne of Munde. The
slaughter was great on either side,Great slaughter on both sides. euen at the taking of the campe, whereas Caesars men could
neuer enter, before they had slaine all those that defended it, with like losse of their own men.
Caesar hauing gotten the victorie with great difficultie and danger, he said vnto his souldiours,
That he had often fought for honour, but now he had fought for his life. There dyed of Pompeyes
souldiours 30000.
After this rout Cordoua being abandoned by Sex. Pompeius, yeelded, in the which Scapula
(who had beene author of the souldiours sedition) caused a slaue of his to kill him, and to
burne his bodie, with all the treasure he had. Seuill, Munde, and other places, were some taken
by force, with great slaughter of the inhabitants, and some by composition. Many towns
in Spaine (flattering Caesar) after these victories, called themselues after his name: Vcubis
was called Claritas Iulia, Ebora, Libertas Iulia. At this time Caesar did not spare the treasure
of Hercules temple in Gades, being greatly distressed for money: He took away many of their
lands, and laid new taxes vpo^ those towns which had rebelled, that he might reward his friends.
Pompey hauing escaped by flight, he came to Carteia, where he thought to make vse of the
armie at sea, which he had kept readie thereabouts: but he was pursued, and the ships after a
great fight falling into the power of Didius, were some of them carried away by him, and the
rest burnt; so as Pompey sore wounded in the shoulder and leg, seeking to flie by land, was pursued,
ouertaken,Cn. Pompeius the sonne slaine. and slaine, with many of his men, by the horsemen and some companies of
foot which were sent after him. For these victories gotten in Spaine, not against strangers, but
against citizens of Rome, Caesar, Q. Fabius, and Q. Pedius, did triumph at Rome, to the great
griefe of the people. After that these things had been exploited by Caesar, and all ciuile dissentions
quenched, as he thought to enjoy his Dictatorship, suffering kingly honours to be done
vnto him, he was slaine by Cassius, Brutus, and other conspirators. Then was the estate of Rome
in greater confusion than euer, by the diuision betwixt Octauius Caesar and M. Anthonie, and afterwards
by the cruell proscriptions of Octauius, M. Anthonie, and Lepidus: which Lepidus had
 triumphed for Spaine in the yere 707, I know not for what victories. It is certaine that he gouerned
the hither part of Spain by Caesars gift,Lepidus gouerns Spaine vnder Caesar. but it was by his lieutenants, hauing neuer done
any exploit of warre. Dio saith, That he persuaded Sex. Pompeius to leaue Spaine, promising
him restitution of his fathers goods. Domitius Caluinus, C. Norbanus, Flaccus, and Asinius Pollio,
were afterwards Gouernours of Spaine, of whose exploits there is no memorable mention. In
the yeare 713 Cornel. Balbus, borne at Calis, was Consull at Rome: and in the yeare 714, the
second diuision of the empire being made betwixt Octauius Caesar, M. Anthonie, and M. Lepidus,
after the reconciliation betwixt Octauius and M. Anthonie, and the Perusine warre, among
other prouinces, Spaine fell to Octauius: and from that yere the Spaniards began to account
their yeares by the Arke or rule of Caesar, the which was 38 years before the comming of our
Sauiour, the which they did continue vntill the yeare 1383 of our saluation, when as this custome
was left, as shall be said.
20 In the yeare 726 of the foundation of Rome,Augustus in Spaine. Augustus being sole Emperour, he
vndertooke to subdue the Cantabrians, Asturians, and Gallicians, who had alwayes held
their libertie, lawes, and auntient customes, to rob and spoyle their neighbours, and would

wholly subject them vnder his empire: wherefore he resolued to goe in person into Spaine,
where he found those nations assured in their countenances, and full of contempt, relying in
the strength of their mountaines, from whence they made many sudden enterprises, verie prejudiciall
to the emperours armie, the which camped at Sigisama (the which some thinke was
that which at this present they call Veisama, in Guipuscoa or Biscaye, and not Sigisama Iulia)
where he made three troupes of his forces. Hauing spent many dayes there, and nothing aduanced
his affaires, Augustus fell sicke with care and trauell: wherfore hauing left the charge
of the warre to C. Antistius, he caused himselfe to be carried to Tarracona. The Cantabrians
assailed both by land and sea towards Gaule Aquitaine, came to fight with Antistius and Firmius,
by whom they were defeated in many encounters, and their townes taken. A great
number of Gallicians hauing fortified themselues on a mountaine, then called Medullius,
neere vnto the riuer of Minio,Cruell (...) of Barbarians. they were besieged, and so pressed as they must of necessitie
either fight or yeeld: but hauing not the courage to defend themselues, and being loath to
fall into seruitude, they all slew themselues. The Asturians being camped neere vnto the riuer
which giues the name vnto their countrey, thought to surprise the Romane armie, and
without doubt had defeated them, if their enterprise had not beene discouered. They were
afterwards put to rout by P. Carisius, but not without great slaughter of his men. Hee also
tooke Lancia, the chiefe towne of Asturia, being abandoned. So the warre ended, and at the
same instant Augustus hauing dismissed the old souldiours, hee gaue them leaue to build the
towne of Emerita in Lusitania,Emerita sounded by Augustus Sarag^sse. at this day it is Merida in Portugall. Then also the towne of
Salduba was first called Cesar Augusta, in honor of Octauius Augustus, it is now Saragosse, the
which he did much enlarge with buildings. Fiue and twentie yeares before the birth of our
Sauiour, the way was paued from Cordoua to Astigi vpon the Ocean. It appeares by this inscription
which is at Cordoua, on a pillar of greene stone, whereon Augustus name is grauen,
and the number of twelue miles, which is the distance from Cordoua to the sea.
Imp. Caesar. Diui. F. AugustusCos. VIII. Trib. Potest. XXI.Pont. Max. A. Baete. and Iano.Augusto. Ad. Oceanum.C. XXI.
This Temple of Ianus was by all conjectures built by Augustus at Cordoua, in signe of a
perpetuall peace. After Caesars returne Sextus Apuleius Proconsull, shewed some proofes of
his valour in Spaine, for the which he triumphed: and afterwards L. Aemilius suppressed the
Cantabrians,Gouernment of Spaine vnder the emperours. and Asturians, who rebelled againe: After which time Spaine was gouerned
by Pretors and Proconsuls, the which are sometimes called in Latine Praesides, vnto the time
of Dioclesian and Maximin. Strabo saith, That in his time, which was during the empires of Augustus
and Tiberius, the prouince of Betica was giuen vnto the people of Rome, who appointed
a Gouernour or Pretor, hauing a Lieutenant and a Treasurer; the rest of Spaine remaining
at the emperours disposition: who sent two lieutenants, the one in qualitie of Vice-Pretor,
the other as Vice-Consull. The Vice-Pretor, with the helpe of a lieutenant or legat, did
justice, and had jurisdiction ouer all Lusitania, from the riuer of Betis vnto Duero: the other
part, being Taracconese, did obey the Vice-Consull, who had a great armie entertained with
three lieutenants; the one commaunded the Cantabrians, Asturians, and the country of Gallicia;
the other gouerned along the Mediterranean sea; and the third had charge of the inner
countries. The Generals place of residence was at Carthagene, or Tarracone. The emperours
which came after, made first two, and then one Gouernour of Spaine, and not alwayes
of one sort. About the time of Maximinian and Dioclesian, the Gouernours were called
Earles,Earles and Vicars gouerning Spaine. and their lieutenants Vicars: and when as the Gothes began to erect a kingdome,
that small portion which held for the Romanes, along the shore of the prouince of Carthagene,
and the mountains of the Cantabrians and Asturians,Dukes called Pr^fecti. were gouerned by Dukes, whom
they called Praefecti.
Octauius Caesar, surnamed Augustus,The fi^st yere of Christ. 752 of Rome. had held the empire about two and fortie yeares, when
our Sauiour Iesus Christ the eternall sonne of God, was borne God and man, of the virgine

Marie, of the tribe of Iuda, in the citie of Beth-leem of Iuda, which was in the yere 757 of the
foundation of Rome. The night when as the Lord of peace came vpon the earth, was (as
some write) as bright and cleere in Spaine, as the noone day. The computation of times
shall hereafter be taken from the birth of our Sauiour;An. 16 of Christ in the 16 yeare of whose life Augustus
died. Then Sextilius Hena, a Poet of Cordoua, flourished in Spaine, being now brought wholly
to the manners of the Romans.
21 The Spaniards being much affected to Augustus, did obtaine of C. Tiberius Nero, his
successour, leaue to build a goodly temple in honour of him, in the towne of Tarracone. This
emperour kept the Gallicians, Asturians, and Cantabrians vnder, with strong garrisons, hauing
beene formerly subdued by Augustus. In his time they of Lisbone gaue it out, That they
had seene and heard Triton in certaine hollow rockes,Triton a diuelish illusion. singing and playing vpon a comet, as
they painted him: And Plinie reports, that vpon the sea shore a Nereide had beene seene couered
with scales, yea whereas she caried a humane shape: and that they had heard the grones
and complaints she made dying.Vibius Serenus a tyrannous gouernor punished. Vnder Tiberius, Vibius Serenus Proconsull of the further
Spaine, accused by his owne sonne, and conuicted, was condemned as a tyrant, and banished
into the island Amorgos, one of the Cyclades. Iunius Gallio, brother to Seneca the Senator,
was also banished, for that he had propounded in Senat, to honour the old souldiours which
had beene dismist, with higher seats in the Theatre, and at publique shewes; hauing not first
spoken thereof vnto the emperour Tiberius. The Spanish flatterers, doing idolatrie vnto princes,
would also haue made a temple vnto Tiberius and to his mother, the which was prohibited;
Tiberius saying,Tiberius doth mades^ly refuse diuine honours. Anno 16. That he was a man and no god, demaunding no other thing of them,
but that they would retaine a good and commendable memorie of him after his death.
The six and twentieth yeare of our saluation, L. Piso, a great oppressor of the people, was
slaine in the hither Spaine, where he was Pretor,An exacting gouernour slaine by a peasant. by a peasant of Termes, who being taken and
tortured, would neuer confesse who had made him to commit this murther. This man slipping
out of the officers hands which led him to the racke againe, beat his own head so violently
against a stone, as instantly he lost both sence and life. In those times one of the richest men
of Spaine, called Sextus Marius, was accused, to haue accompanied with his owne daughter
carnally: for the which he was cast downe headlong from the rocke Tarpeien: but his great
wealth was the cause of his death, more than his crime.
Tiberius had raigned seuenteene yeares,Anno 34. when as our Sauiour Iesus Christ suffered death
for the redemption of mankind, hauing finished the three and thirtieth yeare of his life.
22 The healthfull doctrine of our redemption by him,The Gospel preached in Spain in Tiberius time. was during the empire of Tiberius
knowne in Spaine, as some hold: but it is doubtfull who was the Apostle. We read in
the Epistles of Saint Paul, that he had a desire to go thither, but it is not certaine that he performed
that voiage, although that Epiphanius and others do beleeue it. The Spaniards affirme,
That Saint Iames the sonne of Zebedee, came thither to preach the Gospell in the seuen and
thirtieth yere, and that he onely conuerted nine persons: Others, as Pope Calixtus, write, That
he had many Disciples, but that he had twelue speciall ones, nine whereof hee conuerted in
Gallicia. Others affirme, That when he preached at Saragosse, hee dedicated to the virgine
Marie, the temple which is at this day called Nuestra Segnora del pillar: and that hauing left
two of his Disciples in Spaine, he returned into Iudea. Wee comprehend by the holy writ,
that this holy Apostle liued almost all his life in Ierusalem, and thereabouts: and wee know,
that Herodes caused his head to be cut off, in the third yeare of the empire of Claudius.
The nine and thirtieth yeare of our saluation,Anno 39. H^rodes and Herodi^^ died in Spaine, as the Spaniards affirme. as some authors write, Herodes and Herodias
(she which incited her incestuous husband, to cut off Saint Iohn Baptists head) retired themselues
into Spaine: who (being spoyled of all their goods and dignities, by C. Caligula) dyed
there for sorrow. Caligula was slaine by Cherca and other conspirators: But before them Aemilius
Regula of Cordoua, hauing attempted his death, was preuented and executed. This yeare
M. Anneus Lucanus the Poet, was borne at Cordoua, whose father was Luc. Anneus Mela, brother
to Seneca the Philosopher: his mother was called C. Acilia, daughter to Acilius Lucanus
the Orator. This child being but eight moneths old, was carried to Rome.
23 We haue said, That Saint Iames the sonne of Zebedeus was beheaded in Ierusalem by
Herods commaundement, in the third yeare of the emperour Claudius. The Spaniards and
other authors write, That his Disciples gathering vp his bodie and head, imbarqued it at Ioppa,

and carried it into Spaine,The Spaniards opinion of S. Iames bodie. for feare of the Iewes; and that they landed at a place called
Iria Flauia, now Padron, where they buried it in a secret place, where since it was discouered,
and carried to Compostella. In Claudius time liued Pomponius Mela, borne at Mellaria,
and Turanius Graccula. Anneus Seneca of Cordoua, banished by Claudius, was in fauour of
Agrippina (whom the Emperour had newly married) called home againe, made Pretor at
Rome, and appointed schoolemaster and gouernor to Nero. This Seneca was a famous Orator
and Philosopher, as it appeares by his workes, highly honoured for his great memorie, and auditor
to Socion the Philosopher: L. Anneus Seneca the tragicall Poet was his sonne. Then did
also flourish Portius Latro, a Spaniard, an excellent Orator. Vnder the Emperour Claudius
there gouerned Spaine, on this side Ebro, Drusillanus Rotundus his Libertine, with the title of
Dispenser, and Vmbonius Silio ruled Betica.
In those times, as Buter sayes, S. Saturnin was sent into Spaine, he who was afterwards
Bishop of Tolouse, and preached at Pampelone, where in seuen daies he couerted fortie
thousand persons; a great number for that place: among the which was S. Fremin, a citizen
of Pampelone.
In the yeare 61 of the natiuitie of Christ,Anno 61. Otho a modest Gouernour in Spaine. Otho (who was Emperour after Galba) was
sent by Nero into Lusitania: which prouince hee gouerned tenne yeares modestly, and
without oppression of the people; the which was strange, considering the disposition of
the man.
In the yeare 64 Lucan the Poet, a confederat of Pisos conspiracie, caused his veines to be
opened, and died in the 28 yeare of his age. His father Mela pressing Nero with great importunitie,
for the restitution of his sonnes goods, was accused as guiltie of the same treason, and 
forced to haue his veines opened,The death of many learned Spaniards by Nero. and so die. Seneca was brought to the same death by his disciple
Nero, against the promises which he had so often made and sworne, not to giue eare to
his accusers, nor to hurt him in any sort: Seeing the bloud come slowly out of his veines, he
hastened his owne death, with poyson taken in a hot bath, the 114 yeare of his age, or according
vnto some, the 120. Paulina his chast wife, and a rare president of loue to her husband,
caused her veines to bee opened, to follow him: but whether through womanish
weakenesse, or that Nero hindered it, she suffered them to be bound vp. L. Iunius Moderatus
Columella liued also in those times, the author of the bookes of Husbandrie, borne in
Gades.
In the yeare 70, which was the last of the life of Nero,Anno 70. Sillius Italicus was Consull at Rome,
being borne in Italica, a towne in the prouince of Betica, not farre from Seuille: and at that
time Cluuius Rufus was in Spaine with some commaund. The abhominable disposition of Nero
made the Spaniards and many other nations to rebell against the Romane Empire, a little
before his death;Galba sent to suppresse rebels in Spaine. for the suppressing of whom, he sent Sergius Galba: but this old man (who
had before time gouerned the prouince of Tarraconese eight yeares) hauing discouered,
that Nero had giuen a secret Commission to kill him, he declared himselfe Emperour, and
in stead of a judge, became head and captaine of the rebellion; whereunto both the Prouince
and the Romane armie did consent: but his Empire lasted not long, nor of his two
successors, Otho and Vitellius: for in lesse than two yeares they lost both their liues and the 
the Empire; one defeating another, to make place for Vespasian, who came vnto the imperiall
seat in the 72 yeare of the Natiuitie of our Sauiour Christ, and graunted vnto the
Spaniards the priuiledges of the Latines,Ann. 72. which were, That they might demaund offices,
and enjoy some immunities, but not so amply as the citizens of Rome, yet somewhat more
than the liberties of other cities of Italie. Otho was the first which joyned Mauritania Tingitania
vnto Betica in Spaine, making it of the jurisdiction of Gades. At that time liued
Bellila, a Spanish Christian woman. Fabius Quintilian had beene brought vnto the citie of
Rome verie young by Sergius Galba: about the 90 yeare he erected a schoole at Rome,
with a publicke pension, and had manie schollers; among the which, they name Iuuenal
and the younger Plinie: As for Iuuenal, they doubt whether he were a Spaniard, but Martial
without all question was borne, and died at Bilbilis, seated neere vnto the place whereas
now stands Calataiud or Calataiub, of the name of Aiub a Moore, who built it with the
ruines of Bilbilis. Canius a Poet, who liued also in that age, was a Gaditane, and Decian of
Emerita.

After Vespasian, his children raigned at Rome.Anno 81. Domitian the second persecutor of the church. Titus in the yeare 81, and two yeares after
Domitian, the second scourge of the Church of God, in whose time liued Eugenius, the first
bishop of Toledo, Disciple, as they say, to Denis Areopagita. This Eugenius was slaine at Paris,
whither he was come to visit his master. Of the Flauian familie, from whence these emperours
were issued, there remained some markes and remembrances in Spaine, by the denomination
of many townes, as Flauio Brigo, Flauium Brigantium, Iria Flauia, Flauium Axatitanum,
Aquae Flauiae in Gallicia, etc.
Domitian did prohibit by a new edict, That they should not plant any more vines in Spain,
fearing least come should faile them.A diuision of the gouernment of Spaine. Vnder these Flauian emperours they number eight
Romane Colonies, planted in the prouince of Betica: and foure places for justice, which
they termed Colonels, at Gades, Seuille, Astigis, and Cordoua.
Lusitania had fiue Romane Colonies, one priuiledged citie called Olisippo, and now
Lisbone, and three seats of iustice at Emerita, Pax Augusta, and Scalabis. In the rest of Spain
which was the quietest gouernment, there were fourteene Romane Colonies, thirteene priuiledged
townes, and seuen courts for justice. At new Carthage, Tarracona, Sarragossa, Clunia,
Asturica, Lugo, and Bracara.
Cocceius Nerua came vnto the Empire in the yeare 97. a prince who seemed to be called
 by God,Anno 97. to repaire the confusion which Domitian had caused in the world, vnder whom the
Christians had some rest.Traian a Spaniard the third persecutor of the church. The Spaniards will haue him to be of their nation, but it appeares
not plainly. But he adopted Vlpius Traian a Spaniard without all doubt, borne in the towne
of Italica, who through errour caused the third persecution of the Church, whereof being
admonished by Plinius Secundus, he moderated his edicts. Mancius a citizen of Rome in this
tempest suffered death for the confession of the Christian faith at Ebora in Lusitania, vnder
the gouernment of Validius. By the liberalitie and bountie of Traian, Spaine was inriched
with many goodly buildings, among the which is the bridge of Alcantara,The bridge of Alcantara Traians worke. vpon the riuer of
Tayo, where at this day are to be seene these inscriptions following.
Imp. Caesari Diui Neruae F. Traiano Aug. Germ. Dacico. Pontif. Max.
Trib. Potes. VIII. Imp. VI. Cos. V. P. P.
Vnder the Arch is in a Table on the one side,
Municipiae.Prouinciae.Lusitaniae stipe conlataQuae opus Pontis perfecerunt.Icaeditani.Lancienses Oppidani.Talori.Interannienses.Colarni.Lancienses Transcudani.Araui.Meidubrigenses.Arabrigenses.Banienses.Paesures.
There is place for three other such like Tables, which haue beene taken away.
Ouer the dore of S. Iulians church, at the end of the bridge, is written that which followeth,
in Romane capitall letters.
Imp. Neruae. Traiano Caesari. Augusto. Germanico. Dacico. Sacrum.
Templum in rupe Tagi Superis and Caesare plenum.Ars vbi materia vincitur ipsa sua.Quis quali dederit voto fortasse requiret,Cura viatorum quos noua fama iuuat.Ingentem vasta Pontem quod mole peregit,Sacra litaturo fecit honore Lacer.Qui Pontem fecit Lacer and noua Templa dicauitIlli^ se solu Vota litant.
Pontem perpetui mansurum in secula mundiFecit diuina nobilis arte Lacer.Idem Romule is Templum cum Caesare DiuisConstituit foelix vtraque causa Sacri.
C. Iulius Lacer. H. S. F. and dedicauit amico
Curio Lacone Icaeditano.
The aqueduct of Segobia, is also held to be Traians worke, where they may easily obserue
the stately manner of building of the Romanes. This emperour sent two legions (of
fourteene,Edict to race the townes standing in the mountains which were appointed to keepe the prouinces of the empire in awe) into Spaine,
to put his edicts in execution, and to rase all the townes and castles which were situated vpon
the mountaines or places of strength: with commaundement to the people, to build in the
open country, where the accesse was easie. Sublantia was ruined by vertue of this decree, and
a towne built,The citie of Leon Built. which then was called Legio Germanica, or Gemina, according vnto some, but
now it is Leon, a royall citie. Vnder Traian Plinie the yonger had charge in Spaine.
Adrian, who was emperour after Traian,Anno 118. in the yeare of our Sauiour 118, was also borne
in the towne of Italica, in the prouince of Betica, as Eutropius, Orosus, and Ser. Sulpitius doe
witnesse. Domitia Paulina his mother, was of Gades. He had some instruction, or good opinion
of the Christian religion. Being at Tarracone (where he had called a generall assemblie
of all the people of Spaine) he caused (at his owne charge) Augustus temple, which went to
ruine, to be repaired. In which towne he was in danger to haue beene slaine by a slaue that
was madde, who set vpon him with his sword drawne, as he walked without any feare in a garden.
This slaue being taken,A generous act of Adrian. when as the emperour vnderstood that he was madde, he sayd
nothing, but that they must put him into the Physitians hands. Hauing subdued the Iewes
which were rebelled in Palestina,Adrian peoples Spaine with Iewes. he sent a great number in exile into Spaine, so as from that
time this sect was setled there, and had their Synagogues, vntil the raigne of Dom Fernando and
D. Isabella, in the time of our forefathers. Spaine was then diuided into six gouernments, two 
ruled by vice-Consuls appointed by the Senat, which were Betica and Lusitania; and foure
by the emperors lieutenants, which were the prouinces of Carthagene, Tarracone, Gallicia,
and Mauritania Tingitana, where the strait is.
28 After the decease of Adrian, there succeeded in the empire,Anno 139. in the yeare 139, T. Aurelius
Fuluius Antonius Pius, whom the Spaniards hold to be of their nation. As for his successor
M. Aelius Aurelius, comming to the empire in the yeare 162, he was without doubt of a Spanish
race; for his predecessors were of the towne of Succubite in Betica. Hee was the first 
which had a companion in the empire, imparting his authoritie with Lucius Commodus Verus,
who was the fourth persecutor in the Christian Church.L. Commodus Vorus, a persecutor of the Church. In the time of M. Aurelius, the
Moores inuaded Spaine, and did infinit harme: whom notwithstanding hee repulsed by his
lieutenants, namely by Seuerus, who afterwards was emperour. This prince was wise, vertuous,
and courteous: but as he was indowed with all good qualities, so his sonne Commodus,
who raigned after him in the yeare 181,Ann. 181. was detestable and vicious. He was the first of the Romane
princes, which through couetousnesse sold offices for money. Vespasian had done it before
him, but through necessitie, finding the commonweale charged with debts, and the treasure
exhausted. Vnder Commodus were slaine in Gallicia, Facundus and Primitius, holy Christian
souldiours, vpon the bankes of the riuer Cea, by Atticus the gouernor. After him, about
the yeare 194. Rome lost two emperours in lesse than a yeare, Pertinax and Didius Iulian, so as
in the yeare 195,Anno 195. L. Septimius Seuerus, a great personage, borne in Africke, he who had gouerned
Spaine in the time of M. Aurelius, tooke the gouernment of the empire. Vnder him
was the fift persecution of the Church, especially in Spaine, whereas Cornelius was gouernor,
who put Felix a priest,The fift persecution vnder Fortunatus, and Archilochus to death at Valence, for that they had preached
the Gospell.
Vnder his sonne Caracalla, Opilius Macrinus, Heliogabalus, and Alexander Seuerus, who raigned
from the yeare two hundred and thirteene, vnto two hundred thirtie and eight, the Spanish
historie doth not furnish anything memorable, although those times did not passe without
great exploits, whereof there remaine some obscure markes among the stones and medailles.

At Gades there is the basis of the image of Mammea, mother to Alexander Seuerus,
where this inscription is to be seene.
Iuliae Mammeae. Aug. Matri. Impe. Caesaris.M. Aurelij Seueri. Alexandri Pij. F. Aug.M. Castrorum. Col. Iul. Gem. Accitana.Deuot. Numini. M. Q. Eius.
But Maximin being come to the empire, the sixt persecution began of the Christians, in the
which Maximus and many other faithfull were slaine, neere vnto Tarracone. After Maximin
vnto Decius, the empire of Rome was in great combustion, by reason of the ordinary murthers
of such as did affect the soueraigntie, for the space of fifteen yeres; in the which there perished
by a violent death, Maximin Balbinus, Puienus, Gordian, and Philip: during which time we find
not any thing of Spaine worth the writing,Anno 241. but that about the yeare 241, Antherus bishop
of Rome did write vnto the bishops of the prouinces of Betica and Toledo, admonishing
them among other things to be graue and constant, and not to fleet from church to church, if
necessitie and the publique good did not presse them: whereby it wil appeare by this history,
that their successors had small regard vnto this aduertisement, but haue rather sought their
priuat commoditie. Many other epistles of holy men are found written to the bishops of
Spaine, and to their churches, and among others an epistle decretall of S. Ciprian and other bishops
assembled at the Councell of Africk,Basilides and Martiall condemned by the Councell of Africke. The seuenth persecution. by the which Basilides and Martiall, Idolaters and
infected with many vices, were declared vnworthie of all Episcopall dignities: and it seemes
that the one was bishop of Legio Gemina, and the other of Emerita. Whilest that Decius gouerned
the empire (vnder whom began the 7 persecution of the Church) the first Councel of
Spaine was held at Toledo, whereas Xyste a Grecian was present, who soone after was bishop
of Rome: yet there is no mention made of this Councell but by Spaniards. The Spanish histories
write nothing of his time, nor of Gallus, Volusianus, nor Aemilianus, which succeeded him.
As for Valerian,Anno 256. who came to the empire in the yeare 256, he was verie cruel against the Christians,
and his persecution is accounted the eight.The eight persecution vnder Valorian. Vnder him and Decius, S. Laurence borne at
Osca in Catelognia, was martyred, whom Xiste, who (as we haue said) was come to the Councell
of Toledo, had led with him to Rome, passing by Sarragossa, whereas this holy man spent
his time in studie. Vnder the same Valerian, by the commandement of Emylian, the gouernor,
there were also put to death for the faith of Christ, Fructuosus bishop of Tarracone, with Augurius
and Eulogia, two deacons, of whom Prudentius, a Christian Poet, did write hymnes. Parmenius
was also put to death at Cordoua. Valerian author of these wicked persecutions, did
soone after receiue a worthy reward for his impietie: for he was taken by Sapor king of Persia,
and kept all his life time ignominiously in chains, the which it seemes did moue Galien his son
and companion, to leaue the Churches in quiet, although he were the most corrupted prince
vpon the earth; whose basenesse caused many tyrants to vsurpe the title of Soueraigne, in diuers
prouinces of the empire, and encouraged barbarous nations to inuade them: for in his
time Spaine was full of great troups of Germans,Saxons and French inuade Spaine. Saxons, and French, vnder the conduct of
Anthaire and Lothaire, princes, who ruined Tarracone, and spoyled the country, almost for the
space of 12 yeares. To the former martyres we will adde Narcissus, who came to Girone to
preach the Gospell.
30 After Galien, Claudius was emperor, vpon whom Tetricus vsurped Spaine and Gaule,
being the chiefe strength and sinewes of the empire.The ninth persecution vnder Aurelian. During the raigne of Aurelian (vnder
whom was the ninth persecution of the Church) and of Tacitus and Florian, which were from
 the yeare 273, vnto 280, there is no mention made of Spaine. But Probus gaue leaue to the
Spaniards and Gaules, to plant vines: for good husbands held it not profitable for the commonweale,
that the land should be too much imploied to this kind of plant: but Probus was
much affected to it, and therefore he caused the mountaines of Almus and Aureus in Hungarie
and Mysia, to be planted at his owne charge. In his time the Spaniards did mutine, but Saturninus
did pacifie them. One called Bonosius, borne and bred in Spaine, whose father was
a Britan, and his mother a Gauloise, a great drinker, caused himselfe to be proclaimed emperour
in Germanie, and with one Proculus would haue seized vpon Spaine, Gaule, and other

prouinces: but they were defeated by Probus. The short empire of Carus Numerianus and Carinus,
make no mention of any thing that belongs to Spaine. Dioclesianus Iouius, who succeeded
them in the yere 288, and Maximianus Herculeius,Anno 288. made companion of the same dignity the
yere after, haue left (by their great crueltie against the faithful) an infamous memory of them,
in Spain, and throughout all the world.Ann. 306. They made an edict in the yere 306, That all the Christians
temples should be beaten downe,Edict to ruine the Christian churches. The tenth persecution. and all those that confessed Iesus Christ, tormented
and massacred. This was the 10 and the cruellest persecution of the Church of God: for during
the space of 10 yeres, there was nothing to be seene but burning of temples, running away of
poore innocents, murthers, and executions of martyres, wherof Spaine (it may be) did furnish
as many as any nation in the world, to their great commendation. The names of these constant
witnesses of the truth of Christ,Martyres as Sarragosse. should not be suppres^. In Sarragosse there were 18 at
one time, of whom the Christian Poet Prudentius made a goodly hymne. These were Optatus,
Successus, Vrbanus, Pubius, Felix, Euentius, Lupercus, Martialis, Iulius, Fronto, Caecilianus, Primitiuus,
Quintilianus, Apodemius, and foure Saturnines. Encratia a noble virgine, daughter to a great
nobleman of Lusitania, betrothed to a duke or gouernour of Gaule Narbonoise, did there
also end this fugitiue life. Dacian was then Gouernour of Spaine, and a diligent minister of
these impieties; who residing at Sarragosse, and seeing the constancie of the Christians to surpasse
his inhumanitie, he caused a proclamation to be made by the sound of the trumpet, that
all those that were Christians should depart the towne, and haue leaue to retire where they
pleased. The faithfull being joyfull hereof, went forth in great troups, thanking God for this
libertie, thinking they would suffer them to depart: but they were not gone farre from the
gates, before they were compassed in by armed souldiours, and cut in peeces. The multitude
of those that were thus villanously murthered, was verie great, and therefore in those dayes
the Christians by a certaine humane affection,From a humane affection of the antient Christians, is grown the superstition, which in the end is become impious. more than for any religion, made account of
the ashes, bones, and all things which did belong vnto those holy martyres, and did reuerence
the places where they had frequented, or were buried: not for any superstition, but to
incite the liuing to imitate their pietie. This cruell Gouernour hauing committed this horrible
massacre, sought also to depriue the faithful seruants (if any remained in the countrey) of
all comfort: Wherefore hauing gathered all their bodies together, and murthered vpon
them all the offendors, which were committed for any crimes, he burnt them all together,
that the ashes (being thus mingled) should not be gathered vp by the Christians: whereupon
the bruit was, That God (meaning to giue a testimonie of the innocencie of his people) made
the ashes of the faithful to appeare verie white among the rest, the which, with a small shewer
which fell, were gathered together in white heapes: whereof those which haue come after,
being moued with another zeale than the Christians of those times, haue made their profit.
Lambert seruing a countrey man, was also beheaded, for that he would not renounce Iesus
Christ. The bruit was, That hauing taken his head in his hands, he went two good leagues,
vntil he came vnto the place where the bodies of the martyres aboue mentioned lay, and that
there he began to sing, Exultabunt sancti in gloria, and that they answered, Et letabuntur in cubilibus
suis; and then he fell vpon them: the which I will not call into question, considering the
end of myracles. There were many others put to death in Spaine, for the profession of the
Gospell, during the gouernment of Dacian, whose names for breuities sake I omit, being not
much pertinent to a historie. Dacian, a bloudie instrument of these cruelties, was during
these executions slaine with fire from heauen.The wicked end of Ducian the persecutor. The like persecutions were in the other prouinces
of the empire.
At this time liued Prudentius, borne in the prouince of Cantabria, of the countrey which
is now called Alaba: he was bishop of Tarracone, and not the Poet aboue mentioned. There
is a decretall epistle extant of Melchiades bishop of Rome, who liued in those times, vnto
the bishops of Spaine, touching the Primacie of the Romane Sea: but it sauours not of
the Latine stile of that age, no more than those of Marcelin, Marcellus, Eusebius, Syluester,
Mare, Iulius, Liberius, Damasus, and Syricius: which must bee read with judgement.
As for the politique Artes of Dioclesian and Maximian, although they were great, and
worthie of memorie, yet the histories of Spaine make no mention of them. They receiued
into their companie to gouerne the empire, Maximus Galerius, and Constantius Chlorus:
the last in a good time tooke vpon him the gouernment of Spaine and Gaule, who dying

in England, left the dignitie of Caesar to Constantine his sonne, who learned the first principles
of religion, of a certaine Spaniard, as some write. Galerius adopted Seuerus, and Maximian
the young. At the same time Dioclesian and Maximian resigned the imperiall dignitie at Milan:
but Maximian repenting himselfe, as he did striue to resume his authoritie at Rome, being
rejected by his sonne Maxenc^ and the Pretorian souldiors, he fled towards his son in law
Constantine, against whom he practised treason, and was slaine at Marseilles. Dioclesian a strange
monster, who caused himselfe to be called, Brother to the Sunne and Moone, and to bee worshipped,
liued long a priuat life: but God shewed a testimonie of his wrath vpon him in the
end of his dayes; for he died madde,The miserable end of tyrants. eaten with vermine, and so infected and stinking, as none
could endure to come neere him, howling (as Nicephorus writes) like a dog. Galerius slew himselfe,
as cruell as a butcher; for (...) he had beene from his youth. Seuerus was slaine by the faction
of Maxence, whom the Pretorians had created Caesar. Maximian the younger died eaten
with wormes, hauing beene vanquished neere vnto Tharse, by Licinius, whom Constantine had
sent against him. Maxence, a cruel tyrant, and therefore hated of the Romans, as he thought to
make head against Constantine, was defeated in battel neere vnto Rome, and drowned himself
in the riuer of Tiber: all cruell and bloudie princes, enemies to the Church of God, remarkable
for such as persecute it. After these, Licinius and Constantine held the empire, the one in
the East, the other in the West. But Licinius who had maried Constantines sister, a cruell and
barbarous man,Licinius an (...) learning. an enemie to Christians and all learning, tearming them a plague to the commonweale,
hauing no good thing in him, but that he persecuted the courtisans, whom he tearmed
mice, sought to breake the order made betwixt him and Constantine: wherefore after that
he had beene supprest aboue once, and reconciled to his brother in law, by the meanes of his
wife Constance, he was slaine by his commaundement at Thessalonica; so as Constantine called
the Great, remained sole emperor, who gaue peace vnto the Churches, much desired, and (if
they could haue vsed it to the aduancement thereof) most happie.Constantine a good prince. This prince did great honour
vnto the Christians, imbraced the true religion, endowed the churches with rents
and riches, caused the Gentiles temples to be beaten downe in many places, assembled by his
imperiall authoritie the Councell of Nice in Bithinia,Anno 326. in the yeare 326, or 328, where there
met 318 bishops of diuers countries; among the which was Osius bishop of Cordoua, who
was also at the Councell of Gangre,Nice the first general Councell celebrated the same yeare. That of Nice is held the first
generall Councell, where the impietie of the Arrians was condemned, the which notwithstanding
did afterwards infect many nations. That Constantine made a donation of the citie of
Rome, of Italie, and of all the Westerne empire, vnto Siluester then bishop of Rome, or that
he had declared him head and primat ouer other bishops, and granted vnto him and his successors,
other things conteined in that which is called Constantines donation,A false donation fathere^ v^on Constantine. besides, that Pope
Pius the second doth jeast at it, there is no receiuable testimonie there of, nor any probable conjecture:
besides, the histories of following emperors, do argue the contrarie, euen they of the
West. In the time of this emperor the Northerne nations inuaded Spaine, and spoiled that
part of the countrey which lies neere the Ocean, from Gallicia vnto the strait: whither he led
a great army, chased away the enemies, and restored the Spaniards (which were fled into mountaines)
vnto their houses, and setled an order in the prouince, as well for that wich concerned
the temporaltie, as the churches. There was a prouinciall Councell held by his commaundement
at Illiberis,Illiberis where Callibre was built. at the foot of the Pyrenees, some call it Eliberis, a towne in the marches of
Grenado: whither came Helena the mother of Constantine, with Constantine his eldest sonne, to
whom he had assigned the Gauls and Spaine, for his portion. In this Councell Spaine was diuided
into fiue prouinces;Spaine vnder Constantine diuided into fiue (...). that is, that of Tarracone, Carthagene, Betica, Lusitania, and Gallicia,
in either of the which there was a Metropolitan appointed at Tarracone, new Carthage
(to whom Toledo hath since succeeded) at Seuille, at Merida, and at Bracara. Some hold, that
this Councell was more antient than that of Nice, among which Beuter affirmes, That Conscius
bishop of Cordoua, Osius predecessor, was there present: others say, that it was Osius himselfe,
and Quintian bishop of Ebora. Some beleeue that the emperor Constantine was not baptized
vntil he drew neer his death, being deceiued by the error of some, which beleeued that the
circumstance of places gaue more authority to baptisme: for he had a great desire to be baptized
in Iordan. Many thought, that in the end of his daies he fel into the heresie of the Arrians,
for that he had banisht Athanasius by the persuasion of the Arrians, and that his sister Constance

liuing with him was an Arrian: but it is most certaine, that before his death he commaunded
that Athanasius should be called home againe, and that he did not beleeue the confession of
faith, nor the exposition made by Arrius, after that he had called him from banishment, but
sent it to the Councell of Ierusalem, there to be examined. Of Constantines deeds in Spaine
there are many medailles found in that countrey, and elsewhere, in our time, that beare witnesse.
After him there raigned in the West Constantine and Constans, his sonnes, the East remaining
to Constantius their brother.Constantine the yong had Spaine and other prouinces for his portion. To Constantine was assigned Spaine, Gaule, and the
islands of Britaine, or that which the Romanes held there. But Constantine being a proud
and turbulent prince, he would make warre against his brother Constans, and take Italie from
him: in which enterprise he was slaine neere vnto Aquilea, in the 25 yeare of his age: wherefore
all the prouinces of his portion fell vnto Constans: in whose time the Poet Aurelius Prudentius
Clement was borne at Sarragossa, or rather at Calaorra: Pacian bishop of Barcellona
flourished in doctrine and good life.
The repeale of Arrius, granted by Constantine the great, had caused greater troubles in
the Church than before: for being returned into Alexandria, he had confirmed his doctrine,
and drawne many bishops vnto him; yea the emperour Constantius, who held the empire in
the East, was infected with this errour, and did persecute the faithfull beleeuers: so as Athanasius
being banished againe by him, and Paul of Constantinople, who retired to Constans
his brother, they wrought so, as by the consent of the two brethren princes, a generall Councell
was called at Sardica,The Councell of Sardica. a towne in Illir^a; whither came two hundred and fiftie bishops, among
the which was Osius bishop of Cordoua, who was then verie old, Annianus of Castulo,
Costus of Sarragossa, Domitian of Augusta (that is to say, Bracar) Florentine of Emerita,
and Pretextatus bishop of Barcellona. There the confession of the faith, or Symbole of the
Councell of Nice, was confirmed: But at the same time by reason of the bad agreement
which was betwixt the two brethren Constans and Constantius, there was another assemblie of
the Easterne bishops at Philipopolis in Thracia, who agreed not with any that held with Athanasius
and Paul.Councell of Syrmium. And after that there was another held at Syrmium im Hungarie (whither
Constantius went in person) and others elsewhere. The Councell of Sardica being ended,
Constans entreated his brother Constantius, to restore Athanasius: the which he did, partly for
loue, and partly for feare of warre: But Constans being dead, Athanasius was forced to saue
himselfe by flight, being accused to haue persuaded Constans to make warre against his brother
for his sake:Arrians persecute the faithful and then the Arrian bishops began to persecute them that made profession
of Athanasius his doctrine, more cruelly than the Dioclesians or Maximians. The Councell
of Syrmium,Anno 360. contrarie to that of Nice, was held in the yeare three hundred and threescore,
or three hundred fiftie and six, according vnto some, whereas many wicked decrees
were made and maintained, especially by Photinus, bishop of that place, who reuiued the
blasphemies of Samosatenus, denying the two natures in Iesus Christ, borne of the virgine
Marie.
This Councell, to suppresse all controuersies, would disguise the tearmes and manner of
speaking, receiued in the Church; and in stead of saying, That Iesus Christ was coessentiall
with the Father, or of the same essence, they propounded the tearme of Like in essence:
Which two words in the Greeke tongue, doe somewhat symbolize, (...), and (...). By
this disguising, vnder which the poyson lay hidden, the good old man Osius the Spaniard,
hauing constantly maintained the truth all his life time,The error of Osius. suffered himselfe to be deceiued and
woon: whether that his great age had dulled his vnderstanding, or that he did it for feare of
the emperour, who examined him vpon that point, and threatned him in the towne of Rimini,
where hee had againe assembled many bishops, causing him to commit this errour;
saying, That both the one and the other said well. But the Orthodoxes did soone after
reject that word of (...), as captious and deceitfull. Osius, as Isidore writes, dyed soone
after in his impietie, strucken with the hand of God, in his bishoprick: and that being brought
to Cordoua, Gregorie bishop of Illiberis, according to the Edict made by Constantius the emperor,
against the Christians, to force them to the Arrians opinion, he refusing to yeeld vnto
it,The magistrat did not meddle with clergie men, before they were degraded. Osius prest Clementine Gouernour of the prouince, to banish him: but he answered, That he
could not banish a bishop before he was deposed from his bishopricke, and judged incapable.
Whereupon Osius richly attyred like a king, meaning to giue sentence against Gregorie, who

lay prostrate vpon the earth, praying vnto God, that he would maintaine the glorie of his
name, and his truth, against all Apostats: the which he demaunded earnestly, not to saue
his life, the which he was readie to loose a thousand times for the confession of the faith,
but to the end the simple should not be abused with the deceits of the Apostat Osius. Wherupon
it happened, that as Osius was readie to pronounce sentence against Gregorie, he sunke
downe to the ground,Osius strucken with the hard of God, dyeth. hauing his mouth and necke drawne on the one side, and so dyed. The
Gouernor amazed at this strange accident, kneeling downe, asked Gregorie forgiuenesse, confessing
his ignorance, and excusing it vpon the commaundement of the emperour his prince.
These things are written by Isidorus: but S. Augustine giues a better testimonie of Osius, writing
against Parmenian.
In the yeare of our redemption 369,Anno 369. there came vnto the bishopricke of Rome, which
was not yet soueraigne, Damasus a Spaniard, borne at Vimaranes, a place in Portugall, betwixt
Minio and Duero, three leagues from Braga: he succeeded Felix, who was an Arrian,
and therefore not numbred in the catalogue of the Bishops of Rome; for that they would
make this (...) without all blemish. Among his other qualities, they say, he was a good Poet:
Saint Ierosme was his Secretarie. During the time of Constantines children, Iuuencus, a Spanish
priest, and Poet, liued. Constantius the emperour was alreadie dead, with Iulian and Iouinian
his successours, of whom Spaine hath nothing to speake. And then did Valentinian
raigne in the West, and Valens in the East. Vnder Valens the Gothes chased by the Dacians,
inuaded the Romane empire, whereas as the first they were receiued in peace: but the couetousnesse
and wickednesse of Gouernours made them take armes,The Gothes inuade the (...) empire. so as there grew a sharp
warre, in the which the emperour Valens himselfe was slaine. This nation did erect a kingdome
in Spaine, whose race, according to the common opinion, hath continued vnto this
day.The impietie of Valens. The emperour Valens was addicted to the Arrian heresie, to Negromancie, and other
impieties. We read, that being carefull who should succeed him in the empire, he was deceiued
by the enemie of mankind, a murtherer from the beginning, who shewed him the letters
(...) and persuaded him, that his name that should hold the empire after him, should
begin with them: Whereof the emperour growing jealous, he caused all the Theodores,
Theodoses, Theophiles, and others, whose names were compounded of Theos, to be slaine. But
Theodosius, who succeeded him, a Spaniard bome, fell not into his hands. Hee was adopted
by Gratian in the yeare three hundred fourescore and two,Anno 383. or fourescore and three, according
vnto some, and raigned after him in the East, Valentinian the second brother to Gratian holding
the Westerne empire. His father was called Theodosius, and his mother Thermantia, and
descended from the race of Traian. During his empire, there came out of Italie into Spaine,
Paulin the Poet, a great friend to Ausonius, who became a monke, and liued a solitarie life.
At the same time Priscilian bishop of Auila, published his heresie, mingled with the impieties
of the Manicheans and Gnostiques, the which was condemned in a Counsell held at
Bourdeaux, some time after. He was a sectarie to one Marke, a Disciple to Basilides, who
during the empire of the Antonines had brought this heresie into Spaine, where it was receiued
and fauoured by a great ladie called Agape, and drew to his opinions Helpidius a Rhetorician;
so as this mischiefe lay smothered for a time, vntill that Priscilian did publish it: a man
issued from a noble familie in Gallicia, eloquent and subtile. The fourth yeare of Theodosius
empire,Ann. 368. which was in the yeare three hundred fourescore and six, or fourescore and seuen,
there died at Constantinople in Theodosius his court, Athanaric king of the Gothes, who was
become a friend and allie to the Romanes. Isidorus affirmes, That the yeare following the
Gothes, being impatient of the Romane yoke, did chuse Alaric for their king. Others hold,
that it was 14 yeares after, whereof we will intreat at large in the next booke.
In the yeare 388 Priscilian hauing beene condemned in the Counsel of Bourdeaux, he retired
to Treues,Priscilian the here^^ke (...). to a tyrant called Maximin, some call him Clemens Maximus: who hauing
caused Euodius his constable to heare him, he cut off his head, and of other his sectaries, among
the which was Matronianus a Spaniard,Bishops (...) for that they made themselues (...) parties (...). an excellent Poet. Ithacius and Visatius, Bishops,
were accusers, and parties against Priscilian, by reason whereof they were excommunicated
and banished. Sigebert saith, That it was taken ill, when as by the accusation of any
man a Bishop was put to death. For one hereticke, author of a sect in Spaine, there liued
in those times many religious and learned men; as Lucinius, Beticus, Abigaus, Abundius,

Auitus, Olympus, Audentius, Vigilantius, who although he were a Gaule, yet he did reside at
Barcelona; against whom S. Ierosme did write very vehemently, for that hee did condemne
the superfluous honour done vnto the reliques. Theodosius hauing in the yeare 387 made his
sonne Arcadius, Caesar; tenne yeares after he aduanced Honorius his other sonne to the same
dignitie, who after his decease were Emperours, Arcadius in the East, and Honorius in the
West, by the death of Valentinian the second, and of Eugenius the tyrant: these two princes
were borne in Spaine, as the Poet Claudian writes. In their time the Gothes began to disperse
themselues ouer the West, where they committed infinit spoyles, vntill in the end they setled
themselues in Gaule, Spaine, and lastly in Italie, blemishing the name and majestie of the Emperours
in these rich Prouinces.



@ THE FIFTH BOOKE OF
the Historie of Spaine.

The Contents.
1 THe beginning of the Gothes, and their aduentures in Hungarie, Mesia, and Thrace.
2 Their Religion.
3 Their warres against the Emperours of the East.
4 Descent of the Gothes into Italie vnder Alaric.
5 Athaulphe who first erected the Gothes kingdome in Gaule, and inuaded Spaine.
6 First Councell of Toledo, and the estate of religion then in Spaine.
7 Vallia the first king of the Gothes, which erected a kingdome in Spaine.
8 Reigne of the Sueues in Gallicia.
9 Reigne of Theodoric the second king of Gothes in Spaine.
10 Torismond the third king of Gothes.
11 Theodoric the second of that name, and fourth king of Gothes.
12 Henry, the fifth king.
13 Alaric the second of that name, sixt king.
14 Gensalaric the seuenth king, his cruelties and death.
15 Amalaric the eight king, and vnder him the second Councell of Toledo.
16 Councels at Tarracone, Girone, Sarragosse, Ilerda, and Valencia.
17 The second Councell of Toledo.
18 Discourse vpon the vncertainetie of the histories of Spaine, touching the reigne of Amalaric, and
deeds of Theodoric king of Italie, whom the Spaniards make his grandfather by the mothers side.
19 Theude the ninth king of the Gothes in Spaine.
20 Theodiscle the tenth king of the Gothes in Spaine.
21 Agila the eleuenth king.
22 Athanagilde the twelfth king.
23 Luiba the thirteenth king.
24 Leonigilde the foureteenth king, and his deeds.
25 End of the reigne of the Sueues in Gallicia.




26 Ricared the fifteenth king: abiuration of the Arrian heresie at the third Councell of Toledo: reformation
of the Gothicke lawes.
27 Luiba the second of that name, sixteenth king, cruell, his death.
28 Vuiteric the seuentcenth king, a tyrant.
29 Gundamyr the eighteenth king.
30 Sizebut the nineteenth king.
31 Suintilla the twentieth king, deposed for his vices.
32 Sizenand the one and twentieth king: the fourth Councell of Toledo.
33 Cinthilla the two and twentieth king: and the fift and sixt Councels of Toledo.
34 Tulba the three and twentieth king.
35 Cindasuinthe the foure and twentieth king, vnder whom was the seuenth Councell of Toledo.
36 Recesuinthe the fiue and twentieth king: and the ninth and tenth Councels of Toledo.
37 Bamba the six and twentieth king: rebellion of Paule and others in Gothike Gaule, and their punishment.
38 The eleuenth Councell of Toledo vnder him, and some decrees.
39 Eringe the seuen and twentieth king, and vnder him the twelfth, thirteenth, and foureteenth
Councels of Toledo.
40 Egica the eight and twentieth king, vnder whom were the fifteenth, sixteenth, and seuenteenth
Councels of Toledo.
41 Vitiza the nine and twentieth king, cruell and infamous: the eighteenth Councell at Toledo.
42 Roderic the thirtieth and last king of Gothes in Spaine, his vices: inuasion of Spaine by the
Moores and Arabians, and the end of the Gothes reigne.
43 A Catalogue of the auncient Bishops of Spaine.

BEing to treat of the Gothes kingdome in Spaine, it is fit to know from
what region they are come, and by what accidents they first seated themselues
in Spaine, Honorius sonne to Theodosius the Great then reigning in
the West.
1 The Gothes are issued from the Getes,The Gothes come out of Asia int^ Europe. and their first beginning
was in Asia: they passed into Europe long before, and did first seize vpon
the higher countrey of Thrace and Mysia, which is at this day Bulgaria,
Bosna, Rascia, Seruia, and, it may be, a part of Hungarie; and in the end they came to either
banke of the riuer of Danube: and then by degrees peopling all that lyes betwixt that riuer
and the Northerne shore of the Baltike sea, they did in the end hold all that continent, which
extends it selfe in manner of an island in the bosome thereof, with all the neighbour islands.
They were famous for a long time in Dacia, in those regions which wee now call Valachia,
Transyluania,Gothes, Ge^es, and Gepides, all one nation. and Moldauia, where they were called Getes and Gepides. In the times of
Alexander the Great there were certaine encounters betwixt the Grecians and the Gothes,
not farre from the island of Peuce, aboue Constantinople; at the mouths of Danube, or Ister,
as they called it in that place. Syrmius reigned ouer that nation at that time. We read also,
That Lysimachus, one of Alexanders successors, was vanquished in battaile, and taken by a king
of the Gothes, whom hee afterwards set freely at libertie, and married his daughter. After
which, in tract of time other nations being mingled with them, those which did inhabite the
great Peninsule, which the auncients called Scandia and Scandinauia (yet little knowne to
them) retained the name of Gothes and the language; the which, as some affirme, was like
vnto that of the Celtes: others hold, That it was the Teuton or Dutch tongue: which languages
being corrupted, differ much at this day from those times, when they were in their
greatest puritie. From these Northerne regions, which containe at this day the realmes of
Suethland and Denmarke, often and vpon diuers occasions there came great troupes of people,
who tooke possession againe of the countries joyning to the Venedique or Baltike sea,The Gothish tongue.
and of the islands thereof, chasing away the inhabitants; and aduauncing into the maine land,
they did repossesse Dacia and Mysia, and ouerrun the higher Thrace, vnder Filymer, sonne to
Gandaric, who was the fift king after this returne. In these countries they planted their bounds
vpon the Danube, and there reigned some ages: they did encrease their fame with great victories,
and did giue their name to many nations whom they subjected. They inuaded the Romane

Empire in the time of Decius, vnder the conduct of their king Giua, and did vanquish the
Romanes in a great battaile, whereas Decius and his sonne were slaine: after which, by many
victories they made themselues fearefull to the Romans, so as the Emperous were often glad
to haue them for friends and companions in arms; and by the vertue and valor of their troups,
which they entertained, did often execute great matters.
About the time of Valentinian and Valens, Hermanaric reigned ouer the Gothes,The Hunschase the Gothes out of their co^quests. who vanquished
many nations: who notwithstanding yeelded to the force of the Hunnes, fathers to
the Hungarians, who came at that time out of Asia into Europe, in great numbers, through
the fennes of Meotides. Hermanaric being dead, and Vithimir his successor slaine in battaile,
the Gothes estate was ouerthrowne, and troden vnder foot by the Hunnes: wherefore such as
would not liue vnder the Conquerors subjection, retyred themselues into diuers other countries.
Athanaric, who had shewed himselfe an enemie to Valens, in supporting Procopius his
rebell, would not trust him, and therefore he tooke his course towards the North, and did inhabite
with his troupes in the forrests of Sarmatia. But Fritigerne and Alauin being followed
with a great number of Gothes, came vnto the bankes of Danube, vpon the confines of the
Empire, where desiring to be admitted to dwell with the other subjects, Valens consented, supposing
that they should serue as a rampier against forraine nations, that would inuade the empire
on that side.
Then there arriued vpon the same marches Vitheric,Distinction of the East and West Gothes. sonne to Vithimir, with his tutors Alathee
and Safrax, and also Farnabe, conductors of other great troupes. Then did the Romans begin
to distinguish these people, into Ostrogoths or East Goths, and Visigoths or West Goths:
calling those which did remaine vnder the domination of the Hunnes, Ostrogoths; and those
Visigots which had passed the Danube, and dwelt in Hungarie, Mysia, and Thracia: the which
distinction was ancient among them, according to their countries and abodes, and was againe
practised in Italie, Gaule, and Spaine, when as this nation had erected kingdomes there;
whereof the princes were diuided into two families or factions: that is, the H^mels or Amales,
and the Baltes.
2 The name of Iesus Christ had beene many yeares preached among this nation,Christian religion among the Gothes. before
the Emperour Valens time: for we read, That at the Councell of Nice, which was vnder Constantine
the Great, among others, there came Theophilus a Bishop of the Gothes: wherefore
they were alreadie Christians and Orthodoxes, although there were some idolatrous princes
among them, and by consequence, part of the people: so as when they came vpon the territories
of the Empire, Valens reigning in the East, they had Bishops, whereof the most famous
was Vulphilas.
The manner how they became Arrians, is reported by Theodorite, in the fourth booke of the
Ecclesiasticall Historie,Gothes made Arrians by the Romanes. saying, That after the Gothes had passed the riuer of Ister or Danube,
and that they had made their peace with Valens, Eudoxus who was an Arrian, persuaded Valens,
who was also infected with this heresie, to draw the Gothes to his opinions, for that conformitie
in religion would make the peace more firme. Wherewith Valens hauing acquainted the
princes and heads of the Gothike nation, they made answer, That they could not cha^ge the doctrine
of their ancestors. Then Eudoxus addressing himselfe to Vulphilas, whom he knew to be
couetous and ambitious, he preuailed so with faire words and money, as he got him to persuade
the Gothes to receiue the Emperors confession of faith: the which he did, saying, That they
were but childish contentions,Docilitie of the Gothike nation. and debates for words, and not for doctrine: for this Vu^philas
was in great credit with the Goths, and they say, that he inuented the Gothike letters, and translated
the Bible into that tongue. Thus were these people gouerned by their Bishops and Prelates:
they were a free people and couragious, and withall, tractable and apt to learning and
Philosophie, the which they learned, frequenting with more ciuile nations: hardie and valiant,
and yet familiar and liberall; apt to arms, tall and of a goodly stature, strong and patient to endure
all the discommodities of warre.
This new nation being seated in the territories of the Empire,The crueltie, auarice, and infid^lit^e of Valen^s and his lieutenants against the Gothes. the Emperor was aduised to
make his profit of them, and to draw money and other commodities from them for their dwellings,
and for the vse of the land, water, and ayre which he graunted them; the which he could
well put in practise, especially his gouernors and lieutenants, so as this nation found themselues
in a short time oppressed with a harder seruitude vnder the Romane Empire, than their countreymen

were vnder the Hunnes: For the Gothes being distressed for victuals, Lupicin and
Maximus Gouernours of Thrace, inuented all the wicked deuices they could to make them
poore, and to strip them of that they had, making them to eat dogs and other beasts, for euery
one of which they were forced to giue a man to be a slaue. Besides Lupicin hauing caused Fritigerne
and Alauin, captains of the Gothes, to come to Martianopolis, to conferre with them
vpon the complaints which were made of these inhumanities, hee incensed them with proud
and injurious words: so as hauing cunningly escaped out of his hands, they afterwards declared
themselues enemies to the Romane Empire, so as there grew a great and cruell warre betwixt
the Gothes and the Romanes, by the which the Emperour and his lieutenants were punished
for their couetousnesse and impieties: Lupicin seeking to suppresse the spoyles which
the Goths made, was defeated, and in the end after many vnfortunat encounters betwixt both
parties,Defeat of the Emperor Valens armie, and his miserable end. the Emperour Valens hauing lost a battaile, where the best of his men died, he also lost
his life, being burnt by the Gothes in a country house, into the which he was retired wounded,
after the losse of the battaile: and without the valour and wisdome of Theodosius (whom God
raised vp to succeed Valens in the East) the Gothes had rooted out the name of the Romanes
in that countrey. But Theodosius a Spaniard,Theodosius a good Prince. a wise and vertuous prince, did suppresse them,
and afterwards made a peace with them: so as after the death of Fritigerne, his successor Athanaric,
a friend and well affected to the Romane Empire, died in Theodosius court: after which,
the Gothes remained 14 yeares quietly vnder the Romane Emperours, without any king of
their nation,Alaric chiefe of the Gothes. vntill that Alaric, one of their captaines, who had serued Theodosius in his warres
against Eugenius the tyrant, rebelled, and put the Gothes in armes, Arcadius and Honorius,
sonnes to Theodosius, sitting in the imperiall seat.
3 The Gothes disdaining to be any more subject to the Romanes, and meaning to chuse a
king of their owne, there grew a sedition and warre among themselues; some desiring Alaric,
others Radagase: but Alaric had the soueraigntie. Wherefore Radagase with aboue two hundred
thousand of that nation went into Italie, whilest that Alaric opprest Hungarie; against whom
Stilico, who gouerned the Westerne Empire vnder Honorius, opposed himselfe: and finding
this armie of Gothes shut vp in the Appenine hils, bordering vpon Tuscane, it was consumed
with hunger and pouertie:Radagase slain, and his armie of Gothes ruiued. their leader Radagase was taken and strangled, and those which remained,
were sold in great troupes, for slaues, at a small rate. This Radagase was an idolatrer,
and would haue planted idolatrie againe in Italie. It was at such a season, when as the Romane
Empire was in greatest combustion, especially in the West: for besides the inuasion
of the Gothes in Italie,The French inuade Gaule. the Frenchmen, a people of Germanie, bordering vpon Gaule,
sought to make a breach there, and entred in great troupes vpon the countrey adjoyning
vpon the riuer of Rhene: against whom, Stilico (who was a Henete or Sclauonian borne)
meaning to fortifie himselfe with barbarous nations) called into Gaule the Bourguignons,
Sueues, Alanes, and Vandales, nations which were chased out of their countries, on the
one side by the Hunnes, and on the other by the Gothes: who afterwards raunged and
spoyled Gaule themselues, and would haue seized thereon; for the which they had many
encounters with the Emperours Lieutenants, with variable successe. Great was the vertue
and valour then of Constantius Patricius, who gouerned Gaule Narbonoise, the which
wee now call by the name of Prouence and Languedoc, by whom the Vandales were repulsed,
and forced to passe into Spaine; where for a time they did ouerrun the countrey,
and being afterwards followed by the Alanes and Sueues, they sought to settle themselues
there. Gunderic reigned ouer the Vandales, Hermeric ouer the Sueues, and the Alanes were
commaunded by Resplandian or Atace, according vnto some. These diuided Spaine betwixt
them:The Barbarians diuide the conquest of Spaine betwixt them. so as the Alanes should make warre in the countrey of Carthagene, and in part of
Portugall or Lusitania, as it was then called: part of the Vandales, called Silinges, should
conquer Betica, called since Andalusia: and the other Vandales, with the Sueues, should settle
in Gallicia.
4 After the defeat of Radagase, Alaric marched into Italie with a great armie,Alaric passeth into Italie. and demaunded
to diuide the Empire with Honorius; to whom by the counsell of Stilico, Honorius
graunted the possession of Gaule and Spaine, who were also in prey to the French and
other nations. Alaric and the Gothes marching towards the Alpes, doubting no surprize,
were charged by an armie which Stilico had sent after them, to keepe them from spoyling

Italie, vnder the commaund of a Iew called Saule, who had a secret commaundement to set
vpon the Gothes armie, when they should be most busied in the straits of the mountaines; the
which hee could not put in execution: for the Gothes seeing themselues betrayed, gathered 
their forces together, and put themselues in battaile as well as they could,Trecherie of Still^^ and defeat of the imperiall army. defending themselues
so valiantly, as the imperiall armie was defeated: wherefore Alaric being victor, and full
of a furious desire of reuenge, leauing the way to Gaule, he turned backe, and did miserably
spoyle the countries, which were since called Lumbardie, Tuscane, and Romania, putting
all to fire and sword,Rome taken by the Gothes. euen to the gates of Rome; the which he tooke after a long siege, and
sacked it, pardoning the holy places, and those that were fled into them. From thence hee
did ouerrun Italie, euen vnto the furthest bounds: then returning towards Rome, he died suddainely
neere vnto Cosence, and was buried in the riuer of Barsente, turned out of her course
for that cause,The death of Alaric. and afterwards drawne againe into her old bed by the Gothes: who after his
death made choice of Ataulphe, his cousin, for their king, being a very wise man. Hauing
brought backe the armie to Rome, he spoyled all that remained of the first sacke: yet he was
somewhat pacified by the loue of Placidia Galla,Ataulphe Alarics successors pacified by P^a^idia. sister to the Emperour Honorius, being prisoner;
whom by reason of her nobilitie and beautie; he married at Forly in Romania. From that
time hauing some respect to Honorius, as his allie, he resolued to leaue Italie, and take his way
into Gaule, according to the first agreement betwixt Honorius and Alaric; where bee erected
the kingdome of the Visigothes, restrained the French within certaine limits, and helped to
chase away the rest of the Vandales, Alanes, and Sueues, beyond the Pyrenees, where he afterwards
pursued them.
A little before these accidents, one Constantine, of a simple souldior being growne captaine
of the Legions which were in great Britaine, hauing slaine a tyrant who had seized vpon that
island vnder the Roman Empire,Constantine a tyrant. called Gratian, had passed into Gaule, to vsurpe the imperiall
title there, and from thence had sent Gouernours into Spaine. But two noblemen Spaniards,
Didimus and Seuerianus, or Verianus, or Verinianus (for this diuersitie is found in authors) rich
and mightie men, opposed themselues: and seeking to preserue the prouince for the lawfull
Emperour, they gathered some troupes together, of friends and subjects, and seized
vpon the passages of the mountaines, to keepe these gouernours and their companies from
passing. Against these Spaniards, the tyrant sent a sonne of his called Constant, whom hee
had drawne out of a Monasterie, and proclaimed him Caesar: who being followed by an armie
of Barbarians, which he called Honoriaques, he defeated and slew the two brethren.
These Honoriaques being masters of the straits and passages of the Pyrenees by this victorie,
and hauing afterwards rebelled with their captaine Gerontius, they (as some hold)
deliuered Spaine to the Vandales, Alanes, and Sueues, after the death of the tyrant Constantine,
and of his sonne Constant, whereof the one was taken at Arles, and the other dispatched
at Vienna: These nations joyning together to rob and spoyle, Palantia, since called
Palenza, was the first towne of Spaine, which fell in prey to these Barbarians, who besieged
Toledo in vaine, ransomed Lisbone, and committed infinite spoyles, whilest that
Maximus,Maximus a tyrant. another tyrant, being rebelled against the Emperour, sought during these combustions
to make himselfe king of Spaine of another side: who being taken by them that
did yet reuerence the majestie of the Romane Empire, he was depriued of his vsurped royaltie,
yet his life was saued.
Spaine for the space of two yeares was thus miserably oppressed, as well by tyrants as
by these cruell nations: so as there remained nothing but the mountaines of the Cantabrians,
at this present Biscaye and Nauarre, in the quiet possession of the Romanes, maintained
by Constantius Patricius, who was the Emperours Lieutenant on this side the Alpes:
which was at such time as the Vandales, Sueues, and Alanes made the diuision of Spaine.
Then did Ataulphe passe into Spaine, to dispossesse them, according to the right he had
by an accord made with Honorius his brother in law: but as he was at Barcelona, he was slaine,
with six children which he had had by another wife than Placidia. The time and cause of his
death are not reported alike. Iornandes sayth,A^aulph^ slaine by his owne men. That he was slaine (hauing reigned three yeares
in Spaine and Gaule) being thrust into the flanke by Vernulphe, whom he was accustomed to
jest at. Some affirme, That he had been chased, and forced to passe into Spaine by Constantius
Patricius Gouernour of Gaule.

The Christian religion during these troubles and forraine inuasions was not neglected among
the Spaniards:Ann. 402. for in the yeare 402 (although others write 420) was held at Toledo 
the first Councell by 29 Bishops,The first Councell of Toledo. where Patron Bishop of Toledo did preside against the heresie
of Priscilian. He had beene Bishop of Auila, and had published an heresie mixt with the
errors of the Gnostiques, Manicheans, and auncient Philosophers: among other opinions, he
maintained, That the soule of man was a portion of the Diuinitie: he was condemned first at
a Councell held at Bourdeaux, and from thence he appealed to Maximus the tyrant, who
caused him to be heard at Treues; then he commaunded his head to be cut off, with some of
his followers. This Councell notwithstanding gaue place to a single life, and decreed, That
priests should liue continually vnmarried. This decree was contradicted by Vigilantius, who
liued then at Barcelona, who did also write against the abuse of reliques, against whom S. Ierosme
was very bitter. Many learned men liued at that time in Spaine,Learned men in Spaine. as Lucinius, Abigaus, Abundius,
Auitus, Olympus, Audentius, Turbius, P. Orosius, and others: yet the Church was declined
much from her auncient puritie, and then grew in request ceremonies, vowes, merits,
reliques, and miracles; for the clergie was then much infected with couetousnesse and ambition.
Then came the Vandales and Gothes, who were all infected with the heresie of Arrian,
who did in some sort persecute the good, as we shall heare.
Ataulphe being dead, the Gothes did chuse Sigeric for their king, who reigned but a
yeare, and was slaine by his owne men, in disdaine that he was too desirous of peace. He left
many children, Giseric, Huneric, Guntemaud, Trasamund, and Hilderic: yet Vallia succeeded
him, to the end he should breake the peace with the Romanes: but God had otherwise decreed,
for he confirmed it more. With him (according vnto some) begins the reigne of the
Vice-Gothes in Spaine.

Vallia first King of the Gothes.
7 IN the yeare of Christ 418 Vallia was chosen king of the Gothes, whereof next vnto
Narbone,Ann. 418. Tolouse was the royall seat. In his time the French began to erect a kingdome
in Gaule vnder Pharamond. Constantius Patricius, Gouernour for the Emperour in Gaule
and Spaine, was admitted by Honorius to the dignitie of Caesar, which in those dayes was a
degree to attaine vnto the Empire, as in our time the dignitie of king of Romanes, during
the life of the Emperour of Germanie.Vallia a friend to the Romanes, makes warre against the Barbatians in Spain This Vallia shewed himselfe a friend and well affected
to the Romane Empire. He restored to Honorius Placidia his sister, widow to king Ataulphe,
whom he had honoured, and kept in his house since the death of her husband. She
was afterwards married to Constantius Caesar aboue mentioned, by whom she had Valentinian
the third, who was the last Emperour in the West vntill Charlemaigne. Vallia vndertooke by a
contract made with Constantius, to chase the barbarous nations of Vandales, Alanes, and
Sueues, out of Spaine, to the benefit of the Romane Empire, and his owne: whereupon he
entred into Spaine,Alanes and Vandales defeated by the Gothes. being called by Constantius to begin this warre, in the yeare 420, and assailed
the Alanes and Vandales, who held Betica and Lusitania, slew their king Atace, and reduced
them to that extremitie, as those few which remained went and joined with Gunderic, who
reigned ouer the other Vandales in Gallicia: the battaile wherein they were wholly defeated,
was giuen neere vnto Emerita, the which is Merida in Portugall. These victories obtained, he
meant to passe into Africke, but he was put backe by a storme, and therefore returned into
Gaule, where hee purchased vnto the Gothes all the countrey from Tolouse to the Ocean,
bounded in by the Pyrenee mountaines, and the riuer of Garonne.
8 Sometime after the Alanes, which were retyred to Gunderic in Gallicia, shooke of his
yoake, being loth to subject themselues vnto him, and returned into Lusitania, Betica, and
the prouince of Carthagena, yet not chusing any prince ouer them: there they obtained
certaine lands, and liued tributaries to the Romanes, dispersing themselues as farre as the
riuer of Ebro, and to the foot of the Pyrenee mountaines, where some maintaine, that of
their name the countrey of Cattelogne was called Cattalania, for that they did inhabite
there, being mingled with the Cattes, a nation of Germanie, which had passed with them
into Spaine. In Gallicia (which contained at that time part of the realme of Portugall) there
grew debate betwixt Gunderic king of the Vandales, and Hermeric king of the Sueues, so

as they fell to armes,Warre in Spaine betwixt the Vandales and Sueues. and the Sueues were besieged in the mountaines called Narbaseens:
but the Vandales left them there, despising that barren countrey, and came into the prouinces
of Betica and Carthagena, the which they forraged: then passing into the islands of Maiorca
and Minorca, they sackt them: returning into Spaine, they tooke and ruined Carthagena,Betica takes the name of Vandalusia of the Vandales.
and brought backe their armie into Betica, the which was afterwards called Vandalusia,
of their name: there they ruined the towne of Seuille, and made the countrey desolate. Gunderic
died at the sacke of Seuille, vpon the threshold of S. Vincents temple, which he had commaunded
should be spoyled: he was sonne to Godigisque, after whose decease Giseric or Genseric
his bastard brother was chosen king of the Vandales.
Vallia entred againe into Spaine, to suppresse the spoyles and cruelties of these Vandales,
whither there was also sent by the Emperour a captaine called Castinus, who should joyne
with Boniface Gouernour of Africke, and joyntly make warre against the Barbarians. But as
Castinus had nothing in him but vanitie and foolish presumption, he disdained Boniface, who
was a valiant and wise nobleman;Dissention betwixt the Emperors lieutenants, causeth the losse of Spain and Africke. against whom hee did also bandie Aetius Gouernour of
Gaules, either through emulation and enuie, or for some other cause of hatred: so as when
Vallia came with his armie of Gothes to set vpon the Vandales, Boniface, who was retyred
into his gouernment of Africke, being incensed, sent messengers vnto Genseric, to sollicite him
to passe the strait, promising to giue him means to lodge himselfe in Africke with all his men,
in despight of the Emperour; the which fell out happily for him, being oppressed with many
enemies: wherefore he left Spaine, but not without bloud: for in a battaile which was giuen
him by the people of Spaine,Boniface deliuers Africke to Gonseric and the Vandales. subjects to the Romanes, and by the Gothes, he slew twentie
thousand of his enemies vpon the place at his departure. The Vandales being then passed
into Africke with all their families, there remained not any forraine power to make head
in Spaine, but that of the Sueues, with their king Hermeric, who being fallen into a grieuous
sicknesse, died about that time, after he had languished long. In the meane time Vallia incensed
against the Vandales, prepared to pursue them into Africke, but he was preuented by
death, hauing reigned 22 yeares.


2. Theodoric or Roderic.
9 THeodoric succeeded Vallia, Valentinian the third being Emperour in the West,Anno 440. in the
yeare 440. Hermeric about a little before his death had so pacified the people of Gallicia,
as he reigned ouer them, and of two nations he made one, taking his sonne Rechilan for
companion, whom he made his heire and successor in the kingdome, and sent him into Betica
or Vandalusia against Andenot, a Romane captaine, whom he defeated neere vnto Singil, a riuer
vpon that continent, where he was much enriched. Returning, he besieged Merida, tooke
it, and enlarged the kingdome of the Sueues, the which had a beginning about the yeare 437.
Theodoric reigning ouer the Gothes,Romans assailed by the Sueues in Spaine, and by the Gothes in Gaule. they brake the peace made by Vallia with the Emperour
Honorius, and besieged Narbonne, the which was relieued by Lictorius, Gouernor in those parts
for the Empire vnder the Generall Aetius: but Lictorius was defeated soone after by the same
Gothes, the which was a great prejudice to the Romanes. By reason of this defeat, the peace
was renued among these potentates.
Rechilan being king of Gallicia after his fathers decease, hee sought also to enlarge his
limits:Rechilan 2. king of Sueues in Gallicia* wherefore he first assayled Vandalusia, and the countrey about new Carthage, the
which he made subject vnto his crowne, and did wholly suppresse the name of the Silinges
Vandales in Betica. Hee made a certaine composition with the Romanes, to whom
he yeelded the countrey of Toledo in Carpetania, and new Carthage, called now Carthagena.
Theodoric hauing also made a peace with the Romanes in Gaule, made a designe vpon
Spaine; yet being called backe to joyne with the Romanes against the Hunnes, who were
entred in infinit numbers into Gaule vnder Attila:Defeat of Attila Anno 453. hee was in that memorable battaile,
whereas Attila was defeated, in the which there died aboue an hundred and eightie thousand
men vpon the field; and among others, Theodoric king of the Gothes, hauing reigned
foureteene yeares, according vnto some. The cause of this warre, which Attila vndertooke,
was his bad disposition to ruine the whole world: whereunto he was incited by Genseric,

king of the Vandales, who was trecherous, cruell, and inhumane, hauing a desire to ruine the
Visigothes in Gaule and Spaine, both for that he had beene chased and pursued by them, as
also fearing that Theodoric their king would seeke to reuenge the injurie done vnto his daughter,
who being married vnto Humeric, the sonne of Genseric, had beene sent backe by him vnto
her father disfigured, without a nose, vpon a suspition which Genseric had, that she would haue
poysoned him. In this battaile there were fiue kings: Atila king of the Hunnes, Generall of
the warre: Valamir, of the Ostrogothes, who were tributaries to Atila: Theodoric, of the Visigothes
in Gaule and Spaine:Fiue kings in the battel^ whereas Atila was defeated. Ardaric of the Gepides: and Meroue of the French. This was in
the yere 453, and was fought in the fields of Maroche, a word corrupted of Maurice, otherwise
called Cathalaunians: a battaile as remarkable as hath bin since the deluge, in regard of the
great number of men that were in arms, and the strange designes of Atila, a common enemie
of all mankind. Besides those that died in the battell, there was an encounter the night before
betwixt the Gepides and the French, in the which there were aboue 90000 men slaine.
Rechilan died a little before in Merida,Recciaire third K. of the Sueues in Gallicia. being an idolatrer, and after him his sonne Recciaire
reigned ouer the Sueues in Gallicia, who was baptized, and had receiued the Christian religion.
Hee had also married a daughter of Theodorics, king of Gothes, whereby he grew proud,
aspiring to great matters. He inuaded the Vascons country, which is now Nauarre, and spoiled
it. From thence he went to see his father in law, and in his returne, with the helpe of the
Gothes, he sackt Sarragosse, and all the country which we now call Arragon, the which obeyed
the Empire. He spoyled that of Carthagene, the which his father by a treatie made with
the Romanes had yeelded vnto them. This past before the defeat of the Hunnes.


3. Torismund.
10 AFter that Theodoric had beene slaine in that great battaile,An. 453. the which was woon by the
fauor of God, and to the great good of all the countries of Europe, against that cruell
tyrant Attila; his sonne Torismund succeeded him ouer the Visigothes, whose seat was at Tolouse.
He had many brethren, Theodoric, Frederic, Turic, Rothemer, and Huneric. Aetius lieutenant
Generall for the Emperour Valentinian, made him jealous of them, least they should seize
vpon the realme in his absence, aduising him to goe speedily to Tolouse, and to cause himselfe
to be crowned. This Aetius did, for that he distrusted the Gothes, whom he loued not neere
him; yea, he was grieued to see this yong prince full of courage after this victory lately gotten
against the Hunnes, hauing a desire to pursue the remainder of this defeated army, and to root
them out quite; the which Aetius held not profitable for the Romans: for knowing the nature
of the Goths to be proud and actiue, he feared, that being puffed vp with many victories, they
should enter into the territories of the Romanes: wherefore he suffered the remainders of the
defeated armie of the Hunnes to slip away, which gaue his enemies subject to disgrace him
with the Emperour Valentinian, who afterwards put him to death: whereby (as some said) he
cut off the right arme of his estate; for he was a wise and valiant captaine: yet some say, That
betwixt Torismund and Atila there were some happie encounters for the Gothes. Torismund
hauing reigned three yeares, was slaine by his enemies, as he was let bloud, being sicke. They
write, That one stole away his armes, which he kept by his bed, yet hauing a penknife in his
hand,Torismund slain by his brethrens procurement. he slew some of the murtherers which came to assault him. It is doubtfull whether they
were his brethren, or others by their procurement. Some say, That the murtherers name was
Ascalerne, and that he reigned but a yeare.


4. Theodoric the second of that name.
11 THeodoric the 2. succeeded his brother Torismund,A damnable desire of reuenge in a woman. about the time that Valentinian the 3
was slain by the friends of Aetius. The Empire of Rome was the^ held by one Maximus,
who maried Eudoxia by force, being widow to Valentinian that was slaine, thinking by this conjunction
to be more respected in the imperial dignitie, which he vsurped: but this woman mad
for the wrong she thought was done vnto her, sought to be reue^ged of Maximus, to the prejudice
of her selfe, of Rome, Italy, and of the whole Empire: for by the means of Boniface she caused
Genseric to come out of Africke, who with an army of Vandales, Africanes, Moores, and others,

entred Rome, and slew Maximus, sacked and burnt the towne, spoyled all Italie, and led
away Eudoxia and her daughters, with many thousands others, prisoners into Africke: yet
afterwards he set Eudoxia and her daughters free, except one, whom he kept to marrie to his
sonne. This was done by a treatie made with the Emperour Martian, who reigned in the East
at Constantinople, who also suffered Theodoric, in recompence of the succours which the
Visigothes had giuen the Romanes against Attila, to reigne in Spaine, and to get what hee
could from the Sueues.
Theodoric then entred into Spaine in the yeare 458,Ann. 458. against whom, Recchiaire king of the
Sueues opposed himselfe, reigning in Lusitania and Gallicia: there was a battaile fought
neere vnto the riuer of Vrbic, twelue miles from Asturica, betwixt Asturica and Leon, in the
which the chiefe of the nobilitie of the Sueues were slaine, and Recchiaire was constrained to
saue himselfe by flight:Defeat of the Sueues, and the death of Recchiaire. meaning to passe into Africke, to Genseric king of the Vandales, hee
was put backe by a tempest to Porto, and there taken and deliuered to Theodoric, who caused
him to be slaine, although he were his brother in law. Gallicia being come into Theodorics
power by this victorie, he left one of his captaines called Acliulf of Auuergne, Gouernour in
his name, whilest that he pursued his conquests: but when as Acliulf saw that Theodoric had
turned his back, he caused himselfe to be proclaimed king, and seized vpon the kingdome, forgetting
his faith,Acliulf punished for his trecherie. and the dutie which he ought vnto his master, who had honoured him so
much: wherewith Theodoric being much moued, he returned, and finding him readie to resist
him, he fought with him, and slew him vpon the place.
The Sueues desirous to be reconciled to Theodoric, caused their Bishops to sue for their
pardon; the which they not onely obtained, but he also gaue them leaue to chuse a king
of their owne nation. So the Sueues in the furthest parts of Gallicia made choice of Masdra,
the sonne of Massila,Humanitie of the Gothes to the Sueues vanquished for their king; but being of sundrie opinions, another faction proclaimed
Frauta. Theodoric after all this passed into Lusitania, meaning to sacke Emerita or
Merida, but either for the respect he bare to S. Eulalie, or for feare (as they say) he did abstaine.
From that time hauing diuided his armie into three, he sent one part into Vandalusia,
vnder the commaund of a captaine named Cherula or Ceurila: another into Gallicia,
led by Sigeric and Nepotian; these did much annoy the disagreeing Sueues: and he himselfe
with the other third part returned into Gaule Gothique, which was Languedoc, where in
few dayes he tooke Narbonne, by the treason of Count Agrippin or Rauennius, who was Gouernour
thereof: or, according vnto some, hee receiued it of Gilon, who then reigned in
Fraunce, during the time that Childeric was in exile, meaning by this bountie to fortifie
himselfe with the Visigothes against the French, who began to be discontented with his exactions
and tyrannies. The majestie of the Romane Empire in the West was then troden vnderfoot,Gouernours ambitious and disloyall.
after the death of Valentinian: for in euery prouince the gouernours and captaines
of armies caused themselues to be proclaimed Emperours, and supported one another: so as
Spaine was wholly abandoned to the Visigothes, and the Gaules to them and the French, and
to pettie tyrants.
The Sueues being diuided in Gallicia, had chosen (as is said) two kings; one faction would
haue Masdra, the other obeyed Frauta, but he died within few daies; after whom, the same faction
did chuse Rechimund, who hauing made an accord with Masdra, they entred jointly with
a great armie into Lusitania,Foure kings of the Sueues in Spaine. and spoyled it. Masdra was slaine by his owne people; after
whom, that partie created Frumar king, but Rechimund opposed himselfe: so as these two
pettie kings impatient one of another, fell to spoyle Gallicia, one on the one side, and the other
on the other side.Arismund 8. K. of the Sueues. Frumar being dead, Remismund or Arismund, the sonne of Masdra,
brought all the Sueues vnder his obedience, and was peaceable king of Gallicia. The Sueues
since Recchiaire had receiued the Christian religion, reasonably pure concerning the principall
points, and had continued in the same, vntill the time of this king Arismund, who receiued
a certaine Gaule called Aiax an Arrian, thinking ill of the mysterie of the holy Trinitie,
into Gallicia, who infected the whole countrey with his heresie, the which was maintained
many yeares by many kings, whose names and deeds haue beene buried by writers in hatred of
their impieties.
In the meane time there had bin ten Emperors in Italie of small fame, and of lesse exploits,
who made no great opposition against the Visigothes and French: so as the one seized

vpon Spaine, and the other vpon Gaule, leauing but very obscure markes of the imperiall authoritie:
it may be for the good of these two rich regions, who were better gouerned vnder
those generous and free nations, than they should haue beene vnder the Romanes, who were
corrupted with all vices, and but a medley of all other nations. In these times the Bishops of
Spaine would in their life time chuse successors to their Bishoprickes; the which was reprooued
in a Councell held at Rome,Resignation of Bishopricks reproued. vnder Pope Hilarie. Remismund or Arismund sought friendship
and peace with Theodoric, the which he did courteously graunt: and moreouer, Theodoric
made an alliance with him, by the marriage of a daughter of his, the which hee sent
him vnder the conduct of Sallan, Maior of the palace, with rich presents. Remismund growne
proud with these honours, he seized againe vpon Lusitania, where he tooke Conimbrica,
and spoyled it: Lisbone was deliuered vnto him by Lusides, who commaunded there: during
which things, Theodoric was slaine at Tolouse by his brother Euric or Henry, hauing
reigned foureteene yeares: vnder him liued Sydonius Apollinaris, who of an Earle became a
Bishop.


5. Henry or Euric or Eoric.
12 DEsire to reigne induced Henry to kill his brother Theodoric,Ann. 471. who (as some say) receiued
that which he had done to another: for some did thinke, that Theodoric and Frederic
had beene authors of the death of Torismund their eldest brother. Leon was at that time
Emperour of Rome,Exploits of Henry. sitting at Constantinople. As soone as Henry was seated in the royall
throne of the Visigothes, he entred into Spaine with a great army, and seized vpon the whole
countrey on this side Ebro; for he tooke Pampelone, Sarragosse, and other places of the prouince
of Tarracona: then running into Lusitania, and seeing the combustions which were in
the Romane Empire, on this side the Pyrenees, he assayled Arles and Marseilles, and joyned
them vnto his kingdome, and defeated Riothime, king of the Britons, who came against him in
fauour of the Romanes, with twelue thousand men. Vindemir, brother to Theodomir, and vncle
to Theodoric, an Ostrogothe, being king of Italie, brought him forces out of Hungarie,
and gaue him meanes to seize vpon part of Gaule. Hee caused the Gothes lawes to bee set
downe in writing,Proidigies. who vntill that time had bin gouerned by customes. Being at Arles, where
he held a generall assembly in armes, according to the manner of that nation, they did see the
yron of their launces and other weapons change colour, looking greene, red, blacke, yellow,
and of diuers other colours; and soone after the king died, hauing reigned 17 yeares: He was
an Arrian,Henrie an Arrian a persecutor of the Church. as his predecessors, and did persecute the churches, shut vp the temples, and caused
them to be hedged about with thornes, that they should forget the way to assemble. During
the reigne of this Henry, Odoacer a Herule or Saxon entred into Italie, who hauing forced Augustule
(who tearmed himselfe Emperor) to leaue his purple robe, he made himself king of Italie,
the which he held the space of 15 or 16 yeares.


6. Alaric.
13 ALaric succeeded his father Euric,Punishment of a trecher^us Gouernor. being the second of that name, who reigned ouer
the Visigothes at Tolouse, when as Clouis the first Christian king reigned ouer the
French. In his reigne the Romanes had yet some lands in Spaine, and in Gaule, where they
had gouernours; one of the which called Burdunel, seized vpon the countrey which he commaunded
in Spaine, and became a tyrant, but he was taken by the Gothes, and burnt at Tolouse
in a bull of brasse. Apollinaris was also at that time Earle, and gouernor of Auuergne,
kinsman to Sydonius.
Before this time the Visigothes and the French had been good friends: but Clouis with most
of his people hauing embraced the Christian religion, and left their idols, he thought himselfe
also bound to pursue those that were not of the same opinion,Warre for irreligion betwixt the French and the Visigothes. and to force them thereunto by
armes. He therefore fell in dislike of Alaric and the Visigothes, for that they were Arrians: besides,
he tooke an occasion, for that his enemies and the banished men of Fraunce had sought
refuge at Tolouse and other places belonging vnto Alaric: and moreouer Clouis complained,
That a day and place being appointed them to parle, he was aduertised, that Alaric had layd an

ambush to kill him: wherefore there grew a great quarrell betwixt these two princes, the
which they would decide by single combat betwixt themselues: but king Theodoric (who had
newly dispossessed Odoacer of Italie, and there erected the kingdome of the Ostrogothes, a
wise and valiant prince) reconciled them for that time, and the Visigothes turned the warre
into Spaine, where they tooke Tortose, and slew one Peter who had played the tyrant there,
whose head was carried to Sarragosse.
The hatred betwixt the French and the Gothes encreased daily,Battell of Voglad in Poicto^ and the death of Alaric. so as they must come to
blows, and there was a battel fought neere vnto Poictiers, in the plaine of Voglad, 10 leagues
from the towne, whereas Alaric was slaine, and with him Apollinaris Earle of Auuergne. There
was also another battell neere vnto Bourdeaux, where there were an infinit number of Gothes
Arrians slaine, so as the place is to this day called the field of Arri. Among the spoyles of the
Visigothes, there were certaine vessels found, consecrated in old time to the temple of Ierusalem.
This king Clouis is by some called Lodom. By meanes of these victories the French seized
vpon Aquitain, and on Tolouse, the chiefe towne of the Visigothes, they besieged Carcassone,
and meant to pursue their victorie, but Theodoric comming out of Italie, made them to rayse
their siege.
At that time Toledo was the royall towne in Spaine. Many Christian Bishops chased out
of Africke by the Vandales Arrians,Toledo the chief towne of the Goths kingdome in Spaine. were retyred into Italie; from whence some were sent into
Spaine. At that time liued Fulgentius, Bishop of Ruspence, a learned and an eloquent man,
who was chased away and persecuted by the Arrian Gothes. Alaric (as the Spaniards write)
had married Amalasunta, daughter to Theodoric, king of the Ostrogothes and of Italie, and had
a sonne by her called Amalaric, who was yet a child, when his father died: wherefore Gesselaric
(who was bastard brother to Alaric) tooke the gouernment of the kingdome, his brother hauing
reigned 22 yeares.


7. Gensolaric or Gesselaric.
14 GEnsolaric was sonne to Euric,Ann. 508. by a concubine, hee vsurped the crowne at Narbone, his
nephew Amalaric being yet but fiue yeares old. He was base and a coward: for being
assayled by Gundebault king of the Bourguignons (who had also erected another kingdome in
Gaule, to the prejudice of the Romanes) after that he had receiued a great rout neere vnto
Narbone, he fled ignominiously into Spain, and shut himselfe vp in Barcelone, vntill that Ilba
(sent by Theodoric king of Ostrogothes, grandfather as they said by the mothers side vnto yong
Amalaric) came out of Italy to chase him from thence. Some make this Gesselaric bastard sonne
to Alaric, and brother to young Amalaric.
This K. Theodoric sent 80000 men out of Italie into Gaule against the French, to reuenge
the death of Alaric. Ilba (who was Generall) joyned his forces with the Visigoths,French defeated by the Ostrogothes. and defeated
the French, where there were aboue 20000 of them slaine. Prouence remained then vnto
the Ostrogothes, and was a member of the realme of Italie, and Languedoc and Gasconie returned
vnto the Visigothes, as before. Ilba then past into Spaine, to settle the estate of young
Amalaric, and chased K. Gesselaric out of Barcelone, the third yeare of his reigne, who fled into
Africke to the Vandales, hoping to recouer his dignitie by their means, but he labored in vain:
wherefore being returned into Gaule, he was slaine neere vnto Durance.


Amalaric eight King of the Gothes.
15 THe Spaniards write,Ann. 511. That K. Theodoric came out of Italie (where he had reigned 18
yeares) expressely into Spain, to settle his grandchild Amalaric in his kingdome, where
(as they say) he continued 15 yeares, and that Clouis the French king being dead, and his kingdome
diuided betwixt his foure sonnes, they made a peace with yong Amalaric, and assured him
their sister Clotilde, restoring to him Tolouse, or at the least the vsufruit of it. This treatie was
made with Theodoric his grandfather and tutor.
16 Vnder these Arrian princes the Christian religion was somewhat maintained by the Bishops,Councels at Tarracone, Sarragosse, and other places.
touching the fundamentall points, although intermixed with superstitions, the which
encreased daily. There assembled tenne Bishops at Tarracone, who decreed, That the feast of

Sunday should begin on Saterday. From whence it came that in Spain and many other places
they hold it a profane thing to work on the Saterday; no not the women to spin. This Councell
makes mention of the first Monks in Spaine. At Girone was another prouinciall assembly
of 7 Bishops: at Sarragosse of 12: in Ilerda at the foot of the Pyrenees of 8: at Valence of 6 Bishops,
wheras alwaies the Bishop of that place did preside. These Cou^cels were not very free
nor assured in the Arrians iurisdiction: but in those places which the Romans did yet hold in
Spaine, the pure Christian religion was fauoured. The counsell of Sarragosse did ordayne,
that no Nun should were a vayle nor be professed before the age of 40 yeares. Theodoric king
of the Ostrogoths, regent in Spaine, tooke to wife, as the Spanish authors write, a noble woman
of that countrie, at whose intreatie he set at libertie all those of her nation that were in
prison, and had by her a sonne, called Seuerin, Duke of Carthagena, father to Leandre and
Isidore,An. 526. who were saints. The 15 yeare of his gouernment, he resigned the kingdome of the
Visigoths to his graundchild Amalaric, being now of age to commaund, and returned to his
realme of Italie. This was in the yeare 526,End of the Vandales raign in Africke. when as Iustinian being emperour, the warre began
in Africke by Bellisarius against the Vandales, and Gilimer their king, whereof followed
the taking of the king, and the end of the Vandales royaltie, the which had continued in
these countries 113 years. Vnder the raign of Amalaric was celebrated the second Councel of
Toledo by eight Christian Bishops, although the king were an Arrian. He hauing (as we haue
said) maried Clotilde, daughter to Clouis king of France, intreated her verie ill, by reason of the
diuersitie of religion (for she was well instructed) so as going through the streets,Diuersitie of religion kils all charitie. the people
cast stones and durt at her in contempt: being retired she wip't off the bloud and durt with
a handkerchiefe, the which she sent vnto her brethren, letting them vnderstand the disgraces
and wrongs which she suffred: wherewith being incensed, they proclaimed warre against Amalaric:
the armies incountred neere vnto Narbone, whereas Amlaaric was vanquished, who
thinking to saue himselfe in Barcellone,Amalaric slaine by the French and the Gothes defeated. was slaine, being forsaken by his men. The annales
of France say, that Childebert king of Paris did this execution, and that he tooke Toledo, the
royall seat, spoiled the temples, and carried backe into France, 60 chalices, fifteene plates,
and twentie little cofers, where they kept the books of the Gospell, al of pure gold, and much
other treasure, and that he did distribute these ornaments among the Churches of France.
Amalaric raigned fiue yeares and eight months after the gouernment of Theodoric. After his
death, the kingdom of the Visigoths remained vnto Amalasunta his mother, say the Spaniards,
I know not by what title. I cannot concurre with them in this opinion, that this Amalasunta
was daughter to Theodoric king of Italie, the which we read was maried to a prince of the
 bloud royall of the Visigoths, and of the familie of Hamels, called Euthaire, and had Athalaric
by him, to whom Theodoric his graundfather dying, left the kingdome of the Ostrogoths in
Italie. Procopius sayes, that the wife of Alaric, and mother to this Amalaric, was called Theudetuse,
the which by the report of Iourdain, who names her Theudicode, Theodoric had by a concubine
when he was yet in Misia: others say, that this Theudicode was maryed to Gundebault
king of Bourgogne, and that the wife of Alaric, mother to Amalaric was called Ostrogotte,
bastard also to this king Theodoric. Howsoeuer it be, it is not credible that Theodoric king of
Italie, should so much affect the affaires of Spaine, as hee should abandon Italie for fifteene
yeares, to remaine in Spaine. And there is lesse likelyhood, seeing that Athalaric sonne of
Euthaire and of Amalasunta succeeded him in the realme of the Ostrogothes, the which hee
had of a lawfull marriage, whatsoeuer the Spaniards write, duke Seuerian of Carthage,
father to Isidore and Leandre bishops of Seuille, and others, the which Seuerian should rather
haue succeeded him in the realme of the Ostrogothes, than his graundchild, the sonne
of his daughter. That which others write, that he sent Ilba with an armie against the French,
to reuenge the death of Alaric his kinsman, and that he had reteyned for his paines and the
charges of war, Prouence (for these princes notwithstanding all their charitie, did not labour
for nothing) and that for the loue of consanguinitie, beeing all of the familie of Hamels, he had
sent one of his captaines called Theude into Spaine, to be tutor and regent of the yong king
Amalaric and of the realm of the Visigots, with his mother Theudetuse or Amalasunta, as she
was called: that I say comes neere vnto the truth, as we may see by Procopius. All the raigne
of Amalaric, as well vnder his tutors, as alone, is counted by all probabilitie 15. yeares.



Theude the ninth King.
19 SO it is, that Theude or Theodat,An. 526. as others name him, raigned after the death of Amalaric,
if we shal beleeue Procopius, hauing maried a great lady of the countrie of Spaine,
who, the Spaniards say, was mother to the deceased king. The resemblance of names hath
deceiued them in al their discourses: for at the same time, or therabouts, Amalasunta mother to
Athalaric, heire of the realme of Italie, maried an other Theude or Theodat (seeing that she was
not feared not respected by the Ostrogoths, for that she was a woman) and made him tutor
to her sonne, and regent to the realme, to her owne preiudice, but this hath nothing common
with Spaine. At the comming of Theude the Visigoth, the French entred into Spaine, and
spoyled the countrie of Arragon, and other places thereabouts: but they were defeated
by the Visigothes,The French defeated in Spaine. led by Theodiscle their captaine, who seased vpon all the passages
and straits of the Pyrenees. They say, that seeing themselues inclosed, they entreated
them to giue them a day and a night to passe away, the which the Gothes graunted, and
all that remayned behind, after that time, were put to the sword: a remarkable victorie,
but it was afterwards blemished by the defeat of the Gothes in Africke, as we will shew.
The French notwithstanding returned,The French inuade Spaine. and tooke Sarragosse, with other townes in Spaine:
and forced the inhabitants to abiure the Arrian sect, thinking they should doe much for
the Christian religion, if they forced their bodies by armes, being ignorant that religion is
a profession of the spirit, the which may well be persuaded by reasons and doctrine, but no
waies forced. It was the cause of all the French wars in those daies, ioyned with ambition
and the insatiable desire of reigne, which vice they thought to obscure, fighting (said they)
for the Christian religion, and inriching the Clergie men of their countrie, with spoiles and
other gifts. In the meane time most of the Monks that were then in credit, song in the Churches,
and the bishops became like dumbe dogs, following the courts of princes, and armies; a
mischiefe which hath not beene since repaired. In Spaine, whereas the Clergie was not in
so good estate, their gouernment was somewhat better: for many of their bishops were learned,Learned and religious Bishops in Spaine.
according vnto those times, as some writings, which yet remaine, doe witnesse, namely
Aprugius bishop of Paccence, Iustinian of Valence, Iuste of Vrgell his brother, Leandre of Seuille,
and according to some of Toledo, and others, who did often assemble for the affaires of
the Church, and held Prouinciall councels: yet they were not without blemishes, busying
themselues more than was fit, about seruices, ceremonies and exterior ornaments: from
whence sprung many superstitions. Childebert brought from Sarragosse, as some say, Saint
Vincents shirt, the which was put at Saint Germains by Paris, where he built a temple to that
Saint: and the authors say, that they of Sarragosse redeemed their towne from spoiles by this
iewell, the which is credible, considering the deuotion of that nation. After the retreat of
the French, the Visigoths would passe the strait into Africke, to chase away the Romanes,
who had surprised the towne of Septe from them: but as this nation possessed with a superfluous
feare, would not vse their armes vpon a Sunday, for the reuerence of the day, the Romanes
who had no such scruple;The Goths defeated in Africk by the Romans. fell vpon them, and finding them carelesse and disarmed,
they made a pitifull slaughter; so as there escaped not any one to carrie newes. It hapened
at the same time that King Theude (the newes of this rout beeing published abroad) was
slaine in his chamber, by one that made himselfe a iester, to haue the better accesse, who stabbed
him in the bellie with a dagger. The king feeling himselfe wounded to the death, coniured
the noble-men that were about him, not to doe any harme to him that had hurt him,
saying, that God had sent him a worthy reward for his merits, for that he had also beene the
murtherer of his captaine. He raigned 17. yeares and fiue moneths.


10. Theodiscle.
20 THeodiscle seased vpon the realme: he was generall or Constable of the Goths armies,An. 544.
he gaue himselfe to lust and adulteries, poluting honest families and great houses, the
which he filled with murthers by reason of his excesse: wherefore the chiefe of the Goths

conspired to kill him at Seuille,The reward of a lustfull tyrant. rioting in his banquets. Some say, that he was sonne to the
sister of Totilas king of the Ostrogothes in Italie, and held the kingdom one yere and 7 months.


11. Agila.
21 THe Gothes did chuse Agila for their king,Anno 546. who assailed the towne and territorie of
Corduba,Crueltie of Agila against the Christians. or Cordoua, and did all the disgraces he could vnto the Christians, treading
the bones of Asciscles and Victor, who were martyres, vnder his horses feet, whereof among
that nation the superstition was great. Comming afterwards to fight against the Gothes,
which were of a contrarie faction, he was vanquished, his armie defeated, his sonne slaine, and
all his baggage, which was verie rich, lost: he himselfe flying into Merida, was slaine by the
faction of Athanagilde, who succeeded him, hauing raigned fiue yeares.


12. Athanagilde.
22 DVring the life of Agila,Anno 551. Athanagilde had attempted to seize vpon the kingdome of the
Visigothes by force, the which after his death he obtained without any difficultie: about
the same time the kingdome of the Ostrogothes in Italie was extinguished by Iustinian,
or Bellisarius, Generall of his armies, and his lieutenant in the West. The Visigothes were diuided;
some followed Athanagilde,Diuision among the Gothes. whom others loued better for a companion than a master.
There was an armie raised against him by Agila, who was head of the other partie: being come
to battell neere vnto the towne of Seuille, Agila was defeated. Hereupon the Gothes considering,
that by reason of their dissentions, the Romanes, and Spaniards lying vnder their authoritie,
might inuade them, to their great prejudice, they agreed in the end, and did acknowledge
Athanagilde for their king, Agila hauing beene vanquished and slaine at Merida. They
hold, that this king did secretly detest the profession of the Arrians, and fauoured the Christians.
He dyed at Toledo,Athanagilde dislikes the Arrian heresie. of a naturall death, hauing raigned foureteene yeares: during the
which he had many encounters with the Romanes and their partie, with variable successe. In
his time the Sueues of Gallicia left the Arrian sect, and submitted themselues to the Christians
Church. Theodemir was the first king of Gallicia which imbraced the true religion, by the
persuasion of a bishop, or an Abbot of Dume, called Martin, who reformed the churches of
Gallicia,Bru^haut or Brunichilde. by the Councels held at Bracar and at Lugo. Brunichilde, who was daughter to Athanagilde,
was maried to Sigebert king of Mets, to be a plague to France.


13. Luiba, or Liuba.
23 THe Gothes disagreeing in the election of a king,Anno 565. the royall seat was vacant for some
moneths: in the end they chose Luiba at Narbone, who admitted Leouigilde his brother
to be partner in the kingdome, giuing him the gouernment of the hither Spaine. This
Leouigilde tooke to wife the widow of Athanagilde, called Gosuintha; but he had had another
wife, which was Theodosia daughter to Seuerian duke of Carthagene, by whom hee had Hermingilde
and Ricared. This Seuerian of whom we haue made mention,Seuerian and his posteritie. is held to be the sonne
of Theodoric king of the Ostrogothes in Italie: and the Spanish authors say, that he had many
sonnes and daughters by Theodora his wife, issued from the bloud royal, all which were Saints
and men of the Church, as S. Leandre and S. Isidore bishops of Seuille, Fulgentius bishop of
Astigi, and then of Carthagene; Florence an Abbesse, whom some call Iustina, and others. Luiba
hauing raigned 3 yeres, died at Narbone, leauing no other memorie of him, for he was not
warlike.


14. Leouigilde.
24 LEouigilde remained sole king of the Gothes,Ann. 567. both on this side and beyond the Pyrenees,
after the decease of Luiba his brother: He did ouerrun the territories of the Bastitanes,
and of Malaca, which is the countrey of Grenado and Mutcia at this day. Hee

tooke Asinode, or rather Assidon, a verie strong towne, by a composition made with one
Framedanc, who commaunded there, and added it to the Gothes kingdome. This place had
a garrison of Romane souldiours, and had defended themselues till then vnder the majestie of
the Romane empire, Iustine the young sitting then in the imperiall seat at Constantinople.
Leouigilde did many other exploits of war against the Romanes and their partisans in Spaine,Exploits of Leouigilde.
and did much inlarge the Gothes dominions. Cordoua (which they had often attempted in
vaine) was by this king surprised in the night, many towns and castles forced, with great slaughter
of the people. Vpon the frontiers of Gaule hee made warre against them of Sauoy and
Daulphine, if writers erre not. He diuided his kingdomes betwixt his sonnes Hermengilde and
Ricared, the which he had by his first wife.
Miro king of the Sueues in Gallicia, made warre at that time against the Vascons, which
are the Nauarrois and Biscanes: but Leouigilde stayed him, and sent his owne forces to the
Cantabrians, towards the Ocean (that is Biscaie) from whence he chased all such as had vsurped
any townes or seigniories, reducing in a manner all those pettie potentates which were risen
in Spaine, to the prejudice of the Romane empire, vnder the crowne and scepter of the
Visigothes. Hee made a peace notwithstanding for a time with Miro, by meanes of his
embassadours: So hauing enlarged his dominions in Spaine, he gaue himselfe to ciuile
affaires.
He built a towne called Ripol,The politique actions of Leouigilde. in the hither Spain, beautified it with buildings, and endowed
it with priuiledges. He also built the towne of Victoria in Biscaie, which is not Victoria
at this day. He maried his eldest sonne to Iugunde daughter to Sigebert king of the French: he
caused a Councell to be called at Toledo, of the Arrian bishops, where he heapt errour vpon
errour,The Arrians baptisme. forcing the Christians to be rebaptized, after the Arrian manner, which was, In the
name of the Father, to the Sonne, by the holy Ghost: and not, In the name of the Father,
the Sonne, and the holy Ghost: meaning thereby to make three essences of that which is but
one, distinct in three qualities. Herein he was assisted by Vincent bishop of Sarragosse, an Apostat,
against whom Seuerus a Christian bishop of Malaca did write.
As Leouigilde busied himselfe about these matters,Conspiracle of the mother in law and the son against the father. some good and profitable, others prophane
and wicked, his peace was troubled by the rebellion of his owne sonne; who either
through desire to raigne alone, or otherwise, and by the persuasion of Gosuinthe his mother in
law, he seized vpon Seuille, and many other places; and leuied men to fortifie himselfe against
his father: who hauing put a great armie to field, marched to Seuille, to suppresse the rashnesse
of his ill aduised sonne, besieged the towne on all sides, and began to batter it with all
sorts of engines. Miro king of Gallicia came to this siege, with good troups, as a friend and
allie to aid him. The auntient towne of Italica was not farre from Seuille: for we read, that
Leouigilde made his store-house for the warre there during the siege, hauing caused the walls,
which were ruined, to be repaired, the which did much annoy them of Seuille; from the which
he turned the riuer of Betis, and prest the besieged by continuall batteries, assaults, cutting off
their victuals, and all other acts of hostilitie: so as in the end he tooke it, and soone after the
towne of Cordoua also, in the which his sonne had fortified himselfe, with all the other places
which he had vsurped. Being thus spoiled of all, and depriued of his dignitie, Hermengilde
was confined to Valence. This ciuile warre did afflict Spaine, more than all the former, as the
Spaniards write.
25 During the siege of Seuille,The end of the kingdome of the Sueues in Gallicia Miro king of Gallicia died, to whom Eburic his sonne
succeeded: but Andeca seized vpon the realme of the Sueues, maried Siseguta, left by king Miro,
tooke Eburic, and shut him vp in a cloister of Monkes. To reuenge this injurie, and also to make
his profit thereof, Leouigilde entred into Gallicia with an armie, tooke Andeca, caused him to
be polled, and sent him to Badaios, to liue for euer in a cloister. He reduced Gallicia to a prouince,
and joyned it to the Gothes kingdome, the which had continued an hundred seuentie
and seuen yeares.
Hermengilde being found at Tarracone, was there slaine by Sisbert: yet the Spaniards varie
in this point,Hermengilde a Christian slaine by his fathers commandement, being an Arrian some saying, That he was shut vp in a tower at Seuille, where he lost his head,
holding him for a Saint, and that he was slaine on Easter day, by the commaundement of his
father, who was an Arrian, for that he had imbraced the Christian religion, for the which he
had rebelled, and had caused great troubles in Spaine; the which Saint Gregorie and Beda

doth witnesse: and it is likely that this prince was drawne vnto the true doctrine by Leandre
bishop of Seuille, and by his wife Iugunde a French woman, whom, they say, he, put in the
beginning of the ciuile warres, into the hands of those that gouerned the lands of the empire
in Spaine, vnder Maurice the emperour, being newly brought in bed of a sonne, fearing
the threats and furie of his father: and that after her husbands death the Romanes caused
her to passe into Africke with her little infant, where she died; but the child was carried to
Constantinople. Childebert king of France,War betwixt the the French and the Gothes, for the death of Hermengilde. to reuenge the wrong done vnto his brother in
law, tooke armes against the Gothes, and hoping to recouer his sister and his nephew, hee
made a league with the emperour Maurice. Against the French which did forrage Languedoc,
was sent Ricaire the other sonne of Leouigilde, who repulst them with great losse of their
men, entring into their territories, where he tooke a great spoile.
They speake of many myracles during the raigne of this king, which God did in fauour
and confirmation of the Christian religion,Myracles. against the Arrians and their sect, the which hee
had decreed should haue an end with this king Leouigilde. The ciuile warre being (as we haue
said) hot in Spaine, the armie of Leouigilde pursuing his sonne, and passing by the territories
of Valencia and Murcia, the Monkes of the Abbey of Saint Martin in those marches, being
terrified, abandoned their Abbot, and fled all into an island of the sea neere adjoyning. The
souldiours being entred into the Abbey, and finding the Abbot all alone, being a verie deuout
and religious man, and crooked with age, they did him many outrages: one of them hauing
drawne out his sword to cut off his head, he fell downe starke dead; the which did so
terrifie the rest, as they presently fled. This being reported vnto king Leouigilde, he commanded,
that all the goods which had beene taken in that monasterie, should be restored. An Arrian
bishop meaning to deceiue the king (who reproached him, that the Arrians did no myracles)
suborned one of his sect, who could counterfeit himselfe blind, causing him to stand in
the way whereas he knew the king should passe: there this gallant began to crie out, and to
entreat this bishop which did accompanie the king, that he would make him recouer his sightby
his prayers. The bishop approached, and laying his hands arrogantly vpon his eyes, the
king being present, and attending to see this myracle, it happened, that hee which did counterfeit
himselfe blind,Acounterfeit begger diuinely punished. lost his sight in good earnest; and withall was so full of paine in that
part, as detesting the bishop and his cousinage, hee confest openly before the king and his
traine, That the bishop had induced him to act this tragedie, and had corrupted him with
money. Many other signes are written to haue beene seene in those times, the which we will
not call into question, for that the end and vse of myracles, is to witnesse, and to giue credit to
the word of God, and his true doctrine, which was then disgraced by the Arrian princes.
Spaine was furnished with many learned and holy men, whilest that the Arrians did raigne
in Africke, and did persecute the Christians. They make mention of one Donat an Abbot, who
passed out of Africke into Spaine, with about 70 Monkes, and a goodly librarie, where he was
the founder of the monasterie Seruitane: and that they were entertained by a rich ladie called
Minicea, who then built the first monasterie at Setabis, which is Xatiua. This Donat did first
set downe certaine rules and orders for a monasticall life among them; for vntill that time
they were not tyed by any vowes, neither had they liued in cloisters, but were dispersed in
woods and desarts, leading a solitarie life, from whence he retired them. Leandre bishop of
Seuille, was then famous for his learning and holinesse, a great friend to S. Gregorie, whom he
had knowne at Constantinople: of which friendship, they say, that the image of the virgine
Marie, which is in great, yea in superstitious veneration in these dayes at Guadalupe, is a witnesse,
and that S. Gregorie sent it to Leandre.
As one kind of Antichrist should haue an end, so it was necessarie, that (to exercise the
Church of God) others should come. Wherefore during the raigne of Leouigilde, Mahumet
the great seducer was borne,Birth of Mahumet. with whose doctrine the Arabians did a while after infect
Spaine; and soone after that grew the quarell for the Primacie, betwixt the bishops of Constantinople
and Rome. And as among those which made profession of the Christian religion
there were many abuses which had beene receiued and embraced, or else dissembled by the
most learned and religious, the rashnesse of the one, and the negligence of the other, gaue
place to impietie, the which hath since preuailed in the world, vsing force with the one
hand,Anno 580. and fraud with the other. This was in the yeare 580, which the Spaniards account 618

of their Aera: yet others say, That it was in the yeare of Christ 591, that this scourge of Gods
Church was borne in Arabia, of the race of Agar and Ismael. His father was called Abdalia,
or Abedela, his mother Emina. A little before the death of Leouigilde, Amalaric the tyrant
would haue made himselfe king of Gallicia, but he was taken by the kings lieutenants in
those marches.
Leouigilde hauing raigned eighteene yeares,Repentan^^ Leouigilde* dyed at Toledo: who by the report of Saint
Gregorie, repented himselfe of the rigour and crueltie he had vsed to his sonne Hermengilde,
being desirous to reforme himselfe to the pure religion; and dying, recommended his other
sonne Ricared to Leandre, intreating him to instruct him as he had done his other sonne: and
he commaunded Ricared to call home the Christian bishops which he had banished. He was
the first king of the Gothes raigning in Spaine, which vsed a robe of purple, or other royall
ornaments: for vntill that time the kings of that nation were apparelled like vnto the other
nobles. He first of all began to heape vp treasure, and filled his cofers with spoils of temples,
confiscations, and other violences vsed to good men, whereof many were put to death
by him. He corrected the lawes made by Euric his predecessor, and reduced them into better
forme.


15. Ricared.
26 RIcared being crowned by Leandre,An. 585. as Luke Tudensis writes, hee was instructed in the
true Christian religion, the first yere of his raigne, and preuailed so with mild words
and strong reasons, as hee persuaded many of the Arrian bishops to leaue that heresie, and to
follow the better partie; and so consequently the noblemen and common people. He ordained,
That the goods which had been taken and confiscated for that cause, should be restored; and
of a destroyer he became a builder of churches. He put Sisbert the murtherer of his brother
Hermingilde ignominiously to death:Ricared of a destroyer becomes a nurse of the churches. he discouered and supprest the conspiracy of bishop Sunna,
and of Sugga, Arrians, who would haue made themselues tyrants. The bishop was banished,
and Suggas hands cut off, and then confined into Gallicia. There was another conspiracie
auerred of bishop Vldila, and of queene Gosuintha, against Ricared, and punished: Vldila was
banished, and Gosuintha died soone after: she had beene a perpetuall enemie to the Christians.
The French being come into Languedoc with a great armie of aboue threescore thousand
men, vnder a captaine called Desiderius, and then vnder Boson, being sent by Guntran
king of Orleans, Ricared sent Claude duke of Lusitania against them, who obtained one of the
greatest and most memorable victories that euer was,An admirable victorie, and scarce credible. neere vnto Carcassonne: For we read,
that with 300 men or thereabouts, he defeated all this great power of the French, and tooke
all their baggage.
The fourth yeare of his raigne he caused a Councell to be called at Toledo, which was the
third;3 Councell of Toledo, where the Gothes absured the Arrian heresie. at the which there were assembled threescore and two bishops of his realme, of either
side of the Pyrenee mountaines, or threescore and ten, according vnto some. There he did renounce
and abjure the Arrain heresie, and Badda his wife, with all the noblemen Gothes, did
the like, all confessing the equalitie of the three persons in one diuinitie. The Metropolitanes
at this Councell were: 1 Mausona of Merida. 2 Leandre of Seuille, whom Luke Tudensis cals
Primat and the Popes Legat. 3 Euphemius of Toledo. 4 Pantard of Bracara. 5 Nigith of Narbona.
6 Stephen of Tarracone.
These were the Archbishops and Metropolitanes, by the which the Arrian heresie
was condemned, with the which the noblemen Gothes had beene abused two hundred
and thirteene yeares. At this Councell did preside Leandre bishop of Seuille, and Eutropius
Abbot of the monasterie of Serui, afterwards bishop of Valence. Among other decrees it
was ordained, That no Iew should be admitted to any publike charge. The acts of this Councell
were not onely allowed by the king, but also confirmed vnder his hand. Since that time
the custome is in Spaine, that euerie one that presents himselfe vnto the Communion, is
bound to rehearse the articles of the Apostles Creed after the priest. This was in the yeare
of our Sauiour fiue hundred eightie nine,An. 589. and adding thereunto thirtie eight yeares, it makes
the 627 of the Spaniards Aera. King Ricared being thus in peace, and imploying his time about
matters of religion in Spain, he discouered domestike trecheries, which did much trouble

him: for a chamberlaine of his, of the number of his captaines, called Arg^mund, attempted
against his estate and life,Argemund a trailor punished to raigne in his place. The enterprise being proued, his partisans
were executed, and he also, after that he had beene whipped, and led vpon an asse through the
citie of Toledo, to serue for an example to all subjects, not to rebell against their princes for
ambition.
The Iewes did what they could to procure the king to abolish the decree of the Councell
made against them: and as in a maner all that nation haue euer giuen themselues to the trade
of merchandise, and are therefore full of money, they offered a great summe to haue it effected:
but the king continued constant, and they must haue patience. This holy resolution of
king Ricared and his nobilitie, was ill seconded by the Pope and the Prelats of those times,
being alreadie accustomed to make superfluous shewes, and oftentimes merchandise of externall
things, which were of small vse for pietie. The king sent royall presents to pope Gregorie
the first, who was called Holy, and an Angell vpon earth: and he requited him with reliques,
with a linke of the chaine wherewith Saint Peter had beene bound by the necke,Reliques. when he suffered
martyredome; of the wood of the verie crosse, of Saint Iohn Baptists haire, and such other
singularities, with an Archbishops cloke for Leandre bishop of Seuille. These were the
exercises of pietie, which were then too much vsed among Christians. At that time there
was another Councell held at Seuille, of eight bishops,Councell at Seuille. whereas Leandre their pastor did
preside.
In Spaine there did flourish in those times,Learned and religious bishops. besides the aboue-named bishops, Iohn abbot
of Va^claire, who was afterwards bishop of Girone, a Goth by race, but borne at Scalabis in
Lusitania, who hath written a Chronicle vnto the yeare fiue hundred and ninetie: Fulgentius
bishop of Astigi, then of Carthage, brother to Leandre, a man well seene in the Greeke,
Latine, Arabike, and Syriack tongues, and hath written many bookes: Seuerus bishop of Carthage,
Licinian of Malaca, and others. Florentine the sister of Leandre, was Prioresse of fortie
Nunnes in the towne of Astigi.
Queene Badda, who was daughter to king Arthure of great Britaine, dyed; after which Ricared
maried Clotosinde sister to king Childebert of Mets: by meanes of which mariage a peace
was concluded betwixt the Gothes and the French.
Pope Gregorie would not haue the name of Primat, yet in the meane time he did exercise
a jurisdiction in Spaine: for Ianuarius being deposed from his bishopricke of Malaca, by the
practises of some of his enemies, he sent one called Iohn to take knowledge of the cause, who
with Apostolike authoritie, restored him to his bishopricke, and punished his aduersaries. Ricared
hauing held the kingdome of the Gothes in Spaine and in Gaule fifteene yeares,The death of Ricared: and his vertues. dyed
at Toledo, much lamented of all men: for he had raigned verie mildly, so as they called him
Father of the people. He reduced the Gothike lawes into order, enlarged his dominions, hauing
beene alwayes in armes against the Romanes, and their partisans which remained in
Spaine: he was verie deuout and bountifull to the Clergie, so as hee was commended for a
verie religious prince, especially for that he had giuen vnto the church of S. Felix at Gironne,
the crowne of gold which he ware vpon his head: but, that which is of more esteeme, he purged
Spaine of all heresies.


16. Luiba 2, and Victerix 17.
27 TO Ricared succeeded his son Luiba,Anno 601. or Liuua, Maurice raigning then at Constantinople.
Some Spaniards say, That he was a bastard; others denie it, and giue him two brethren,
Suinthila and Geila. Victeric seized vpon the Gothes kingdome, and taking this yong prince,
who was but sixteene yeares old, he cut off his right hand, and in the end slew him the second
yeare of his raigne. Then dyed Leandre,Crueltie of Victeric to yong Luiba. to whom succeeded Isidore his brother at Seuille.
28 Victeric was an vnfortunate king, for in many encounters which he had with the Romanes,
and those that held their partie in Spaine, he was still beaten. Moreouer hee striued
to aduance the Arrian heresie againe, and in these miserable designes raigned seuen years. He
maried his daughter Hermenberge to Theodoric king of Mets, who could neuer know her,
wherefore he sent her back to her father a virgine vncorrupted: and they say that Brunichilde,
Theodorics grandmother, had bewitched him, and made him vnable to vse his wife, whom she

hated, Theodoric being otherwise verie licentious, and had made good proofe with other
women. We read,A discourse of Mahumet not very credible. that during the raigne of Victeric, in the yeare six hundred and fiue, Mahumet
came into Spaine, to preach his doctrine at Cordoua; and that being discouered as
they went to seize on him, he fled away so secretly, as no man knew what became of him.
But we know, that Mahumet proceeded to the publication of his doctrine after a more violent
meanes, hauing by money and persuasions corrupted the Arabian theeues, whose armes
he imployed to propagate his errours, among other nations, vnder the empire of Heraclius:
yet it is not impossible, that Mahumet, being then about fiue and twentie yeares old, seruing
a rich marchant of Arabia, whose widow he after maried, should come into Spaine for his
masters affaires, and to haue giuen some knowledge of the poyson which lay in his breast.
King Victeric (whom others call Deteric, and some Bertric) as he had put the innocent prince
Liuba miserably to death,The miserable end of the tyrant Victerie. was by a just reuenge miserably slaine by his owne people, as he sat
at the table: a base king, who did nothing aduance the kingdome of the Gothes, but in taking
the towne of Siguensa from the Romans.


18. Gundamir.
29 THe Gothes after the death of Victeric,Anno 610. created Gundamir king, who came to the
crowne about the sixt yeare of the empire of Phocas, in the yeare 610: his wife was
called Hilduare. This king at his comming made the churches sanctuaries,Liberties of Churches. forbidding to take
or force any criminall person that had fled thither: the which was done at the pursute of a
Councell then held at Toledo, of foureteene bishops, and other Clergie men, Aurasius
being bishop there: in the which the Archbishop of Toledo was declared Primat of Spaine.
All writers make not mention of this Councell, but onely (as the Spaniards say) there are
memorials found thereof at Toledo: and it is written, That the rights of this Metropolitane
were debated there, where he had his Suffraganes assigned him in all the prouince of Carpetania,
which did comprehend Carthagene: so as in this regard the Metropolitane of Toledo
had then a greater jurisdiction than at this day. Isidore of Seuille, Innocent of Merida, Eusebius
of Tarracone, and Beniamin of Dumes, among others, assisted at this Councell. Hee
had warre against the Vascons or Nauarrois, and against the Romanes or their partisans
with happie successe. He raigned two yeares, and dyed at Toledo, of his naturall death.


19. Sisebuth.
30 SIsebuth succeeded Gundamir,Anno 612. a wise and valiant prince, learned and eloquent (as the
Spaniards say.) He chased away the Iewes which would not bee baptized, wherewith
France was soone filled: but they were againe forced to flie, Dagobert the French king hauing
made an edict, by the which they were injoyned to conforme themselues to the Christian religion,
vpon paine of death. Sisebuth imployed his time to conquer the townes, castles, forts,
st^aits and passages of the mountaines, which were yet held by the Romane garrisons, and
did in a manner make himselfe master of all Spaine, Caesarius commaunding there for the
Romanes.
The zeale of religion was great in many at that time in Spaine, but most of them wanted
the true knowledge. The Church of Toledo was gouerned by Heladius, who of a Courtier
became a Monke, and from thence had beene taken and aduanced, in his age, to the Archiepiscopall
dignitie, the which was now growne full of state, but not such as it hath been since.
Agapite, or Agapie, being also turned from a souldiour to a Monke, had beene made bishop
of Corduba, not for any learning hee had, but for meere zeale. The nourishment he gaue
to his diocesans, and his religious exercises, were in the inuention and veneration of reliques
of the bodies of martyres: whereunto the world was then more addicted, than
to know the grounds of their Faith. Yet there was a Councell held at Seuille,A Councell at Seuille. of eight
bishops, against the heretikes which were called Acephali, or without a head, the which denied
the truth of the two natures, diuine and humane, in Iesus Christ, where as a certaine Syrian
bishop, a great defender of that heresie, was vanquished by the strong arguments of Isidorus

bishop of that place, and President of the Councel. In all the Ecclesiastical orders which
were made in Spaine, during the raigne of king Sisebuth, he interposed his authoritie. He forced
Cecilius bishop of Mentesa, to giue a reason, for that abandoning his bishopricke he had
made himselfe a Monke: and he deposed Eusebius bishop of Barcelona, for that he had suffered
certaine Comedians to make playes of the false Pagan gods. At the said Councell of
Seuille, it was decreed, That Nunnes should not talke to any man, except the Abbesse to the
Abbot or Monke which had the charge of their monasterie, and that before one or two witnesses.
Mahumets sect began then to spread in Africke,Anno 620. which was in the yere six hundred and
twentie of our Sauiour, and the six hundreth fiftie and eight of the Spaniards Aera; the which
did run wonderfully throughout all Asia, and part of Europe, in a short time: whilest that
the Pastors of the Church of Christ did busie themselues to adorne their exterior Hierarchie,
and to conuert it into a mundane Principalitie; and that the summe of the doctrine of the
Gospell was reduced by them to build churches and chappels, and to heape vp rents and re^enewes,
to seeke out and oftentimes to suppose the dead bodies of Saints, and that which
had belonged vnto them in this corporall life, to reuerence them after an extraordinarie maner,
with other such like traditions; which approached neere to impietie, couering all with a
cloake of well meaning. We read in the acts of Sisebuth,Lawes of king Sisebuth. That he made a law, by the which
he cursed all his successours kings, which should suffer any Christian to be held as a slaue, or
to serue a Iew. There is another law of his found, which ordaines, That those which should
not go to the warre when the armie should march, or should flie from the enemie, should bee
for euer noted with infamie. This last hath beene since corrected, as too seuere. He was happie
in warre, subdued them of Asturia, who had rebelled, and triumphed twice for the victories
he obtained against the Romanes: To conclude, he was so mild and courteous, euen vnto
his enemies,His mildnesse and christian bountie. as being prisoners he paid their ransoms to his owne men, and sent them home
free; so as he exhausted his treasure in the redeeming of prisoners. Hee built the church of
Saint Leocadia at Toledo, and hauing raigned eight yeares, he died, leauing Ricared his sonne,
successour in the realme; but verie young, and of a short life, whom they doe not put in the
number of the kings of Spaine. Some write, that he liued but three moneths after him, others
seuen.


20. Suintilla.
31 THe Gothes did chuse Suintilla for their king,Anno 621. being sonne to the first Ricared. This was
the first king of the Gothes, which obtained the absolute monarchie of Spaine, and
wholly dispossessed the Romanes. By that which hath beene said they conclude,Monarchie of the Gothes in Spaine. That among
the Gothes they did not raigne by right of succession from father to sonne; but those were
chosen kings among them, which were held worthie to gouerne: which election was made
by the nobilitie and the people:Royaltie of the Gothes electiue. and if any one did affect that dignitie by any other vnlawfull
meanes, he was excommunicated, and rejected from the companie of Christians, as it appeareth
by the fift Councell of Toledo. The Vascons inhabiting the countrey which is now called
Nauarre, were entred into Arragon, whom he supprest, and forced them to build at their
owne charges, the towne called Olit, or Oligil, neere to Tafalla (which hath since beene the
kings houses in Nauarre) to keepe them in awe. We find that the towne of Fo^tarabie was
the worke of this king Suintilla, called properly Ondarriuia, which signifies in the Basques language,
sand of the riuer. He admitted his sonne Ricamire to a part of the gouernment. In the
beginning hee was a good prince, but in the end hee grew exceeding couetous and cruell:
wherefore the Gothes made him to resigne his kingdome, the which Sisenand his aduersarie
obtained,Suintilla deposed for his vices. with the consent of the people, and with the helpe of king Dagobert of France, who
sent Abondant and Venerand, two of his captaines, into Spaine, with forces which they had leuied
of the nobilitie of Bourgogne. Suintilla was not onely depriued of the crowne, but also
excommunicated by the bishops (whose power at that time began to equall that of kings)
at the fourth Councell of Toledo,The power of bishops ballancing that of kings. where they did interdict him, Geilan his brother, with their
wiues and children, the communion and fellowship of the Church, and the possession of their
goods, gotten by violent and tyranous meanes. Suintilla raigned ten yeares.



21. Sisenand.
32 SIsenand being seated in the royall throne,Ann* 635. by the aid of the French, the fourth Councell
of Toledo was celebrated,4 Councell at Toledo. of sixtie bishops, or sixtie seuen, according vnto some, and
as others say, by seuentie: whither among the rest came Isidorus of Seuille, Iustus of Toledo,
who did preside, Iulian of Bracar, Stephen of Merida, A^dax of Tarracone, Silua of Narbona,
all Archbishops. In this Councell it was decreed, That from thenceforth the Iews should
not be forced to make themselues Christians: for the spirit by the which the doctrine is apprehended,
is not to be forced, but persuaded. The Iewes were in the meane time debarred
of all publique charges, least they should thereby doe injurie vnto the Christians. Clergie
men were exempt from all politike care, that they might with more liberty attend that which
did belong vnto their spirituall charge; and as Baleus writes, who hath taken it out of Isidorus,
lawfull mariage was restored vnto the Clergie, and the vse of concubines forbidden: And it
was decreed, That no priest should be admitted, before he were thirtie yeares old. Yet were
these good and wholesome constitutions, mingled with externall ceremonies, which were in
great credit in those dayes. Some good men had then care of the Church, but there were others
which were violent and ill instructed. They say, that Iustus Archbishop of Toledo was
strangled in his bed, by some of his owne Clergie: he was a man without modestie, and so violent
in his actions, as before his death his sences failed him. King Sisenand died nineteene
dayes after the Archbishop Iustus, hauing raigned about six yeares. The Gothes lawes and
ordinance in Spaine, were also reformed in this kings time, with the authoritie of the Councell
aboue mentioned, in the which was receiued the razing of Clergie mens haire in manner
of a crowne.


22. Cinthilla.
33 CInthilla raigned after Sisenand;Ann. 637. in the first yeare of whose raigne the fift Councell was
held at Toledo,5 Councell of Toledo. Eugenius the Archbishop of that place presiding, where there assembled
24 bishops, among the which the vertue and doctrine of Braule bishop of Sarragosse
was famous. Eugenius was also learned, especially in Astrologie. The same yeare Isidorus
Archbishop of Seuille died, of whom the Spaniards make great esteeme, for his sanctitie and
learning, and for the number of bookes which he hath written. The yere following there was
another Councell held at Toledo, whither came 44 bishops,6 Councell of Toledo. and six suffraganes, or vicars, being,
in all as some write, 52; where Eugenius did also preside. There was a perpetual law imposed
vpon the kings of Spaine,A violent decree of the sixt Councell of Toledo. not to suffer any one to liue within their dominions, that was
not a Catholike, the which their kings should solemnely sweare before they were crowned:
and if any king should goe against that law which he had thus sworne, he should be excommunicate
and accursed. Thus did those reuerend Fathers labour to draw the sick and languishing
to their saluation, after the example of our Sauiour Iesus Christ and his Apostles. Cinthilla
dyed the fourth yeare of his raigne.


23. Tulca.
34 AFter him Tulca was chosen king,Anno 641. endowed with all the vertues requisit for a prince, but
he died the second yeare of his raigne, as the Spaniards write: but Sigebert saith, that
the Visigothes did reject him, for his lightnesse and youth; and that hee was made a Clergie
man.


24. Cindasiunthe and his sonne.
35 CIndasiunthe tooke the place of Tulca, and raigned six yeares alone ouer the Gothes,Anno 742.
and foure yeares and seuen moneths with his sonne Flauius Reccesiunthe. The bishops
of Rome were now inthronized in their Primat, and began to force obedience throughout all

Christendome,Popes Pri^^^^ no lesse from princes and kings, than from their fellow bishops: wherefore
to settle the Primat in Spaine, they were forced to haue a Bull and permission from Pope
Theodore the first, or Martin the first, then raigning; by the which this primacie was referred
to the election of the bishops of that prouince. Vntill that time the Archbishop of Seuille
had held this ranke, rather of honour than of power: but it falling out, that Theodisque the
Archbishop, a Grecian borne, a man more learned in the tongues, than religous, seeing himselfe
pursued by the other bishops and prelats of Spaine, being accused to haue corrupted
the workes of Isidorus, who was held a Saint, and therefore deposed from his Archbishopricke
in open Councell, he was so transported, as hauing abandoned the Christian religion,
he retired himselfe into Africke with the Mahumetists, the Primacie of Spaine was
then transferred from Seuille to Toledo,Seuille yields the Primacie to Toledo. whereas the seuenth Synode was celebrated, by
fortie bishops, the fift yeare of the raigne of Cindasiunthe, when as he receiued his sonne for
a companion and assistant in the gouernment of his estate,7 Councell at Toledo. seeking thereby to make the kingdome
of the Gothes hereditarie. This young prince was held verie deuout and studious of
diuinitie; but aboue all things he was curious to build and inrich churches. During their
raigne there liued another Eugenius, successour to the Archbishop of Toledo, aboue mentioned,
famous for his sanctitie of life and doctrine, aduanced by force by the king to the
Archbishopricke.
King Cindasiunthe dyed of poyson, as some beleeue, hauing raigned ten yeares, or thereabouts:
he and his wife are interred in the monasterie of S. Romane, at this day called Hormisga,
betwixt Toro and Tordesillas, vpon the riuer of Duero.


25. Reccesiunthe.
36 REccesiunthe his sonne,Ann. 652. raigned alone, and soone after his fathers decease there was a
Councell held at Toledo of eight and fortie bishops, and ten vicars, of such as had
lawfull lets and could not come;8 Councell of Toledo. there were some abbots, and many earles and dukes did assist
there. In those times, earles were of greater dignitie than dukes. In this Councell, being
the eight, it was decreed, That they should abstaine from eating flesh in Lent, without
leaue, in cases of ineuitable necessitie, vpon paine of excommunication, and not to eat any
flesh in a yeare after: so much they did regard these accessaries of religion, confirming and
amplifying in the meane time their authoritie with the people.
In Lusitania certaine lewd and cruell persons sought to rauish a virgine called Irene,Irene a chast virgine. against
whom she made such resistance, as being impatient in their damnable lust, they slew
her, and cast her into the riuer of Nabanin. Her bodie was carried to the towne of Salabis,
the which changed the name, and is called Saint Irene; an argument of great sanctitie,
seeing she preferred her chastitie before her life. The chiefe of these lustfull murtherers was
called Britaud.
Portamius Archbishop of Bracar,Decree of the 9 Councell of Toledo. was not so vertuous: for the celibate of Clergie men
being then in request, and the children begotten by them declared incapable to inherit their
fathers goods, and were deliuered for slaues to churches, by the ninth Councell held at
Toledo, in the seuenth yeare of Reccesiunthe, he fell to be loose of life: yet hee did acknowledge
it openly in the Councell following, held at Toledo, which was the tenth, and did
willingly resigne his Archbishopricke; to whom Fructuosus succeeded, a man of a noble familie,
being then bishop of Dume, the founder of many monasteries and chappels. The
eight yeare of the raigne of Reccesiunthe Spaine was much terrified, for that there appeared
starres in the firmament at noone day, and the Sunne was ecclipsed.
There came two heretikes,Heretikes HeluidianS. called Theude and Pelagius, out of Gothike Gaule into Spaine,
who denied the perpetuall virginitie of Marie the mother of our Sauiour; renewing the
heresie of Heluidius: the which were confuted by Alphonsus, nephew and successour to Eugenius
in the Archbishopricke of Toledo, who wrot a booke vpon that argument. Whereupon
the Spaniards say, that the virgine Marie appeared vnto him: and to this apparition
they adde the gift of a cope, to weare when he should say Masse, the which they affirme is
kept at Toledo, or at Ouiedo; but they know not well at which of these two places it remaines:

for being not lawfull for any one to vse it after the death of Alphonsus,Apparitions and r^ueiations beleeued by the Spaniards. it hath remained
inuisible. To this Archbishop, they say, that Saint Leocadia did also appeare, who reuealed
vnto him the place where his bodie was buried, and had lyen many yeares hidden.
Such graue testimonies haue they of the holinesse of this Archbishop Alphonsus, surnaming
him Chrysostome, the Anchor of the Faith, attributing vnto him other like epithites, by reason
of his learning and pietie.
There is no other thing found written of this king Reccesiunthe, being credible, that hauing
no warres, he did not much trouble himselfe, leauing all the affaires of state and Clergie
to bee managed by the Prelats and frequent Councels: yet there are some lawes found
made by him. Hauing raigned nineteene yeares and three moneths, he dyed at Toledo, leauing
two brethren, Theofred, who was father to Roderic, the last king of the Gothes in Spaine
and Iafila. He was interred in the towne which in old time was called Gertic, and now Bamba,
in the territorie of Palenza.


26. Bamba.
37 THe same day that Reccesiunthe dyed,Anno 673. Bamba before desired by the noblemen Gothes,
was chosen king. Some say, that he would neuer haue receiued this honour and
charge but by constraint; and that refusing it absolutely, there was a nobleman among the
Gothes,Bamba made king against his will: a rare example. which drew his sword, and threatened to kill him, if he did not yeeld to the Gothes
intreaties: whereupon he condescended, more for feare, than for any desire to raigne, and
was crowned by Quirin, or Quirice, Archbishop of Toledo, in our Ladies church; where
they report, that there was seene comming out of his head, from among his haire, a vapour
like smoke, in forme of a pillar, going vpward. There he made a confession of the Catholique
Faith, confirmed the ciuile lawes and ordinances of the kings his predecessours, and receiued
a solemne oath from the people. These ceremonies were scarce ended, when as they
had newes,Hilderic earle or Gouernour of Norbons. That the earle of Nismes, called Hilperic, or Hilderic, contemning the ordinances
of the precedent kings of the Gothes, had brought the Iewes againe into the countrey, and
made all Gothike Gaule in a manner to rebell against the king. And for that Arege bishop of
Nismes had contradicted him in this excesse, he had chased him away, and against the canons
had consecrated another by two bishops of his faction. Gumild bishop of Maguelone did
counsell and assist him in these actions. Wherefore Bamba to suppresse the insolencie of this
earle, sent a captaine named Paul, allyed to the deceased king, but faithlesse and treacherous
to his prince; who turned the armie which had beene giuen him, against him, and made an
agreement with the enemie,Distolaltie of Paul, Bambas captains. causing himselfe to be crowned king at Narbone, where he set
vpon his head the crowne which king Ricared had giuen to Saint Felix church at Girone.
Hee drew vnto his partie Rasmonde duke of Tarracone, and Hildigise, who was Gardingue
(which was an office of the Crowne) and vsed all the treacheries hee could deuise against
king Bamba. He spoyled all the churches of Languedoc, and fortified himselfe with men
which hee had leuied in Fraunce and Gascoine. But as such attempts doe seldome prosper,
so this succeeded ill with him: for Bamba hauing raised great forces in Spaine, came against
him, and in lesse than six monethes did happily end a most difficult warre: He tooke Barcelone,
Girone, and Narbone, the which he besieged both by sea and land; then Magdelone,
Agde,Defeat of the rebels. Beziers, and in the end Nismes, whereas the chiefe of this rebellion with the
rest of his faction fell into his hands, the same day twelue monethes that hee came vnto
the Crowne. Hee repaired the ruines which had beene made at Nismes, and throughout
all Gothike Gaule, and caused restitution to be made of that which had beene taken
out of the churches. At the intreatie of Argebaud Archbishop of Narbone, he gaue the
offendors their liues, reseruing to himselfe all other punishment. He repulsed Loup a Commaunder
of certaine French bands, neere vnto Beziers. These things being happily performed
by him,Punishment of the rebels. he returned to Toledo, triumphing, and carrying his rebels in pompe before
him, hauing their beards and heads shauen, bare legged, attired in sackcloth, and mounted
vpon Cammels. Among others Paul the chiefe of the rebels, carrying a crowne of pitched

leather, followed by a long traine of his confederats, was led in shew, and exposed to be scorned
of all men, and in the end they were all put into darke filthie dungeons, where they miserably
ended their dayes.
These troubles being pacified, king Bamba caused the walles of Toledo to bee built, and
fortified them with towers and bulwarkes, in one of the which were written these Latine
verses.
Erexit fautore Deo Rexinclytus vrbem,Bamba, suae celebrem protendens gentis honorem.
And vpon a port neere vnto the bridge called Alcantara:
Vos Domini sancti, quorum hic praesentia fulget,Hanc vrbem, and plebem solito seruate fauore.
He caused the eleuenth Councell of Toledo to be held,11 Councell of Toledo. vnder Quirice, or Quirin, Archbishop
of that place, and Primat of Spaine; where there were sixteene bishops present, and
many deputies for others that were absent. They had beene many yeares without calling of
any Councell, wherewith the Fathers had beene much troubled, this was in the yeare 675:
there king Bamba hauing caused the acts of the kings his predecessours to be sought out, according
to that which they had decreed, and with the consent of the Fathers, he assigned to
euerie diocesse the bounds of his jurisdiction. The bishopricks of Lugo and Leon were declared
exempt, and not subject to any Metropolitane, as they had beene vntill that time. Another
Councell was held at Bracar: these were prouinciall Councels, which were to be
held euerie yeare;Prouinciall Councels annual and at certaine times they were to call a generall Councell of all the bishops
of the Gothes kingdome, of either side of the Pyrenee mountaines, the which was
done at Toledo the chiefe towne.
In this kings raigne the Arabians holding Africke, began to inuade Spaine: they had a
fleet at sea of two hundred threescore and ten vessels,Arabians first attempt vpon Spaine. the which by the diligence and valour
of Bamba were in a manner all burnt, and the Arabians put to the sword. They did then spoile
a great part of the countrey along the coast. There was in the Court a nobleman called Eruinge,
issued from a daughter of king Cindausinthe, and a gentleman of Greece, called Ardauaste,
who being chased from Constantinople, had fled into Spaine, where he had been well
entertained, and honoured with this allyance. This Eruinge being ambitious of commaund,
poisoned king Bamba,Bamba poysoned by Eruinge. so as he became madde; for the curing whereof there were many remedies
applied, both naturall and superstitious, but to small effect: so as Bamba (either willingly,
finding himselfe vnable, or otherwise) quit the crowne, and retyred himselfe into a
monasterie, where he liued seuen yeares and one moneth, after that he had beene king nine
yeares. The place where he passed the remainder of his life, is called Pampliga, neere Burgos.
Thus Eruinge seized by force, as they say, of the kingdome of the Visigothes in Spaine,
the which the Archbishop of Toledo doth affirme: yet it doth not accord well with the acts
of the twelfth Councell held at Toledo, vnder Eruinge, where the election of this king Eruinge
is confirmed, and allowed as lawfull. But to reconcile these contrarieties, it is to bee
presumed, that Eruinge being king, and hauing power in his hands, gratifying the Fathers in
some sort, that he was also gratified by them, as one hand washeth another, or, as they say in
France, one Barber shaues another.


27. Eruinge.
39 WHen as Eruinge was seated in the royall throne,Anno 681. hee confirmed the lawes of the
kings of the Gothes his predecessours, and did authorize with his name, some
made by Saint Isidorus: and that to the end it should not seeme, that the Clergie vnder the
title of the Church, would vsurpe a ciuile jurisdiction; he rejected many of the plebeians
from all dignities and honours, hauing gotten them by money, and other vnlawfull meanes,

to the dishonour of nobilitie: he ordained (but with the aduice of the Romane See) That
no Archbishop should be subject to the Primats. To fortifie the beginning of his reigne against
Theofrede the sonne of Bamba (whom he feared much) he gaue Cixilone his daughter,
whom he had by Luibigotte his wife, to an Earle who was rich, and of great authoritie among
the Gothes called Egica,12 Councell of Toledo. cousin to Bamba deceased. And soone after the twelfth Councell
was held at Toledo, which was in the yeare 681, Iulian Archbishop of Seuille being President,
where there assisted one and fortie Bishops,An. 681. fiue Abbots, and fifteene great Noblemen.
By the acts of this Councell in the seuenth Article it appeares,Nomination of Bishops belonged to the kings of Spaine. That the kings of Spaine had
power to giue Bishoprickes, and that to that collation, the confirmation of the other Bishops
of Spaine was required, especially of the Archbishop of Toledo; the which doth also appeare
by the answere of an Epistle written by Braule Bishop of Sarragosse, to S. Isidorus, where
he is admonished to chuse some good man in the place of Eusebius, Archbishop of Tarracone
deceased: Isidorus answeres him, That he did not know the kings pleasure therein. This
Councell did abolish certaine Bishops newly erected, and created by king Bamba, in some
townes which were not very conuenient.
Three yeares after,13 Councell of Toledo. in the yeare 684, was another Councell held at Toledo, which was the
thirteenth, of eight and fortie Bishops, and three Archbishops, of Toledo, Bracar, and Merida;
yet the Authors varie in the number of these Bishops:An. 684. one of the decrees of these fathers
was,Decree not to marrie the kings widow. That neither the king nor any other should marrie the widow of the deceased king, nor
defile her by adulterie, vpon paine of excommunication, and to be damned to hell fire. And
in the yeare 685 the foureteenth Councell was assembled at Toledo, of sixteene Bishops, and
many Vicars of them that were absent,14 Councell of Toledo. to confirme the acts of the sixt Councell of Constantinople,
begun vnder Constantine the fourth, and some yeares after ended, against the errors of
Apollinaris, renewed then, denying the two natures, diuine and humane in Iesus Christ: which
acts the Pope sent into Spaine, that in a generall assembly of the Prelats they might be read,
and by their authoritie allowed, and published throughout all the kingdome of the Gothes.
The Archbishop of Toledo was then called Iulian Pomer, of the Iewes race, whose father and
mother had made themselues Christians; a learned man, religious, and of a good life. Eruinge
hauing reigned seuen yeares, died at Toledo of a naturall death, leauing his kingdome to Egica
his sonne in law. In his time there was a great famine in Spaine.


28. Egica.
40 AS soone as Egica,An. 688. or (as others call him) Egican was king, he put away his wife Cixilone,
for the wickednesse which her father had committed against king Bamba; yet he
did auow the infant Vitisa which he had had by her, and caused it to be nourished (in hope to
make it his heire) in the towne of Tude or Tuy in Gallicia, as if he had giuen it the realme of
Gallicia, and of the Sueues, for a portion, whilest that he reigned ouer the Gothes. He caused
himselfe to be absolued at a Councell held at Toledo,15 Councell of Toledo. in the first yeare of his reigne, of the
oath which he had taken against his dutie to that vnlawfull king. This Councell was called
the fifteenth at Toledo, whereas Iulian the Archbishop of that place did preside, where there
were sixtie one Bishops, or sixtie six, according vnto some. There Iulian did maintaine by
reasons and good authoritie, what he had written in a confession of the Faith sent to Rome, as
well in his name, as of all the Bishops of Spaine; which was, That in our Lord Iesus Christ
were the word, the bodie, and the soule;Pope Benedict an hereticke. the which had beene rejected by Pope Benedict the
second, who (as it seemes) did not well vnderstand these things: the Article was allowed by
the Councell of Toledo, and afterwards being well considered, was receiued at Rome. The
acts of this Councell were published in Gothique Gaule in the Cathedrall Churches, for
that the Bishops of that Prouince could not come to Toledo by reason of the plague; being
enjoyned to receiue them vpon paine of excommunication, and the losse of the tenth part of
their goods that should oppugne them.16 Councell of Toledo. Six yeares after there was the sixteenth Councell
held at Toledo, Sigebert being Archbishop of that place, after the death of Iulian, and was deposed
by this Councell for his ill deseruing, and in his place was set Felix Archbishop of Seuille.
Faustin Archbishop of Bracar was aduanced to Seuille, and Felix Bishop of Portogallo

to Bracar: this alteration being made, they did proceed to the acts. The cause why they
deposed Sigebert, was, for that he had attempted to depriue king Egica of the realme, for the
which hee was degraded, banished, his goods confiscated, and excommunicated; so as hee
might not receiue the Sacraments but at the houre of his death: yea, a penaltie was inflicted
vpon all clergie men, of what degree soeuer they were, that should attempt against their
prince.
The yeare following,17 Councell of Toledo. which was 694, the seuenteenth Councell was held at Toledo,
whereas the king with great humilitie demaunded many things of the Fathers: among other,
there was a decree made against the Iewes,An. 694. who being accused not onely to haue reuolted
from the Christian religion (in the which they had beene once baptized) but also to haue
conspired against the King and the State of Spaine, it was said, That their goods should be
confiscated,A decree against the Iewes. their persons, wiues and children, and their descendants held for slaues, and dispersed
throughout Spaine: That those which had them in seruice, should not suffer them
to exercise their Iewish ceremonies: That their children being once seuen yeres old, should
be sent away from their parents, and giuen to Christians to bring vp, and then married to
Christians, and by all meanes drawne from the conuersation and acquaintance of their parents,
and men of their sect: this is to be seene in the eight article.
These last Councels were generall assemblies of the nation,What the Councels of these times were. whereas the Clergie held
the first place, the which in name and shew were made to determine of matters concerning
religion, but in effect they treated of matters of State, whereas controuersies betwixt
great men and other politicke matters were there decided: and although there were men of
all estates, yea and of the noblest houses, and that there was an order, that regular men should
take knowledge of regular causes, and secular causes should be decided by the secular men,
yet it is easie to judge, that the soueraigne and last decision depended vpon the authoritie of
the Fathers in all things: so as the spiritualtie in the confusion of these two powers did often
vanish among worldly affaires, and ciuile policie vsurped by clergie men, became tyrannie, as
we shall soone see.
Egica growne old,Fafila Gouernor of Biscaye. had setled his sonne Vitiza as Viceroy in Gallicia, holding his seat at
Tuy, then Tude, whither a little before he had confined Fafila, duke or gouernour of Biscaye,
sonne to king Cindasiunthe, as some hold, for certaine attempts made against him, whose
wife was corrupted by Vitiza, who afterwards by her instigation slew Fafila, that they might
enjoy their loues more freely. This excesse happened in a towne which was then called
Douzemains, and now Palatio, neere vnto the riuer Vrbicum. This Fafila was father to king
Pelagius, who restored Spaine, being oppressed and ruined by the Moores. Egica hauing
reigned about thirteene yeares, died at Toledo, being honoured for a wise and temperate
king.


29. Vitiza.
41 THe dishonour and infamie of the kings of the Gothes was in the person of this Vitiza,Ann. 701.
being full of all excesse in his lust, without feare or reuerence of God in his actions,
an hipocrite and dissembler: for at his first comming he shewed himselfe mild, liberall,
and religious, but soone after he turned to his owne nature. He called a Councell of
Bishops and Noblemen at Toledo,18 Councell of Toledo. to consult touching the gouernment of his realme: he
caused Theofreds eyes to be pulled out, who had beene confined to Cordoua, least that
hee who was beloued of the people, and brother to Reccesiunthe, should aspire vnto the
Crowne. Hee intended to doe the like to Pelagius, the sonne of Fafila, whom hee had
slaine, but hee escaped, and fled into Biscaye, being reserued for greater matters. Hee
committed manie villanies the first two yeares, yet secretly, but afterwards he exceeded
in all vices, without any shame: he filled his palace with many wiues which he had married,
and an infinite number of concubines, the which he would haue publickely allowed
vnto all men,The imp^re and lend life of Vitiza. and did persuade the Noblemen to follow his example. Hee did likewise
disannull the Popes Constitutions for a single life, and by an Edict which he caused
to be set foorth, suffered Clergie men to marrie, and to haue as many women married or

vnmarried as they pleased, vsing all the inticements he could to infect them with his licentiousnesse,
least they should oppose themselues against him, and by their censures draw the
people from obeying of so filthie and vnchast a king. And to preuent all rebellions, this
man blinded with his lustfull pleasures, caused (vnder the colour of peace, which Spaine
did then enjoy) all the townes of his realme to be demanteled,Towns of Spain demanteled, and the people disarmed by Vitiza. except Leon, Toledo, and
Asturica. Besides hee disarmed the people, and depriued Sinderede Archbishop of Toledo
(were it justly or vnjustly) of his dignitie, giuing it to his brother Opas, who was Archbishop
of Seuille: hee disannulled all the immunities and priuiledges of Churches, called backe
the Iewes, and restored the banished men to their goods and possessions, giuing them more
priuiledges than euer they had before. Finally, as a presage of the future miseries, he shewed
(in all sorts of excesse and violence contrarie to the lawes of God and men) what princes,
ill instructed and ignorant of true pietie, could doe. In the meane time blind Theofred,
confined to Cordoua, being newly married to Recilone, a ladie of the bloud royall of
the Gothes, had begotten two sonnes of her, Roderic and Costa, to whom Vitiza would
haue done as much as hee had done to the father; but they escaped, and implored the Romanes
aid, as the Archbishop Rodrigo doth report, or else of the nobilitie of the Gothes,
who in remembrance of Reccesiunthe gaue them aid, to chase this infamous monster out of
the royall throne, which he did vnworthily hold. Being come to battaile, Vitiza was defeated
and taken,Vitiza taken and his eyes put out by Roderic and Costa, sons to Theofred. and according to the president which he had giuen, his owne eyes were put
out, and he confined to Cordoua, without title or honour, where he spent the rest of his life
in miserie, hauing reigned tenne yeares. Thus Roderic obtained the crowne by the fauour of
the Romanes and the suffrages of the people.


30. Roderic last King of the Gothes.
42 THe time was now come when as the kingdome of the Gothes in Spaine must haue
an end,Ann. 711. being come to the height of their iniquities: for in their Commonweale all
things, both holy and prophane, were managed with fraud and violence, and their princes affected
confusion, to satisfie their ambition and infamous lusts: wherefore it pleased God to
confound them in their imaginations, to blind them that would be blind, to root out the incorrigible,
and to take his graces from them that did obstinately contemne him.Roderic more vitious than Vitiza. Roderic hauing
beene an instrument to punish a tyrant, made no vse of this correction, nor acknowledged
the fauour from whence it came, but presently after his comming to the crowne he
followed Vitizaes steps, yea, he exceeded him in all vices. He shewed himselfe cruell and
inhumane to Sisebut and Elba, the children of Vitiza, whom he pursued with all the indignities
that might be, and forced them to flie into Africke, depriued of all their goods, where
they were entertained by Recila, Earle and Gouernour of Tanger or Tingis. Hee addressed
himselfe to the daughter of Iulian, Earle or Gouernour of Ceuta, called Caba or Caus, the
which was bred vp in the Court, as other virgines of noble families, according to the custome,
and rauished her, whilest that her father was in embassage in Africke, for the affaires
of the kingdome.Palardie the cause of the (...) of the Gothe^ kingdome. The place where he committed this rape is called Pancoruo, betwixt Victoria
and Burgos. This was the occasion which made the Moores to inuade Spaine. Some
authors write, That Caba or Caua was wife and not daughter to Count Iulian; yet wee find,
that his wife was called Faldrina, and that shee was sister to king Vitiza. The Earle did wickedly
reuenge this priuat injurie by the ruine of the whole kingdome:A priuat iniurie furiously pursued with the ruine of the publicke. for returning into
Africke, whither he led Caua, causing her to embarke at Malaga, of whom the port of the
said towne is yet named, he went to Musa Abenzair, Gouernour for the Emperour of the Arabians,
whose name was Vlit, and promised to make him Lord of all Spaine, if hee would
giue him men and meanes to make warre there. Musa hauing aduertised Vlit, he aduised
him not to giue too much credit vnto the Earle, before he had tried him: Wherefore at
that time they gaue him a hundred horse and foure hundred foot, with promise of greater
forces.
This man transported with the dishonour done vnto his house,Count Iulian brings the Moores into Spaine. led these Moores into
Spaine,Anno 713. and hauing joyned with some of the countrey, whom he had corrupted, he spoyled

all the coast along the Ocean, which now is Andalusia and Portugall, and then led them
backe into Africke, laden with spoyles for a testimonie of his actions. This first descent of the
Moores was in the yeare 713. The Arabians hauing made this triall of Count Iulians affection,
the Gouernour Musa gaue him twelue thousand Moores, vnder the conduct of Tarif Aben
Zarca; which Tarif (according vnto some) had beene in the first passage of the Moores into
Spaine. Passing the strait, he landed his men at the foot of the mountaine Calpe: by reason
whereof this place changed his name,Gibaltar so called of Tarif, a captaine of the Moores. and was in the Arabian tongue called Gebel Tarif,
that is to say, the mount of Tarif. And the next towne taken by that captaine, which was either
the auncient Carteia, or Mellaria, was called Tariffe. This armie being secretly fauoured
by Sisibut and Eba, the sonnes of Vitiza, aided and fortified by Ricila Gouernor of Tanger,
and other noblemen Gothes, to whom the present estate was displeasing, being friends and
affected, and it may be alike interessed with Count Iulian, ouerran and spoyled all Andalusia,
and a part of Lusitania, entring into Seuille, and many other places which had beene demanteled,
by the foolish aduice of king Vitiza. In these combustions, Roderic his successour both
in his vices and kingdome, was so vnprouided, as his enemies had meanes to doe what they
would, without resistance. In the end hauing assembled some troupes in hast, he sent them
against the Moores, vnder the commaund of a kinsman of his, called by some Inigo, by others
Sanche. But the Gothes hauing in a manner forgotten to manage armes, by reason of
the long peace which they had enjoyed,Goth^ defeated. An Estate without armes in (...) and defectiue. could not withstand the Moores force, hauing been
for many yeares in continuall warre, so as they were defeated, which made Count Iulian
to grow proud and insolent, and his enterprises to bee more fauoured: so as vpon the
newes of this victorie in Africke, an infinit number of Arabians, Moores or Sarasins, and other
Africanes, passed into Spaine, as to the assured spoyle of one of the richest regions in
the world.
Roderic seeing this fire to encrease daily, hauing called all the Nobilitie together, and raysed
an armie, he marched against his enemies, hauing not all his forces yet joyned (for they
of Biscaye and of the Asturies, and in a manner all those on this side the riuer of Ebro, were
not yet arriued) finding the Arabians vpon the riuer of Guadalette, neere to Assidone, which
either is Xeres or Medina Sidonia at this day; whereas the two armies standing in view one
of another, for the space of eight dayes, they had many bloudie skirmishes, without any
great aduantage: but in the end they came to a battaile betwixt Medina Sidonia and Xeres,
vpon a Sunday in September,Anno 714. in the yeare 714, whereas king Roderic was a spectator of his
souldiours deuoires, being mounted vpon a great horse which they called Orelia, in a royall
mantle, and a crowne vpon his head, with other rich ornaments, after the manner of the
kings of the Gothes in those times, which made his souldiors the more courageous, and was
the cause of a great slaughter that day of Sarasins or Arabians: but the multitude of the enemies
one supporting another, and the tyred being still relieued with fresh supplies, in the end
made the Gothes and Spaniards to quit the field:The total defeat of the Gothes. and it is written, That the sonnes of Vitiza,
called home by Roderic, and to whom indiscreetly he had giuen the commaund of two points
of his armie, reuolted during the fight; whereupon all his men were cut in pieces, and all
Spaine was thereby lost in few dayes, except the Asturies, Biscaye, and some part of the Pyrenees,
whither the remainders of the Nobilitie and people fled, which refused to liue vnder
the Arabians gouernment. King Roderic was neuer seene more; his horse and spoyles were
onely found in a bogge: yet in the towne of Viseo in Portugall there is at this day this
inscription to be seene in Latine.
Hic iacet Rodericus,An Epitaph vpon K. Roderic. vltimus Rex Gottorum: maledictus furor impius Iuliani, quia pertinax and
indignatio, quia dura, Vcsanus furia, animosus furore, oblitus fidelitatis, Immemor religionis,
contemptor Diuinitatis, crudelis in se, Homicida in Dominum, Hostis in Domesticos, Vastator
in Patriam, Reus in omnes: Memoria eius in omni ore amarescet, and nomen eius in aeternum
putrescet.
In this king ended the Gothes kingdome in Spaine, the which had continued (if wee
account as the Spaniards doe,The continuance of the Gothes reigne. according vnto Isidorus, from Athanaric, who reigned in
the yeare 370 in Mysia and Thrace) 344 yeares: but for that hee had no entrance into

Spaine, but onely Ataulphe, who reigned in the yeare 413, and was the first Gothish king
which entred there about the yeare 417, the Gothes reigne in Spaine had continued but 297
yeares.
After this defeat there was no order nor gouernment among the Gothes, euery man followed
what partie did best please him. Some retyred into the mountaines of Asturia and
Biscaye, and into Nauarre; others went into Gaule: many passed into Italie, Germanie, and
England, begging aid from those princes (but in vaine) to restore the ruined estate of Spaine,
and elsewhere as God directed them. Sindered Archbishop of Toledo (who had been deposed
by the violence of Vitiza) attended not the end of the warre, but leauing his flocke, fled
into Italie. Oppa who had succeeded him, tooke part with the Moores, and negotiating for
them, lost himselfe in Asturia; in whose place the afflicted Christians did chuse one Vrbain, a
religious man.Traitors frustrate of their hopes. The traitors which had drawne in the Moores to reuenge their priuat injuries,
were all disappointed of the promises which had beene made them, and did perish miserably
in diuers seasons, and after diuers manners: especially Iulian, after that he had seene his
wife stoned by the Moores (who allowed the treason,The miserable end of ^ount Iulian, (...) wife and chi^dren. but hated the traitors) his sonne cast
from the top of a tower in the towne of Ceuta, himselfe miserable, being despoyled of all
his goods, died in a prison in Arragon, in the territorie of Huesca, as some write. The name
of the Gothes from that time was in a manner rooted out from the face of the earth: for
since there is no memorie of any Estate, Policie, or Gouernment of this nation vnder this
name, the which in former times was so great and famous, as well in the East as West, since
the first remembrance of any people. The losse of one battaile did blemish all the beautie of
their posteritie, who had vanquished and slaine that great Cyrus king of Persia, and of all Asia:
who had made head against the armies of Alexander the Great, forraged the kingdomes conquered
by him, and carried away the kings (his successors) prisoners:The weakenesse and vanit^e of humane greatnesse. troden vnder foot the
majestie of the Romane Empire, triumphed ouer Emperours, and ouer so many great Captaines
and armies: taking the best townes in Italie; yea Rome, the Queene of all other
townes, sackt by them: the which had seized vpon the most populous and richest Prouinces
of the West; where they had reigned happily for so many yeares, with so many remarkable
examples of pietie, justice, and valour. This braue nation was in one day ouerthrowne, so
weake is the support of humane greatnesse.
THis ruine of the kingdome of the Gothes in Spaine hauing caused so great a confusion in
all things, as not onely religion, the manners of the inhabitants, the language, and the
lawes, but euen the face of the earth, and the feat and names of townes were peruerted and
changed, it shall not be from the purpose, if wee make a catalogue of the auncient Bishoprickes
established by the Christians in that region, whereof mention is made by writers, and
namely, in the treaties of Councels, the which haue beene gouerned by many holy Pastors,
as well in the time of the Romane Emperours, as of the kings of the Gothes, and were at the
entrie of the Arabians ruined wheresoeuer they commaunded: wherein for the more ease of
the reader, we will obserue the order of the Alphabet.
These words Tol. Merid. Brag. Seuil. Tarrag. noted in the margent, signifie Toledo, Merida,
Braga, Seuille, and Tarracone, Archbishoprickes or Metropolitane seas, whereof
were Suffragans the Bishops or Bishoprickes set in their places.

A
Abdera, whose Bishop was called Abderitain, was whereas now the citie of Almerie stands, or that of Vera, according vnto some. Seuil.
Abula, now Auila, a Bishopricke also in our time. Merid.
Acci, whose Bishop was called Accitanus, is likely to be Guadix in Grenado. Tol.
Agra, and the Bishop Agragensis: it is a question whether it were a towne in Spaine or Africke. Seuil.
Arcobrica, and the Bishop Arcobricensis, in the prouince of Tarracona, not farre from Calatajub. Tol.
Assindon, the Bishop Assindonensis, wheras now Medina Sidonia, or Xeres in Andalusia stands. Seuil.
Astigia, the Bishop was called Astigianus, it is held to be Eccia in Andalusia. Seuil.

Asturica, Astorga, and the Bishop Asturicensis, it is a Bishopricke at this day. Augusta was a common name to many townes in Spaine: for Bracar, Asturica, and others were so named, yet it is to be presumed, when as they doe simply make mention of the Bishop of Augusta, they meane Bracar or Braga, as they say at this day. Brag.
Auriensis Episc. possible it is that of Orense, which is a Bishopricke at this day. Brag.
Ausonia, the Bishop Ausoniensis, at this present Vic or Vic-d' Ossone in Cattelogne. Tarrag.
Auca, a citie not farre from the place where since the citie of Burgos was built: the Bishop Aucitanus, in the mountaine Idubeda, vpon that continent which now they call the mountaines of Oca or Auca. Tarrag.


B
Barcino and Barcinonensis Episc. Barcelone. Tarrag.
Bassetania, a region where the towne of Osca stood, as Plinie writes: the Bishop was called Bassetanus or Bassitanus. Tarrag.
Bastitania, Baza at this day, in the kingdome of Murcia, and the Bishop was called Bastitanus. Tol.
Biaria, Barra. Tol.
Bigastrensis or Bistargensis, it was a Bishopricke in the prouince of Carthagena. Tol.
Bigerra, at this day Beijar, Bigerrensis Episcopus. Merid.
Bracar, it is Braga an Archbishopricke, contending for the primacie with Toledo. Metropol.
Britolensis Episc. it was a towne neere vnto Tuy. Brag.


C
Cauria, at this present Coria, retaining the name and Episcopall seat. Merid.
Cesar Augusta, and Caesar Augustanus Episc. Sarragosse a famous Archbishopricke in these times. Tarrag.
Calagurris, it may be Calaorre at this day, the Bishop Calagurritanus. Tarrag.
Colimbrica or Conimbrica, Coimbra in Portugall, and Colimbrensis Episc. or it may be Conimbrensis, a Bishopricke and famous Vniuersitie at this day. Merid.
Carthago noua, Carthaginensis Episc. Carthagena, in old time the chiefe towne of all Spaine. Tol.
Castulo, at this day Caslona, Castulonensis Episc. Seuil.
Catraleuci, people in old time about the riuer of Guadiana, Catraleucensis Episcopus. Merid.
Complutum, and Complutensis Episc. Alcala of Henares. Tol.
Corduba, and Cordubensis Episc. it retaines the name and Bishopricke at this day. Seuil.


D
Dertosa, and Dertosanus Episc. Tortosa vpon Ebro, it hath his Bishop. Tarrag.
Dianium, Dianiensis, Denia, now it is no Bishopricke. Tol.
Dumiensis, it was a Monasterie neere to Braga, where there is a church to be seene at this day. Brag.


E
Egarensis Episc. it may be it was of those people which were called Egurti, neere to Medina del Riosecco. Tol.
Egitanus Episc. or rather Igeditanus: for Igedita was a citie in Lusitania, now a little Bourg called Edania. Merid.
Egibinensis, it may be they should haue written Egosensis: for Egosa was a towne in Cattelogne neere to Girone. Tarrag.
Ebora is a renowmed towne in Portugall, the kings abode; the Bishop was called by the Latines Elborensis. Merid.
Eliberis, in old time a great and well peopled citie, neere to Granado, since reduced to a castle, built and inhabited by the Iewes, and therefore was called the Iewes towne: the Bishops of Eliberis were called Eliberitani. There was another towne of that name at the foot of the Pyrenees, but the one and the other were by some called Illiberis, and more properly. Seuil.
Eliocrota, and the Bishop called Eliocrotensis, betwixt Carthagena and Caslona: Some hold, that the Vandales ruined it.

Elna, and Elnensis Episc. in Gaule Narbonoise. Tol.
Emerita, Emeritanus Episc. called Augusta, it is Merida at this day: it hath nothing singular, but some ruines and markes of antiquitie. Metropol.
Eminium or Euminium, betwixt Coimbra and Porto, vpon a riuer of that name, Eminiensis Episcopus. Brag.
Ergauica a towne of Arragon, now called Alcanniz: it is no Bishopricke at this day. Tarrag.


G
Gerunda, and Gerundensis Episc. Girone. Tarrag.
Gerabrica or Ierabrica, betwixt Lisbone and S. Irene, Gerabricensis Episc. Merid.


H
Hispalis, and Hispalensis Episc. Seuille. Metropol.


I
Ilerda Lerida, Ilerdensis Episc. in Arragon, now a Bishopricke and an Vniuersitie. Tarrag.
Ilice, Ilicensis Episc. from whence Sinus Ilicitanus was named, in the kingdome of Valence, vpon the sea, looking to the islands of Pityeuses. Tol.
Ilands of Majorque and Minorque had their Bishop. Seuil.
Ilipa, a citie in the strait of Betica or Andalusia. Tarrag.
Illiberis or Eliberis, at the foot of the Pyrenees, neere to Colibre. Tarrag.
Immotinensis, it may be Imomo^tensis Episc. there is now no memorie of it: some thinke it is Montanches.Merid.
Imopyreneus, was called the Bishop of Rhoda: it is Roses at this day, of the diocesse of Girone. Tarrag.
Impuritanus, or rather Emporitanus of Empuria, of the same diocesse. Tarrag.
Iugastrensis Episc. or rather Iuncariensis: Iuncaria was neere to Girone, Iunquera. Brag.
Intercatiensis, Intercatia was neere to the Astures. Brag.
Iria flauia had a Bishop called Iriensis, at this day it is Padron: the Bishops See was transferred from thence to Compostella. Seuil.
Italica a citie neere to Seuille, whereof there are not any markes remaining, Italicensis Episc. Hispalis the old. Seuil.


L
Lambria, and Lambrionensis, neere to the riuer Limia in Portugall. Brag.
Lacobrica, and Lacobricensis Episc. there were two towns of this name, the one at Cap S. Vincent, the other neere to Palenza. Merid.
Lameca is a Bishopricke yet in Portugall, Lamecensis Episc. Merid.
Legio, Legionensis Episc. at this day Leon, the chiefe towne of a realme, and a Bishopricke, enjoying the priuiledges of a Metropolitane. Brag.
Lucensis Episc. Lugo in Gallicia. Brag.


M
Malaca, and Malacitanus Episc. it is at this day a citie and Episcopall See. Seuil.
Mentesa, now Montijo, or else Iaen in Andalusia. Tol.


N
Nouiensis, Nouium in Gallicia, it may be Noya. Brag.


O
Olisipo, and Olisiponensis Episc. Lisbone, most famous in our time. Merid.
Orcelis, whose Bishop was at the Councell of Arles. Merid.
Oretan, and Oretanus Episc. Calatraua, where there is an order of knights. Tol.
Osca, that is Huesca in Arragon, a Bishopricke and an Vniuersitie. Tarrag.
Ossobonensis Episc. Ossobona was in Algarbe, neere to Pharo, which by the Moores was called Exuba. Merid.
Oxoniensis and Oxouiensis, it is Osona, a Bishopricke at this day: Vxania, Plinie. Tol.


P
Pacensis Episc. a Pace Augusta: it is now Badaios, which the Moores did call Baxangus, corrupting the word. Merid.

Palentia or Palantia, and the Bishop Palentinensis: it is a Bishopricke at this time of the same name. Tol.
Pampelonensis Episc. or Pampilonensis, Pampelone, the chiefe citie of Nauarre: it is a Bishopricke at this day. Tarrag.
Placentia, and the Bishop Placentin: it is now so called. Merid.
Porto or Portogallo, Portogalensis Episc. at this day a good port of the sea, and a Bishopricke. Brag.


S
Salmantica, Salmanticensis Episc. Salamanca a Bishopricke, and a famous Vniuersitie. Merid.
Segobia, and the Bishop Segobiensis, it holds yet the name and dignitie; in old time Secobia Antonin, Segouia Plinie. Tol.
Segobrica, Segobricensis, Segorbia in Arragon. Tol.
Seguntia, Siguenca, Seguntinus Episc. in the limits of Castille and Arragon: it keepes the name and the dignitie. Tol.
Setabis, Xatiua in the realme of Valence, and the Bishop Setabiensis: it is now no Bishopricke. Tol.
Sarabriensis Episc. in whose place is written in the bookes of Councels, Sibariensis. Sarabris it may be was Zamore or Toro. Merid.
Sitia, Sitianensis Episc. it was in Betica, depending vpon Corduba for the temporall. Seuil.
Sitalensis and Sitialensis, all one. Seuil.


T
Tarracon, Tarraconensis Episc. it is an Archbishopricke at this day. Metropol.
Turiasso, Turiassonensis Episc. Tarrassone in the limits of Nauarre. Tarrag.
Toletum, Toletanus, a well knowne Archbishopricke, Primat of Spaine, in old time Metropolitane. Metropol.
Tucca, Tuccitanus Episc. it was in Betica, neere to Castulo. Seuil.
Tude or Tyde, it is Tuy in Gallicia, now vpon the riuer of Minio, Episc. Tudensis: it holds the dignitie. Brag.
Tullica, and his Bishop Tullicensis, in Cantabria among the Autrigons, whereof Calagurris was the chiefe. Tarrag.


V
Valence, a famous Archbishopricke at this day. Valeria, at this day Concia or Cuenca, Conciensis Episc. it was sometimes called Valeriensis. Tol.
Vellensis or Veliensis, it was a Bishopricke among the Autrigons. Tarrag.
Vesci, Vesciensis Episc. it is Viseo a citie in Portugall. Merid.
Vrci, Vrcitanus Episc. neere Murcia or Almerie. Tol.
Vrgelitanus, it is Vrgel in Arragon, a Bishopricke Tarrag.
Vxama. Tol.

These townes vntill the destruction of the Gothes kingdome haue beene Bishops seats, according
to the order and discipline which was then obserued in Christian churches. Those of
Seuille, Toledo, Merida, Braga, and Tarragone, were Archbishoprickes, Metropolitanes, and
Primats: Diuers names, but of one signification, which did not inferre any superioritie one ouer
another, for they were equall in power: and they did preside in Councels, according to
the antiquities of their seas.





@ THE SIXT BOOKE OF
the Historie of Spaine.

The Contents.
1 OF the Moores or Arabians which inuaded Spaine, their beginning and manners.
2 Mahumets sect, his birth, designs, and Empire, and of his successors, vnto Vlit the tenth Caliph.
3 Conquest of Spaine by the Moores.
4 Pelagius the deliuerer of Spaine, and first king of Ouiedo.
5 Garcia Ximenes deliuerer of the Christians oppressed in Spaine, first king in Sobrarbre and Nauarre.
6 Fafila second king of Ouiedo: many Gouernors Moores in Spaine in his time.
7 Alphonse third king of Ouiedo.
8 D. Froila fourth king of Ouiedo, the first which vsed the title of Don.
9 Abderamen first soueraigne king of the Moores in Spaine, sitting at Cordoua.
10 D. Aurelle fift king of Ouiedo.
11 D. Sillo sixt king of Ouiedo.
12 D. Aznar first Earle of Arragon vnder Nauarre.
13 D. Garcia Inigo second king of Sobrarbre or Nauarre.
14 D. Mauregat seuenth king of Ouiedo.
15 D. Bermund eight king of Ouiedo.
16 Hizen second soueraigne king ouer the Moores in Spaine.
17 D. Galinde second Earle of Arragon.
18 Cattelogne, the name, and the gouernment of the Christians in that prouince vnder Bernard.
19 D. Alphonse the chast, ninth king of Ouiedo.
20 Inuention of S. Iaques his sepulchre, as the Spaniards affirme.
21 Haliathan third soueraigne king ouer the Spanish Moores.
22 Expedition of Charlemaigne into Spaine, and the defeat at Ronceaux.
23 D. Fortun third king of Sobrarbre and Nauarre.
24 D. Sancho Garces fourth king of Nauarre.
25 D. Ximen Aznaris third Earle of Arragon.
26 D. Ximen Garces fourth Earle of Arragon.
D. Garci Aznaris fift and D. Fortun Ximenes sixt Earle of Arragon.
27 Geoffrey of Aria the stemme of the Earles of Barcelone.
28 D. Ramit the first of that name, tenth king of Ouiedo.
29 D. Ximen Inigo fift king of Nauarre.
30 D. Ordogno eleuenth king of Ouiedo and Leon.
31 Muza Aben-Cacin makes himselfe king of Toledo.
32 Mahumet fift Miralmumin or king of the Moores in Spaine, the first of that name.
33 D. Geoffroy second Earle of Barcelone, successor to Bernard.
34 D. Alphonse third of that name and twelfth king of Leon.
35 Toledo reduced vnder the obedience of the Moores kings of Cordoua.

36 D. Inigo Arista sixt king of Sobrarbe and Nauarre.
37 D. Garcia Inigo third of that name, seuenth king of Nauarre.
38 D. Suria a Scottish man, the beginner of the Lords of Biscaye.
39 Almundir sixt Moorish king in Spaine.
40 D. Garcia first of that name, the thirteenth king of Ouiedo and Leon.
41 Abdalla seuenth king of the Moores in Spaine.
42 D. Fortun second of that name, eight king of Nauarre.
43 D. Salomon third Earle of Barcelone.
44 D. Geoffrey the hairie, fourth Earle of Barcelone, and first Proprietarie.
45 D. Ordogno second of that name, foureteenth king of Ouiedo and Leon.
46 Abderamen Almansor eighth king of the Moores.
47 The death of the Earles of Castille, among the which was D. Diego Porcello.
48 D. Froila second of that name, fifteenth king of Leon.
49 The alteration of the state in Castille, and the gouernment of the Prouince by two Iudges.

@ In this sixt Booke there is speciall mention made of the
beginning of the Estates of Ouiedo and Leon, of Sobrarbe and Nauarre,
of Cordoua, Cattelogne, Castille, and Arragon, and
of the Prouinces thereof, which were these.

OVIEDO and LEON.
Kings.
1 Pelagius.
2 Fafila.
3 Alphonso 1.
4 Froila 1.
5 Aurelle.
6 Sillo.
7 Mauregat.
8 Bermund 1.
9 Alphonso 2.
10 Ramir 1.
11 Ordogno 1.
12 Alphonso 3.
13 Garcia 1.
14 Ordogno 2.
15 Froila 2.


NAVARRE.
Kings.
1 Garcia Ximenes 1.
2 Garcia Inigo 2.
3 Fortun 1.
4 Sancho Garces 1.
5 Ximen Inigo.
6 Inigo Aristia.
7 Garcia Inigo 3.
8 Fortun 2.


ARRAGON.
Earles.
1 Aznar.
2 Galinde.
3 Ximen Aznaris.
4 Ximen Garces.
5 Garci Aznaris.
6 Fortun Ximenes.


CASTILLE.
Earles.
1 Nugno Fernandes.
2 Diego Porcello.
3 Nugno Bellides.


Iudges.
1 Nugno Razura.
2 Flauin Caluo.
Goncal Nugnes.


CATTELOGNE.
Gouernours.
1 Bernard.
2 Geoffrey Aria.
3 Salomon.


A proprietarie Earle.
1 Geoffrey the hairie.


MOORES.

There were many Gouernours vnder
the Caliphes and Miralmumins of
Asia and Africke, vnto Abderamen,
who first erected a Soueraignetie at
Cordoua.



Kings.
1 Abderamen 1.
2 Hizen.
3 Hali Athan.
4 Abderamen 2.
5 Mahumet 1.
6 Almundir.
7 Abdalla.
8 Abderam^n 3.


THe Arabians Mahumetists which conquered Spaine,Arabians westerne Moores. were also called 
Moores, for that they crossed Mauritania, a region of Africk, which is opposit
vnto Spaine, from the which Tingitana is diuided by a small strait,
the which when as Tarif passed, was subject vnto the Gothes, and gouerned
by Recila, a friend and partisan to Count Iulian. It is therfore expedient
to speak something of this nation, whose power in a short time did in
a manner surpasse all the Monarchies which haue been in the world.
Arabia is a spacious region,Arabia and the parts. diuided into many parts: The auncients made a partition into
three; the Happie, the Stonie, and the Desart. Arabia the Happie was so called, in regard
of the two other which are barren, little knowne to the auncients, and nothing at all annoyed
by the Romane armies. Arabia Petrea or Stonie carried that name of the capitall citie Petra,
which had their kings, sometimes friends and allied, but most commonly enemies vnto their
neighbours, and often tributaries to the auncient kings of Persia and Aegypt (whereunto they
joyne) and afterwards to the Romanes. The Desart Arabia hath not at any time had any certaine
policie, and very few townes, whose princes were but leaders of troupes of theeues, enemies
to all quiet,The manners of the Arabians. seeking nothing but warre, mercinarie to kings and princes that would employ
them, a people without humanitie, without faith, and without any religion. All this
countrey extends from East to West, almost from the floud Euphrates vnto Nyle, hauing Syria
on the North side, and the Ocean to the South. Whilest that the Romane Emperours
were in continuall warre against the kings of Parthia and Persia, either partie employed this
nation, who went for the most part to the warre on horsebacke, fit to spoyle a countrey, to
seize suddainely vpon a passage, to discouer, surprize, or doe any other action of warre, which
required expedition, especially if there were more question to forrage and spoyle than to fight.
This race is descended from Ismael,Arabians Ismael^tes. of whom it is said, That his hand should be against all, and all
hands against him.
2 Among these people Mahumet was borne,Mahumet his birth and countrey. in the yeare of our redemption 580 (some
say, it was in the yeare 591, and others 593) to trouble Christendome, and to punish their
ingratitude, which tearmed themselues Christians, Maurice being then Emperour of Constantinople.
The place of his birth was called Itrarip, a little towne neere vnto Mecque; his
father called Abedela, was a Pagan and an Idolatrer, and his mother Emina a Iew, a poore
begging girle, the which was taken vp by Abedela for loue, for that she seemed faire. At the
age of two yeares he was left an orphan; whereupon he was taken by an vncle of his, called
Salutaleb^, and bred vp in his house by Hal^ma his wife, vntill the age of sixteene yeares, and
then hee was carried away by a troupe of Arabian theeues, who met him alone, and sold
him to a rich marchant, who said, That he was of the race of Ismael, and was called Abdimonepli,
who employed Mahumet some yeares in his trade of marchandise, whereby he had
occasion to see many countries, and to tast many religions, especially the Iewish and Pagan,
to the which was added the Christian religion, which was then much corrupted, and was
made much worse to him by the conuersation of an Arrian Monke called Sergus,Ambition the mother of heresies. who
haunted the house of his master Abdimonepli. With this Monke and others he layed a plot
to make himselfe famous by a remarkable impietie, and framed a doctrine drawne from the
Iewish and the Arrian, mingled with other their inuentions: the which he afterwards brought
in, partly by persuasions, partly by money, and partly by force, being enriched with his masters
treasure, after whose death he had married his widow called Adegiah; so as about the
yeare 623 he was receiued and acknowledged by the Arabians for their captaine and great
Prophet.Mahumets doctrine published in Heraclius time. Then was Heraclius in the imperiall seat at Constantinople; and a little before
there had risen many seditions in Syria and Aegypt, during the which, Mahumet had plotted
his designs, and had made himselfe famous among the seditious. And moreouer, certain mercinarie
bands of Arabian Scenits being cast and sent away with injuries by the Commissaries
of Heraclius the Emperor, he drew them vnto him, and with these forces in a short time seized
vpon a great part of Arabia, namely, of the townes of Mecque and Itrarip, the place of his
birth,The Arabians begin the account of their yeares at 617. the which was afterwards called Medinath-Al-Nabi, that is to say, the city of the great
Prophet; and from the day that place was taken, in the yeare 617, the Arabians and sectaries
of Mahumet account their yeares, as we do ours from the Natiuitie of our Lord Iesus Christ.

Others say, That Medina or Almedina was another rich towne inhabited by rich Iewes,
whereof Mahumet gaue the spoyle to his souldiors, abhorring it aboue all other sects, for it
seemed more opposit to his doctrine than any other; yet it is most certain, that he vsed Iewes
to compound his doctrine. And vpon a defeat which the Persians had by the Romanes in
those times, he tooke occasion to inuade Syria, and seized vpon the countrey about Damas,
and then tried to extend his limits all he could, employing in the end of his dayes his Lieutenants
to make his conquests, whilst that he rested at Mecque, which was in the beginning the
seat of his Empire. In his later daies he made foure captaines, the which he called the cutting
swords of God, the common sort tearmed them Amiraux;Amiraux. the which were Ebubezer, whom
some call Vbequar, others Bubacus or Eubocara; then Homar, Ozmen, and Aly. This last was son
to Salutaleby, Mahumets vncle. Ebubezer was his father in law; for Mahumet had many wiues, and
Ebubezers daughter was called Aixa or Aissa. This monster hauing reigned about ten yeares,
hee died at Medinath Al-Nabi,Death of Mahumet. in the house of this Ebubezer, of poyson, as some say: for hauing
published among other articles, That he should rise againe within three dayes after his
decease, one of his disciples impatient to attend, and curious to see the experience of his doctrine,
poysoned him secretly: and some say, That he kept him 12 daies, and in the end seeing
that he was dead, and his bodie so corrupted and stinking, as no man could endure it, this disciple
being forced to retire by reason of the abominable smel of carrion, and returning soone after,
he found the dogs had torne it in pieces: wherefore hee gathered the bones together, the
which were put in a coffin of yron, and in time caused a chappell to be built, vaulted with adamant
stone, so as the cofer being put into it, the vertue of the stone drew it vp into the ayre,
where it did hang, which seemed miraculous vnto the ignorant: yet such as haue trauelled into
those countries in our time, say there is no such thing now to be seene. He had one son called
Cacin,Cacin, Mahumets sonne. Fatima and Zeineb his daughters. who died before him, and many daughters, wherof Fatima is famous among the Arabians,
as the stemme of the royall race of Aben-Alabecy, and was wife to Aly, according to the most
certaine. Zeineb also, another of Mahumets daughters, wife to Ozmen, or (as some say) to Muhauias
(it may be to both successiuely) is honoured by this nation, and Muhauias her husband (as
the beginning of another royall familie) called Aben-Humeya. There is mention made of Imicultin
and of Nephissa, daughters or neere kinswomen to this false Prophet: The sepulchre of
the last was found in Caire by Sultan Selym, Emperour of the Turkes in our fathers time, and
in it aboue the value of 500000 duckats in gold coyned, with much other treasure, which was
giuen and carried thither for almes.
Mahumet had decreed, That Aly his cousin german, and sonne in law, one of the abouenamed
Amiraux, should succeed him in the realme established by him: but Ebubezer his father in law,
who was rich and mightie, and had Ozmen and Homar on his side, brake this ordinance: for he
pretended, that Mahumet had gotten a great part of that which he enjoyed at his death, by his
means, credit, and wealth, and seeing that he died in his house, it was reason he should be his heire.
Ozmen and Homar were nothing discontented: for hauing also a desire to reigne, they were
more willing the crowne should come to Ebubezer (who they did confidently beleeue would
soone die, by reason of his age) than vnto Aly, who was yong and in the prime of his age. Ebubezer
therfore reigned,Ebubezer Caliph or High Priest of the Arabians in the 11 yeare. and was created High Priest of the Arabians, otherwise called Sarasins,
as in the time of the Christian Emperors of the East, who did willingly entertaine this nation,
they were commonly called. The name comes of the country Saracena, in Arabia foelix, or the
happie, in which region, according to the same author, was the towne of Saraca, but farre off
from these other people.Sarasins why so called. Howsoeuer it be, it seemeth this name comes from Sara, Abrahams
wife, notwithstanding they auow themselues to be descended from Ismael the son of Agar: but
they take no pleasure she should be termed a chambermaid. Hauing reigned 3 yeares, he died,
not without suspition of poyson: after which time these princes entitled themselues Caliphs,
that is to say, Gouernors, Rectors, and soueraigne Princes, properly heires and successors.
After Ebubezer, Homar held the scepter ouer the Arabians,Homar Caliph the 14 yeare of the Arabians. being sometimes called Haumar,
sometimes Humar, Hemer and Homer, by writers, to whom is attributed the taking of the towne
of Bozra, the chiefe of Arabia, of Damas and of Ierusalem, and in the end of all Phenicia, Syria,
Mesopotamia, and Aegypt. And hauing vanquished Orismada or Horsmida, King of Persia,
in battaile, he seized vpon that great and mightie kingdome, to whose succour then came the
Turks from the Caspian ports and straits, but in vaine: so as the name of the Persians was then

extinguished, and they were all called Sarasins. He was suspected to be a Christian; for his father
Catah was a friend and benefactor to the Christians, whom he drew to Ierusalem, and for
that cause built the temple which remaines vnto this day, with other shewes of superstition.
Homer being in this esteeme with his people, he was slaine by a seruant of his, a Persian, called
Amigira, making his prayers vnto God. This prince was hardie and warlike, and did effect
great matters: he raigned ten yeares. He died in the yeare of Christ 641, and the 24 of the
Arabians raigne.
Ozmen, or Hotman, Asman and Autumar,Ozmen the 4 Caliph the 24 yeare of the Arabians. for this diuersitie of names are found in authors,
sonne in law to Mahumet (for they hold, that he was maried to two of his daughters, wherof
it may be Zeineb was one) was the fourth Caliph of the Arabians. There was already growne
great contention among this nation, touching matters of religion, it being vaine and without
ground, by reason of many absurdities, which did contradict one another: which was no maruell;
for Mahumet being ignorant of all learning,Mahumet ignorant of all learning. could not set downe his conceptions with
any good method or order; but as they came into his braine he wrot them downe, and neuer
perused them after: so as oftentimes forgetting what he had before set downe, preached, or
otherwise published, he ordained diuers things which were repugnant and absurd. Whereunto
the people which then followed him, being all giuen to armes, poore, needie, grosse and
ignorant, tooke no good regard, their spirit being attentiue to the exterior countenance; and
if there were any more subtile, force and danger stopt their mouthes. But after some yeares,
they had more libertie and leasure to thinke thereof, and to examine Mahumets doctrine
which was taught, so as they grew into many disputes. To remedie the which, Ozmen
caused the papers of the Prophet to be sought out, whereof they found a great cofer full in
the house of Aissa his widow,Alcoran of the Arabians. with the helpe whereof he caused their Alcoran, or Alfurcan, to
be compiled, shewing himselfe verie liberall to them that laboured therein. Yet some thinke,
that this worke was begun by his predecessour Homar, and that he did reduce it into a better
method, and into chapters.
Hucba one of his lieutenants inuaded Africke, and ruined Carthage, so as Tunis came then
to be well peopled,Cairoan built. and soone after Cairoan, an hundred miles vp in the countrey, and somewhat
farre from the sea, was built, which since was a royall seat of the Arabians. Muhauias also
who gouerned Aegypt, went with an infinit number of vessels into Cypres, which island he
spoyled.Caire built by Muhauias. This Muhauias was the founder of Caire, neere vnto the ruines of the auntient
Memphis, the which from a little burrough came to the greatnesse and state wee haue seene
it in our fathers time, and by his wisedome and conduct the estate of the Arabians was much
augmented. He assailed the Romanes armie vpon the confines of Lycia, and put it to rout,
so as the emperour Constant then raigning, was forced to flie in a disguised habit. Muhauias
being puft vp with this victorie,Rhodes taken by Muhauias. he besieged and tooke Rhodes, beat downe that great Collosse
of the Sunne, being 70 cubits high, or 80, as some write, and sold the mettall to a merchant
Iew, who laded 900 cammels therewith, and carried moreouer out of that island, infinit
other goodly and rich workes, for it was replenished with such things, as Plinie writes, who
witnesseth, that there hath beene numbred in it 73000 figures, or statues, and an hundred
Colosses.
After these exploits he sent his armie at sea to the island of Sicile, from whence they were
repulsed by Olympius, Exarch or Gouernour of Italie. He himselfe returned into Syria, and
there raised a great armie by land, to inuade Capadocia, whither he marched. By these high
exploits Muhauias was in great reputation among the Arabians, which made him aspire to
the soueraigne dignitie, whereunto the death of the Caliph Ozmen seemed to inuite him,
wherefore he brought backe his armie.
Ozmen dyed in the twelfth yeare of his raigne,The miserable death of Ozmen the 653 of our Sauiour, and the 36 of the
Arabians, being set vpon in his palace by the Sarasins, which were of the faction of Ali his
brother in law, they forced him to kill himselfe, for that hee would not fall aliue into their
hands. Some write, that Ali himselfe slew him, by the persuasion of Aissa Mahumets
widow.
There was great dissention then among the Arabians, vpon the election of a new Caliph:
the competitors were Ali, Muhauias, and Mahumet: Ali obtained it by armes against Mahumet,
but he was to trie it with Muhauias, who finding himselfe followed by a great armie of

old souldiors, Aegyptians and Syrians, and himselfe being also and expert captaine, hee gaue
him many crosses for the space of a 11 moneths, so as by a common consent their quarell was
put to the arbitrement of Alascates and Alasci, two old men of great reputation among them;
who notwithstanding could neuer agree, so as they returned againe to armes, till that Ali
was slaine by the practises of Muhauias, neere vnto the towne of Cufa in Arabia, and there
buried: wherefore the place is called vnto this day Massad Ali, that is to say, the house of Ali.
The inhabitants of Cufa and Aratha, did chuse for Caliph in his place Alhacem, eldest sonne
to him and to Fatima, eldest daughter to Mahumet, who in his carriage and behauiour represented
his grandfather by his mothers side. Being established, hee marched with an armie against
Muhauias, but being one neere vnto another, when as euerie man attended a bloudie
battell, suddenly Albacem, either moued by feare, or pietie, and his natural mildnesse, came and
cast himselfe at Muhauias feet, acknowledging him his superiour: so as they entred into Cufa,
the which they did ransome for a great summe of money; and being come from thence to
Ietrib, Muhauias set the royall diademe with his own hands vpon Alhacems head, and would
haue him raigne, which he assured himselfe would not be long, for hee dyed within six moneths
after. Thus Muhauias being freed from all competitors,Muhauias Caliph of the Arabians. raigned alone: he was (according
vnto some) sonne in law to Mahumet, hauing maried his daughter Zeineb, as it is likely,
in her second mariage, from which mariage the royall familie of Aben Humeia is descended.
It is hee which changed the Caliphes seat to Damas.Damas the seat of the Caliphes. He first inuaded the Romane empire
with happie successe, Constant sitting in the imperiall seat, from whom he did exact a tribute.
He ouerrun Africke, from whence there were brought by the Sarasins aboue fourescore
thousand persons, slaues: And in the time of Constantine, surnamed Pogonat, or the Bearded,
hee tooke Cizicus a sea towne, from whence afterwards with a great fleet of ships he infested
the prouinces of the empire, yea and Constantinople it selfe, but vnfortunatly for
the Arabians: for after great losses both by sea and land, Muhauias remained tributarie to
the Romanes,Arabians tributaries to the Romane^. to whom hee promised to pay yearely three thousand pounds of gold, fourescore
slaues, and as many horses, and withall to deliuer 50 Christian prisoners at the emperors
choyce. By this meanes there was a peace, or truce concluded for thirtie yeares, betwixt
the Romanes and Arabians; during the which Muhauias began to trouble the Potentates
of his owne sect, reformed and subdued the Persians, and gaue them Matur for their Gouernour.
Mahumets sect was spread farre into the East, but with great inconstancie, and mingled
with heresies:A Councell of Mahumetists at Damas. by reason whereof hee called a Councell at Damas, of the Alfaquins of Mahumets
law; whither he commaunded to bring all the writings that could bee recouered as
well of their Prophet Mahumet, as of the Caliphes his successours, and other interpretors:
but there was nothing but contention and confusion, without any resolution: Wherefore
there were fiue of the most learned men chosen, that is, Boar, Buora, Anoeci, Aterminde, and
Dauid, who were enjoyned to gather out of all the volumes (the which as they write would
haue laden two hundred cammels) what they thought came neerest to their Prophets will,
which they held the trueth. These being shut into a house, after they had turned ouer, and
conferred these writings, they made six bookes of Mahumets doctrine, the which were presented
by them, vnto the king or Caliph Muhauias, who published them, and by his authoritie
caused them to be receiued, vpon paine of death to any one that should dispute the contrarie.
The rest of the papers were torne in peeces, and cast into the riuer. From these six
volumes there haue since growne foure sects among them,Foure sect in Mahume^^ religion. the Melicians, Asafians, Alambelians,
and Buanifians, the which maintaine themselues at this day in the great citie of Caire.
After these things Muhauias dyed at Damas, an excellent prince, and verie warlike of an
actiue spirit, nature recompensing that which he wanted by art: for he could neither read
nor write,Muhauias vnlearned. to the great griefe of them of his sect, whom they held verie fit to ha^e aduanced
it, if he had been learned. He died in the threescore and seuenteenth yeare of his age, 678
of our redemption, and sixtie one of the raigne of the Arabians, hauing raigned 24 or 25
yeares.
Hizit his sonne, or Gizit, or Iezid, was chosen Caliph after him, degenerating wholly from
his father:Hizit 6 Caliph For as he was actiue, resolute, and valiant, so this was base, voluptuous, and a
coward: Whereupon Mutar (whom his father had placed Gouernour of Persia) made

himselfe king and Caliph, faining to be a Prophet; and of his race the Sophies which raigne
there at this day are descended. The people of Cufa in Arabia, seeing the vnworthinesse of
Hizit, chose Hocem the sonne of Ali Caliph against him; but he was slaine by Abdalla the son
of Hizit, leauing twelue sonnes, which were, Zemal Abadin, Zemal Muamed, Baguer Muamed,
Taguin Muamed, Giafar Cadeneg, Giafar Musa, Ali Mucerati, Alle Muamet, Taguin Muamet, Halmaguin
Alle, Hacem Asquerin, Hacem Muamed Mahadin, the which are buried in diuers places.
The Persians beleeue, that Hacem Muamed Mahadin alone of all the brethren, is not yet dead,
and that he will come one day mounted vpon a braue horse, to conuert all the world, and to
preach the law to all men, beginning with the towne of Massad-Ali, where his grandfather
was interred, where at this day they keepe a horse readie for him, the which they lead vnto
their Mosquee, when they doe their seruice, with torches and and lights in great pompe.
Hocem being slaine,Ciuile warres in Arabia. and Hizit dead the third yeare of his raigne, Abdalla there raigned:
but for that he was a tyrant, they aduanced Maruan to the dignitie of Caliph, betwixt which
two the warre continued two yeares: at the end whereof the Arabians held an assembly, in
manner of parliament,Abdalla deposed and Abdimelec chosen the ninth Cali^h. at Cufa, a towne in Arabia the happie, where Abdalla being deposed,
Abdimelec was chosen in his place, who was verie young, of the race of Aly, and therefore
much honoured by the Arabians: For, Ali (as we haue said) was appointed heire and successour
of the kingdome, by the Prophet Mahumet, whereas Abdalla descended from Ebubezer,
who had beene an vsurper. There was another nobleman of Arabia, called Dadac, which did
bandie himselfe against Abdimelec, and was vanquished by him: but Abdalla did still hold the
citie of Damas, and pursued another Caliph which was risen in Mesopotamia, which country
is now called Diarbec. Against him Abdimelec sent a great captaine, a kinsman of his, called
Ciafas: who hauing encountred Abdalla vpon the riuer Euphrates, returning victoriously from
Mesopotamia to Damas, fought with him, and defeated him, but with great effusion of bloud.
Abdalla being vanquished, thinking to saue himselfe in Damas, hee was kept out by the inhabitants,
for his tyrannies: wherefore he fled to Caire, which at that time was not verie great,
where they also refused him the entrie. Being therefore chased, and abandoned by all men,
thinking to crosse ouer into Greece, he was slaine in a little island, whither a torment had cast
him.Race of the Caliphes Maraunians chased from Damas. With him ended the race of the Caliphes of Damas, called by the Arabians, Maraunians,
descending from Muauia and Ebubezer. Ciafar pursuing his victorie, entred into Damas,
and there vsed all the cruelties he could against the Maraunians, taking the bones of the
Caliph Hizit out of his graue, the which he burnt publikely, and cast the ashes into the riuer.
Yet one of Muauias descendants, called Abedramun, escaped, flying into the furthest
parts of Libia, towards the West Ocean, into Mauritania Tingitana, whither the Arabians
were newly come: For all the length of Africk, from Nile vnto the Ocean (except some places
vpon the sea coast, which were yet subject vnto the Romane empire) had beene ouerrun
and subdued by this nation. There this prince being acknowledged by the Sarasins to be of
the race of the Caliphes of Damas,Abderamun the flemme of the kings of Maroc. was well entertained and honoured by them: Wherefore
taking courage, he erected an Estate, and built the towne of Maroc, which was afterwards
the head of a great kingdome. He was the first which called himselfe Miralmumin,
that is to say, Prince of the beleeuers. Abdimelec nor Ciafas pursued him not, being verie farre
off, and for that he had limited his designes and ambition in those remote parts, not affecting
to make himselfe greater: besides, the plague, famine, and many seditions, but aboue all the
attempts of the Romanes, did much trouble Abdimelec, so as he was forced to renew a peace
with the emperours of Constantinople, and make the Arabians againe tributarie to Iustinian
the 2 then raigning, promising to pay him ten pounds of gold, a slaue, and a horse euery day:
by reason of which peace so deerely bought,A grieuous tribute paid by the Arabians to the Romanes. he conuerted his forces against Persia, whereas
one Abdalla Zubir had newly seized vpon that region, after that he had vanquished and slaine
Mutar, who had vsurped it vpon the Caliph Hizit. Abdimelec sent all his forces against this Abdalla,
and hauing chased him out of Persia, he recouered that prouince. Then he sent one of his
captaines, called Cagian, to pursue Abdalla, who was retired to Mecque, where hee was besieged,
the towne taken, and Abdalla slaine by Cagian, who then burnt the auntient idole, and the
temple there.
After these things, the Caliph Abdimelec was againe ingaged in warre against the Christians,
by the treacherie of Iustinian, who smarted for it: for being defeated with most of the

Grecians, he was forced to saue himselfe by flight, and was afterwards chased out of the imperiall
seat by Leonce, with great troubles throughout all the Easterne empire of the Christians:
whereby the Caliph had not onely meanes to recouer all that the Romanes had taken
from him in Asia,Romans chased out of Spaine. but also to chase their Gouernours and armies out of all Africke; so as there
was nothing remaining of the Romane name: yet his lieutenants were beaten inuading Cilicia,
by the care and conduct of Heraclius, a Romane captaine, about which time Abdimelec
dyed, hauing raigned ouer the Arabians one and twentie yeares. Whilest hee was busie
in these warres, the fame of the sanctitie and justice of Abedramon (who as wee haue said
had built Maroc) grew so great, as he was held by those Westerne Arabians for Caliph, and
more than a Caliph: and the opinion of his vertues passing into Arabia, and throughout all
the East, it happened, that dying and leauing his sonne Vlit successour of his goods and good
fame, all the Arabians with one generall consent chose him for their Caliph in the place of
Abdimelec, who dyed in the yeare seuen hundred and seuen. So the race of the Maraunians
raigned againe, which was the posteritie of Zeineb, daughter to Mahumet, ingendred (as some
beleeue) on Aissa the daughter of Ebubezer.
Vlit was the mightiest of all the Arabian princes,Vlit Caliph of the Arabians, the 90 yeare of the Arabians, and the 707 of Christ. his predecessors, raigning in a maner from
the Western Ocean, vnto the riuer Indus. He gaue the gouernment of Africk to Musa, with
the title of Admirall, and in a manner absolute power, all which was subject to his empire, except
a small portion of the countrey which the Gothes held neere vnto the strait, whereas the
towne of Cepta stands, the which is now called Ceuta: all the rest had bin conquered by his
predecessors, Caliphs. You must vnderstand, that the Arabians entring into Africke, they
brought in Mahumets law, their language and their maners: so as the great number of Christians
was much decreased, but not wholly extinguished, and many goodly churches came to
ruine:The Arabian tongue common in Africke. the African tongue was in a maner lost, and the Arabian was made common. Yet there
is at this day a certaine people found, which haue preserued the Africane tongue, as the Biscanes
haue done the antient Spanish, as some hold. They dwel in the mountaines of the kingdome
of Sus, about Cap d' Aguer, towards the Westerne Ocean, and call their language
Thamazel, the which differs from the Arabian as much as the Biscane from the Castillan: and
the Moors of qualitie in that countrey, learne the Arabic tongue in schools, or in courts, that
they may be able to conuerse with them. It hath also appeared since, that many families haue
retained the Christian religion, and the holy Scriptures, with some forme of Sacraments, but
not altogether pure:Christian religion preserued in Africke. for Ferdinand the third, called the Holy, raigning in Castille, and since in
the raigne of Iohn the first, there were found in the citie of Maroc, certaine antient families,
called Farfanes, which retained still the name and profession of Christians, aboue 680 yeares
after that the Sarasins had seized vpon Africk, whereof some came into Spaine, to Alcala de
Henares. Moreouer, it was seene in our daies, that after that the citie of Tunis had been taken
by the emperor Charles the 5, from Haradin Barberousse, there were many habitations of Christians
in that citie, hauing retained, and as it were inherited from father to sonne, for the space
of aboue 800 yeres, the articles of our Faith, not without great admiration of the diuine prouidence,
who liued in a suburbes without the towne, at the South gate, men much esteemed
of their kings, and valiant and hardie in the warres. They had a temple seperated from the
Moores,Rabatines Christians in Africk. who called them Rabatines, and of them the gards of the kings person did consist.
These Rabatines were afterwards transported to Naples by the emperor, that they might be
instructed in the Romish religion.
3 Whilest that Vlit raigned ouer the Arabians, and that Musa gouerned Africk, the Moors
passed into Spaine,The wrath of God vpon states for their (...). as we haue said, against the kingdome of the Gothes, whereby there followed
a lamentable desolation: a nation without doubt fatall to Christendome, which had
shewed it selfe rebellious, and to contemne so many graces it had receiued: For in that age,
ambition and tyrannie did tread all diuine and humane lawes vnder foot, and all good order
was peruerted, as well in Ecclesiasticall as ciuile gouernments. The bishops did then contend
for the Primacie,Faults in the ^eads. being growne insolent, by the carelesnesse of princes, who had referred
the whole charge of affaires vnto them, abandoning themselues in the meane time to
pleasures and disordinat lusts, with an opinion to be absolued of all their excesse, in building
of churches, conuents, and retreats for Clergie men, and endowing them with great reuenewes,
diuiding with them the spoyles they tooke from the people: who for their parts being

ill instructed,Faults in the people. and corrupted with the superstitions and traditions of men, could doe no
other seruice vnto God, but set vp Images and altars, seeke out the bones of dead Saints,
and such other things, little seruing to true pietie; thinking the paine they tooke in these exercises,
a good satisfaction for all their offences. To conclude, there was then so great a confusion
(the which is not yet amended) as God being justly offended, gaue scope to the furie
of the Arabian nation,Admirable effects of the forces of the Arabians. the which inuaded the Potentates of Christendome with such furie,
as in lesse than an hundred yeares they ouerthrew all the power and riches of the Romane
empire, of the Persians, and of other Estates. This was not a passage, as that of the Gothes,
Hunnes, Lombards, and other nations of Sithia: the which passed soone away, as an ouerflowing
deluge, or if they stayed among vs, they soone conformed themselues to humanitie,
pietie, and justice: but this plague was durable, and did still increase; for the Turkes
empire at this day is nothing but a remainder of the Arabians, mingled with the Hunnes,
from whence the Turkes are come. There remaine few certaine families of that Turkish
nation which came from the Caspian straits, in the time of Orismada the last king of Persia,
who was defeated by Haumar, Caliph or king of the Sarasins, and the which did afterwards
vanquish them: and yet they grew so familiar with them, as after that time the Turkes and
Sarasins were reputed but one nation.
We haue thought it expedient, for the more light of our historie, to make this digression
and to seeke out the beginning of this indomptible power of the Arabians, and to relate the
succession of that Estate, vntill their entrie into Spaine vnder the conduct of Tarif, or Tarir
Aben Zarca, who defeated king Roderic, as we haue shewed in the former booke, where
this king dyed, and in a manner all the flower of the nobilitie of the countrey, in the yeare
of our saluation seuen hundred and foureteene, in Iuly, or according vnto some, in September.
Returning then to our historie,Arabians and Moores one nation in this historie. we say, That the Arabians, or Moores (as wee will tearme
them indifferently hereafter) hauing obtained this great victorie, in a realme without forts, it
was then easie for them to rauage and spoile the whole country at their pleasure, seeing there
was no force to withstand them. They diuided their armie into many troups, and at one instant
assailed all the places which they thought to be of any strength. One of their armies went against
Malaga, and tooke it: another marched to Cordoua, vnder the conduct of a Christian
Renigado,Exployts of the Arabians in Spaine. called Mageitard. Tarif with another troup tooke Iaen, then called Mentisa, which
defended it selfe to the last extremitie; the which he rased: then he tooke Toledo and Guadalaiara.
And passing on, hauing for his guide Mugnuza, or Numatius, a Goth, hee came vnto the
Asturies, where he seized vpon Gigion and Astorga. Returning towards Catalogne, vnder the
conduct of Mugnoc, earle of Cerdagne, he made himselfe master of that countrey, and left the
earle there for Gouernour. Another armie conquered the countries of Murcia and Granado,
but not without resistance: for neere vnto Horiuela there was a cruell battell, the place carries
the name vnto this day of the bloudy field, yet the Sarasins were victors. Valencia yeelded
after that the inhabitants had beene beaten in field, yet vpon condition, to leaue a temple to
the Christians, which is now that of S. Bartholemew, and was then a colledge of S. Basil. Among
other riches,A table of Emeraud. mention is made of a table of Emeraud, which they carried away, the
which was in a place since called Medina Talmeid, it is Siguenza, or Medina Zelin. It was rather
a certaine kind of Indian Iaspe, very like vnto an Emeraud, and very common in the East,
whereof they hold, that Catin to be, which is so famous at Genua. The greedinesse of spoyle
was the reason they wanted not any souldiors, for all Africk posted thither. The taking of Toledo
was vpon a Palme Sunday, in the yeare 715, by the treacherie of the Iewes, whilest the
Christians were at a Sermon at S. Leocades church in the suburbes.
Musa Gouernor of Africk, iealous of the fortunat successe of Tarif, came himselfe in person
into Spaine, and would haue the best part of the spoile. Afterwards they made war joyntly together,
notwithstanding that they were deadly enemies, and took Sarragosse and other towns.
The reliques of Saints which they had so much reuerenced, and worshipped in stead of God,
could neither defend the Spaniards, nor saue themselues: for it is to be presumed, that these
Barbarians did not bear them any great respect, after they had seized vpon the ornaments and
chests of gold or siluer, where they had bin kept: yet if you wil beleeue the monks and other
their fauourers, they lost not many, the greatest part hauing bin preserued by the care of the

Clergie, and other deuout men, who transported some into Fraunce, others into Germanie,
England, and other places, where in the time of our predecessors they were yet worshipped.
Some authors write,The Moors were (...) yeares in co^^^c^ing Spaine. That the Moores were eight moneths about the conquest of Spaine, others
foureteene, many two yeares; but the most probable, fiue yeares: for it is not credible,
that so great a country, where there were so many Christians, and so many places of strength,
at the least by nature, should fall in so short a time into the Infidels power, without any opposition:
for they maintaine, That in diuers incounters, assaults, and sieges of townes and castles,
there died aboue seuen hundred thousand Christians. Tarracone among others defended it
selfe vertuously, who shewed by their valour, that it was a true auntient Colonie of the Romanes.
In the end God hauing decreed to punish this people for their sinnes, and to admonish
the other profaners of his glorie, it was forced to yeeld.
All the regions,The least care of conquerors is religion. cities, townes, and castles of Spaine, except some places in the mountaines
of Asturia, Biscaie, and Nauarre, were made subject and tributaries to the Moores; who had
no great care at that time to force men in their religion, but did allow them the exercise therof:
and to some townes they granted many priuiledges, for that they would not vnpeople
the countrey, burthening them with great tributes, which was all they sought.
The citie of Toledo among others had seuen churches granted them for the exercise of
their religion,Seuen churches left to the Christians at Toledo which were, S. Iuste, S. Luke, S. Torquat, S. Marke, S. Eulalie, S. Sebastian, and S.
Marie. Moreouer, it was granted, that they should haue judges of their owne religion and
nation, and be gouerned by the lawes of the kings of Gothes, with other priuiledges. By this
meanes the Moores retained an infinit number of Christian families, which liued and multiplied
vnder them, else Spaine had beene left desart, for the Arabians could not people it.
The Christians which liued among the Arabians, were called Musarabes (as it is likely) of the
name of the Gouernour Musa, who would bee famous by this conquest. These Musarabes
Christians did celebrate their diuine seruice, as it had beene vsed in the time of the kings of
Gothes, and according to the institution of Isidorus bishop of Seuille, or of Leandre, as they
had accustomed to serue God in those times throughout all Spaine, and continued vntill the
seruice, called Gregorian, or Romane, was brought in, as we shall shew hereafter. This Musarabic
seruice, is entertained at this day for a marke of antiquitie, in the chappell of the companie
of Christs bodie, in the great church of Toledo, and in other places of that citie. They
hold it for certaine,The Moores armies followed by many Christians for spoyle. that all the Moores and other Africanes which past into Spaine, were not
of Mahumets sect, but a good number of them were Christians: For it is not credible, that the
Africanes, who were made subject vnto the Arabians, a little before their passage into Spain,
borne and bred in the Christian religion, and vnder Christian princes, should so soone haue
changed their religion: But it is probable, that being newly subjected to the Mahumetane
kings, many followed their armies wheresoeuer they went, without any scruple of religion,
although they were Christians, hauing no other end but spoile, as most souldiours doe commonly.
The kings and Caliphes of the Arabians, did not care to force people newly conquered,
to change their religion, but suffered them to liue with libertie, least they should vnpeople
the countrey, and diminish the fruits of their victories. And that Africke had preserued families
of Christians, it is verified by experience, as we haue formerly shewed. The like was in
Spaine, the which notwithstanding the gouernment of the Moores, did still retaine a great
number of Christians, as well borne in the countrey, as others that came out of Africke to
dwell there, holding the Moores partie, the which made the enterprises of the kings of Leon
and Castille, and of other Christian princes, more easie to be executed, when following the
steps of Pelagius (who first tooke arms against the Moors) they began to recouer the country.

Pelagius first King of the Asturians, the
deliuerer of Spaine.
4 PElagius (as we haue said) was the so^^ of Fafila,Ouiedo, Pelagius first Christian king of the Asturies. Gouernour of Biscaie, whom Vitiza
before he was king had slaine, that he might more freely enjoy his vnchast wife: After
whose death Pelagius retired himselfe into a place of safetie in the mountaines, and there was

preserued through the fauour of his kinsmen and friends, by the prouidence of God, who
had so decreed to giue a beginning to the deliuerie of Spaine. They say, that the Cantabrians
were the last people of Spaine, which were made subiect to the Roman power; and the
last also that were drawne away, to vndergoe the Gothes yoke: whom notwithstanding they
could neuer so subiect, as they would euer yeeld to any other lawes and manners, than those
that were fit for them. During the Moores conquest, it is also to be presumed, that they maintained
themselues in some libertie; and in like manner all the other people of Spaine, where
as the mountaines, and places of hard accesse, gaue them any meanes to defend themselues.
Yet we must confesse, that they could not altogether assure themselues from that horrible
inundation; but they escaped better then the rest of the Spaniards which were found in the
champian countrey of more easie accesse. The which is euident, by the report which the
Spanish Authors make of this Pelagius; saying, That after the Moores had raigned fiue yeres
in Spaine, he hauing resolued in himselfe to giue some succours to the afflicted Christians,
left his secret retraits, and came into the Asturies of Ouiedo, where there was one Numatius,
otherwise called Magnuza, by corruption of the language;Magnuza a Christian seruing the Moors. a Christian by profession,
but seruing the Moores, and by them made Gouernour of the countrey of Gigion, into
whose friendship and seruice he did insinuate himselfe. Whereby we may coniecture, that
betwixt the Moores and Cantabrians there was some commerce, some league, and (it may
be) subiection, yet vpon honest and tollerable conditions, by reason of the strong situation
of their countrey.
As lust had beene the cause of the ruine of the kingdome of the Gothes in Spaine, so voluptuous
desire made the Moores power decrease there. For Pelagius hauing a faire and louely
sister in his house, this Magnuza grew in loue with her; and fearing he should not obtaine
her, she being wife, and well bred, her brother being in the countrey, he resolued to giue him
a commission, to goe to the great Admirall Musa in embassade, to Cordoua, during which
voyage he forced this Gentlewoman.Magnuza forceth Pelagius sister. Pelagius aduertised at his returne of what had past, notwithstanding
that all might be couered vnder colour of mariage, which Magnuza said he had
promised to his sister, yet he held this rape and violence done to the contempt and dishonour
of his house: but he dissembled it for the present, and when he found a conuenient opportunitie,
he retired himselfe with his sister into the strongest parts of the mountaines of Asturia,
watching meanes to reuenge himselfe. Magnuza incensed, for that he had taken her from him
whom he loued, and who he said was his wife, and finding his honour thereby interessed, he
gaue the Gouernors and Commaunders of the Arabians in Spaine to vnderstand, That Pelagius
made attempts against their State: wherefore thinking it needfull to preuent it in time,
they sent great store of souldiers to Magnuza, to suppresse him, who had almost surprised
him:Pelagius pursued flies into the mountaines of Asturia. but it was the will of God that Pelagius should haue intelligence of this storme which
was comming towards him: who hauing past the riuer of Pionia, he retired into the vallie of
Cangas, where he found many wandring Christians, liuing in those places in great feare of
the Moores. Whose wills he hauing sounded, and exhorted them to be couragious, and to
fight valiantly for the common cause, and to relie vpon the assistance of God, he found them
readie to imploy themselues for the libertie of their countrey; and moreouer they were so affected
vnto him, as they chose him their captaine and leader in this worthie enterprise, giuing
him then the title of King.Pelagius chosen king of the Christians dispersed. And within few dayes the brute of this enterprise being dispersed
through the mountaines, the Chri^^ians which lay hidden, came vnto him from all parts, so as
in a short time he found himselfe strong ynough to defend himselfe against any that should
come to assaile him. The Moores armie hauing failed at this time, returned to Cordoua.
We may well coniecture, that Pelagius was of the Gothick race, yet the Spaniards denie it,
hauing no forcible argument, but that the name of Pelagius was not vsuall among the Goths;
and they maintaine, without any other proofes, That he was descended of that countrey by
long succession, wherof we can speake nothing assured: But whatsoeuer he were, that honor
is due vnto him, as a valiant Prince: for although it seemes that he was forced to take armes
for the priuate iniurie done vnto his sister, and himselfe; yet he shewed great discretion, that
he could wisely ioyne the publick cause with his priuat interest, and pursue the reuenge of the
one and the other, by all the iust meanes which opportunitie and the estate of their affairs did
allow.



Garcia Ximines first King of Sobrarbre,
deliuerer of Spaine.
5 AT that time such as had retired,(...)rarbre. and preserued themselues in the Pyrenees, Nauarre,
and the high countrey of Arragon, began to stirre; who chose Garcia Ximines for their
head, being a noble house among the Gothes, although the name seemes to some to contradict
that opinion: who in the beginning gathered together 600 resolute men, with the which
he did great exploits, as the Spanish Authors say; who report, That after he had recouered
Ainsa from the Moors, and giuen them a great defeat, he tooke for the royall Armes of Sobrarbre,
a red crosse planted vpon an Oke in a field; or, for that such a signe had appeared vnto him
during the conflict before the which he caried only a field of gold. These were the beginnings
of the realmes of Ouiedo and Nauarre, or Sobrarbre, as it was then called, about the yeare
716, and according to the computation of the Spaniards Aera 754,Anno 716. or as some say, 718, and
756, the Moores being Lords and masters of all the good townes in Spaine.
In all places held by the Moores,Moores. there were many Christians, retained by their mildnesse,
and the loue of their naturall countrey, which contented themselues to liue tributaries: to
whom the Christian religion was allowed, wherein they had beene bred, and to celebrate
that forme of seruice which had beene instituted by Isidore, or Leandre, Bishops of Seuile.
These Christians, as we haue said, were called Musarabes, and their seruice Musarabic. The
forme of their Masses and ceremonies is described by Vasee and others, to whom we referre
the curious reader. Whilest that Vrbain, who had beene chosen Bishop of Toledo, liued, he
was carefull of his flocke: but aboue all he had a care to transport the reliques of his church
to Ouiedo. Frodoaire Bishop of Eccia, and Euatius Archdeacon of Toledo, were famous for
their learning and integritie, with Iohn Bishop of Seuile, who translated the Bible into the
Arabian tongue. The Arabians hauing setled their affaires in Spaine, and prouided for the
safetie of their places and forts, Musa and Tarif prepared to repasse the sea, being called
home by Vlit, great Miralmumin, or Miramamolin, to giue him an account of their conquests,
and gouernment. Wherefore they left the gouernment of Spaine to Abdulazis, the sonne of
Musa,Abdulazis first gouernor of the Moores, residing at Seuile. who kept his court at Seuile, and there maried the widow of king Roderigo Egilone:
and to Alcaman a captaine of the Moores, there were great forces giuen both of horse and
foot, to goe against Pelagins, who gathered souldiers together in the mountaines of Asturia.
This Alcaman led Oppa, or Olpa, sometimes Archbishop of Toledo,Anno 618. in his companie.
Pelagius in the meane time fortified himselfe,Ouiedo and being aduertised of the Moores approaching,
he marched towards them with his troupes, and came and lodged at mount Auseba,
and seised vpon the straits and passage thereof; where hee attended with a thousand
choyce Christians, hauing disposed the rest (which were lesse assured, and worse armed)
vpon the top of the rockes and eminent places, as he thought it fit, to annoy the Moores,
if they came on.
He was first solicited by the Archbishop Oppa,Oppa Archbishop of Scuile, an Apostat. to lay aside armes, and to submit himselfe
to the mercie of the Muralmumin Vlit; assuring him that he should bee well intreated
both in his good and honour. That if he should persist in his rebellion, he should consider
into what miseries he plunged himselfe, and what small likelihood he had to make head against
the great power of the Arabians, whom the force of all the Gothes could not resist.
Which persuasions Pelagius did vertuously reiect, so as comming to fight, God assisted him,
and gaue him victorie ouer this multitude of Barbarians, of whom there were slaine (as they
write) aboue twentie thousand vpon the place:A notable victoos the Christians against the Moores. not without some miracles in the furie of the
fight; for they say, that the arrowes which were shot against the Christians, returned against
the enemies themselues. Alcaman the Generall of this armie was slaine there, and no man
knew what became of Oppa. This admirable victorie was the first testimonie which God
gaue the afflicted Christians of their restauration, the which Pelagius obtained in the yeare
718, Musa and Tarif being not yet imbarked, but they parted soone after, leauing the reuenge
of this losse to Abdulazis.
Tarif got the start, and arriued at the Court of Miralmumin Vlit, before Musa, whom he
accused of many abuses and exactions;Moores. and did so incense the Prince, as Musa at his arriuall
was not onely disgraced, but condemned in a great fine, so as he died for griefe. His gouernment
was giuen to Alahor by Vlit,Zuleima, eleuenth Caliph. or by his successor Zuleima, otherwise called Zulcimin:
for they say that Vlit died in the same yeare 718. Alahor hearing of the defeat giuen vnto
the Moores by Pelagius, had a conceit, that it happened by the fraud or trecherie of Cont
Iulien, and the children of Vitiza: whereupon he put them to death, and did forfeit their
goods. Abdulazis, who held Seuile, being importuned by his wife, who was grieued, that
from being a Queene she was now become the wife of a Viceroy, or Gouernour of Spaine,
tooke vpon him the title and Royall Diademe, against the custome of the Arabians: but it
lasted not long; for in the third yeare of his raigne he was slaine in a church as he was at his
prayers, by certaine Arabians, which had conspired against him, being persuaded that he was
become a Christian. His wife was also slaine.
After him Aiub raigned, who changed the royall seat from Seuile to Cordoua: some Authors
say it was his successor Alahor.The Sarasines inuade Languedoc. He built againe the towne of Bilbilis, which had beene
ruined; and called it by his name Calat Aiub. The Sarasines were growne so proud, as not
contenting themselues with the conquest of Spaine, they attempted to passe the Pyrenee
mountaines, and inuaded the Gotick Gaule, which is at this day called Languedoc, all which
they conquered in a manner, euen vnto the Alpes. And, whilest they fed themselues with
hope to become Maisters of all Gaule, they neglected the affaires of Asturia, and the enterprises
of Pelagius: who hauing woon great honour by the victorie which he had obtained, he
found himselfe fortified in a short time with a great number of Christians, which came vnto
him from all parts, yea out of those townes which were held by the Moores: Wherefore he
neither lost time nor opportunitie, but taking occasion when they were busied in their other
warres, he tooke Leon from them, going on still in his course.Leon taken by the Christians. This was in the yeare 722.
Then he left (as the Spaniards say) the Gothes Armes, and carried a Lion gueules in a field
argent,Pelagius stiles himselfe king of Ouiedo. which are at this day the Armes of Leon: Yet he called himselfe King of Ouiedo,
without any other title. Yet it is not verie certaine, that these Armes of a Lion gueules were
first of all carried by Pelagius; but it is without all question, that the Lion which is in the
Armes of Leon, hath no reference to the name of the towne, which was in old time called
Legio. Among others which had followed Pelagius in diuers incounters which he had against
the Moores, there was a Nobleman of Biscaie, of the bloud royall, descended from Ricarede,
named Alphonsus, sonne to one Peter gouernour of Biscaie, or Duke, as they were then
called,Alphonsus a Biscain sonne in law to Pelagius, the stem of the kings of Ouiedo and Leon. who, it is likely, was substituted in the place of Fafilla, slaine by Vitiza. To this Alphonsus
(for that he was wise and valiant, and had drawne many good offices from him) hee
gaue his daughter Ormisinde in mariage; from whom and this Alphonsus are descended the
kings of Leon.
On the other side there was some alterations in Nauarre, whilest the Moores were busie in
Languedoc,Nauarre or Sobrarbre. and other parts of Gaule, so as Garcia Ximines laid the foundations of his principalitie
or kingdome, in these mountaines. The histories of Arragon attribute the honour
of the beginning of this royaltie to their countrey, calling it the kingdome of Sobrarbre,
the which are mountaines at this present in the confines of Arragon: But we find that this
Garcia was Lord of Amescua and Abarsusa, places neere vnto them, where as the towne of
Estella was afterwards built. There were other enterprises made in Cattelognia, and elswhere.
After Aiub, Alor, or Alahor, sonne to Abderramen, was Viceroy of Spaine, about the yeare
719,Moores. Alahor third Viceroy. and the Aera 757: who shewed himselfe rigorous to the Moores and Arabians, who had
first taken and sackt Spaine: whom he intangled in diuers accusations, that he might spoyle
them of the wealth which they had gotten. So as, if the Christian Spaniards were punished,
those which punished them had no great content of the aduantage which God had giuen
them ouer his people. To Zubeima the Caliph, there suceeeded in the yeare 719, two of his
nephewes,Homar and Izit Caliphes. Adam fourth Viceroy of the Moores. Homar the sonne of Abdimazir, and Izit, or Gizit, the sonne of Abdimelec: but
Izit died soone after, and Homar raigned alone; who sent Adam the sonne of Melic into Spain
for Gouernour, who (as they say) made the bridge at Cordoua. We haue said (according to
the opinion of many graue Authors, well informed of the disposition of the Arabians) that it
is a nation which hath euer beene enemie to rest, and to all good lawes and policie, the which

cannot long containe it selfe in any good order, nor vnder one prince, or lawfull magistrat.
According to their naturall dispotion, those which inhabited Spaine, made hauocke of all
things by their robberies and thefts: whereupon this Viceroy Adam punished many of them
by pecuniarie fines, and thereby made himselfe partaker of their spoyles. They say he exacted
the fift part of their substance: the which he did also of the inhabitants of the townes and
castles of Spaine, which he tooke by force, and the twentieth part of them which yeelded
willingly vnto him. He died at Tortose, returning from the spoyle of Tarrassone. At that
time the Sarrasines made great conquests in Gaule; they tooke Narbone, and besieged Tolouse,
vnder the conduct of Zama, who was slaine there. Eude, a Goth, a nobleman of Biscaie,
Duke of Aquitaine in the right of his wife, kindled this warre, and persuaded Muniza,
a Moore, making warre in Languedoc, to rebellion against Abderramen; giuing him a
daughter of his to wife.Abderrame^ fift gouernor of the Moores in Spaine. By reason wherof he was assailed by Abderramen, besieged, and taken
in Cerdagne, and his head sent with his wife into Africke. Abderramen pursuing his victorie against
Eude, defeated him neere Arles, and gaue him another rout about Bourdeaux, spoyling
and burning all the countrey betwixt the Pyrenees and the riuer of Loire: Yet in the end they
concluded a peace, the Moore fearing the French whom he had incensed by these spoyles.
Izit died in the yeare 725,Anno 725. whom EuelidEuelid Caliph. his sonne succeeded, and was vnfortunate. During
whose raigne, Eude Duke of Aquitaine, being threatened by the French, who raigned
in Gaule, to whom he was suspect: and fearing their power, he called in against them that
great multitude of Arabians, and Sarasines, which were defeated in Touraine by Charles
Martel;Eude drawes the Moores into Spaine, and then betrayes them. which some affirme, were aboue foure hundred thousand men, who notwithstanding
were betrayed, and abandoned to the slaughter, by Eude, hauing ioyned with Martel the day
of the battell, and turned his forces against them who were come, by his persuasion, to inhabit
Gaule. Their Generall Abderramen gouernour of Spaine, was slaine there with aboue
three hundred thousand Arabians. This memorable battell, which saued Gaule and the
kingdome of the French from vtter ruine,An. 730. was fought in the yeare 730, or according to some
Spanish Authors, 734: who say, That during these practises, Pope Gregorie the third then resident
at Rome, had sent vnto Eude certaine hallowed sponges, the which being cut into small
peeces, and distributed among the souldiers, preserued all such as carried them from being
wounded, both in that battell, and afterwards in all other incounters.
Euelid sent Iahea into Spaine for Viceroy,Iahea 6 Viceroy. who gouerned two yeares,Moores. and was the sixt, residing
at Cordoua. To Iahea Adaifa Alcazazan succeeded, a rash inconsiderate man, and therefore
soone deposed:Adaifa 7. whom Hiemen succeeded, who liued but six monethes; and then Autuman
was aduanced,Hiemen 8. but he died within foure monethes after. Alhatan followed him, who
was cruell and inhumane,Autuman 9. by reason whereof he lost both gouernment and life,Alhatan 10. by the commaundement
of the great Emperor or Caliph, Euelid, hauing gouerned Spaine two moneths
only. It may be it was in his time that the children of Eude Duke of Aquitain deceased, being
depriued of their possessions by the tyranie of the French, called the Arabians and Sarasines
againe into Gaule,The second entrie of the Moores into Gaule. who spoiled the whole countrey betwixt the Pyrenees and the riuer of
Loire, Languedoc, and Prouence, and seised vpon many strong places, wherof Auignon was
one. The sons of Eude were Hunola, Vifar, and Azner. The head of the Moores in this expedition,
were Athin and Amorrhee: Athin was defeated by Charles Martel, and being chased out
of Auignon, he fled to Narbone: where being besieged, Amorrhee comming out of Spaine to
raise the siege, he was also defeated with all his armie, and pursued and slaine neere to Colible,
at the foot of the Pyrenees. Charles Martel pursuing his victorie, committed greater spoiles
then the Sarrasines and Infidels had done. Athin saued himselfe in Spaine, and hauing afterwards
past into Africk, he died at the siege of Tanger.
This yere of Christ 735 king Pelagius died at Cangas,Ouiedo. leauing to succeed him his son Fafila,An. 735.
and his daughter Orsuinde, or Ormisinde, the wife of Alphonso of Biscaie, one after another; hauing
raigned 19 yeres, or 17 according to the most certaine. His wife was called Gaudieuse.
They were interred in the church of S. Zulalia of Valania.


Fafila second King of Ouiedo.
6 FAfila sonne to Pelagius,Vertue is not alwaies hereditarie. second king of Ouiedo, raigned onely two yeares. He was not so
carefull as his father, to aduance the Christians Estate in Spaine. The Moores in like maner

did not arme against him, for they were much troubled with the French warres. Wherefore
this king giuing himselfe to the pleasure of hunting, more then was fit for his estate (not
yet setled) was slaine by a Beare, which he pursued in the mountaines, being abandoned by his
followers: Which some hold was in the yeare 737, but Garibay sayes, that there is a great errour
in the computation of these yeares. He was maried to a Ladie called Froleua, and they
are both interted at S. Croix neere to Cangas.
After the death of Alhatan gouernor of Spain,Moores. Manes succeeded, who continued not long:
then Mahumet, who liued but two monethes: After him Abderramen, who gouerned three
yeares; who being dead, Abdemelic ruled Spaine foure yeares, who punished some pettie tyrants,
and hauing drawne a new people out of Africke, he filled the townes that were made
desolate by the aboue mentioned defeats. He was chased out of his gouernement by Otha,
who held it fiue yeares: then Abdemelic returned, and gouerned a yeare and a halfe, in whose
place Alcataran was gouernour: who seeking to free Spaine of many strange souldiers, who
were entertained then by the Caliph, he was slaine by them: So as the gouernment was vsurped
by Aben Hax, who was presently set vpon by the children of Alcataran; who hauing vanquished
him, he died within 15 dayes after: and then there grew great diuisions and troubles
in Spaine; to suppresse the which, the Emperour of the Arabians sent Zubeir with great forces,
who pacified all these dissentions, and contented the mutined souldiers with great entertainments:
to satisfie the which, he tooke from the Christians (which liued vnder the subiection
of the Moores) the third part of their goods. This gouernour Zubeir meaning to enter
into Gaule, was preuented by the king of the French, who it seemes was Pepin, and defeated
beyond the Pyrenees. He also sent a captaine against D. Alphonso the first, king of Ouiedo:
but he was vanquished by the Christian armie; and in this battell were slaine all the Arabian
souldiers which had mutined. After Zubeir, Abderramen came to gouerne Spaine: then Iber
Vzit, who liued little, and to him succeeded Abubacar, but he was slaine there, and in his place
Rodoan gouerned at Cordoua. It was the seat for the generall Gouernor of all Spain, of whom
depended all other Gouernours, Captaines, or Admiralls.


Alphonso, the first of that name, and third
King of Ouiedo.
7 ALphonso called the Catholicke,Ouiedo. sonne to Peter, Duke or Gouernour of the Cantabrians,
or Biscains (of the Gothes race) descended from king Ricaredo, succeeded Fafila in the
kingdome of Ouiedo, in the right of his wife Orsuinde, or Ormisinde, daughter to Pelagius, and
sister to Fafila,Anno 737 in the yeare of Christ 737, and of their Era 775. It is likely this was the first
woman which did inherit the Crowne in Spaine, vnlesse Alphonso were chosen king by the
Spaniards, the which is credible: for the right of succession was not then in vse among those
people, in regard of kingdomes. It is likely the name of Catholicke was giuen to this Alphonso,
by some writers, for that he was a deuout Prince, and verie curious to inrich temples: yet
the title of Catholicke which is giuen to the kings of Spaine at this day,The surname of Catholicke. comes not from him,
the which we know was granted by Pope Iohn the eighth, vnto king D. Alphonso, the third;
and by Pope Iulio the second, vnto the king D. Ferdinand the fift, in the time of our fathers, for
some considerations which we will hereafter shew. This prince was warlike, and tooke from
the Sarasines the townes of Lugo,The conquests of king Alphonso the first. Tuy, Astorga, and a great part of old Castille, the second
yeare of his raigne: then Porto, Beia, Flauia, Ledesma, Zamora, Cimancas, Duegnas, Saldagne,
Miranda, Segobia, Osme, Auila, Sepulueda, Birbiesca, and all the country of Bureba, Braga,
Vila, Salamanca, and others, which at this day belong to Portugal, Leon, Castille, and Nauarre;
restoring the Bishops to their auncient seas, cherishing the Clergie, and making libraries
in many parts of his countrey: he also tooke the towne of Pampelone in Nauarre. All
which conquests he made, the Moores being not onely busied in the warres of France, but in
ciuile dissentions among themselues; being also fauored and receiued by the Christians which
were the inhabitants in many places, whom they called Musarabes, liuing tributaries vnder
the Moores.Bishops of Toledo in the time of the Moores. In his time Cixila was Bishop of the Musarabes of Toledo, a holy and learned
man, as they say, who succeeded Vrbain, and after him Peter, surnamed the Faire, gouerned that
church.

The estate of the Arabians was full of troubles after the death of the Mirahnumin Euelid,Moores.
being in contention for the gouernment: in the which Gizit the third was slaine, and Hizes
his sonne remained Emperour, who raigned a yeare: After whom Maruan, of the race of Humeia,
raigned six yeares. But there grew great ciuile warres by reason of these diuisions, the
which in the end ruined their Estate.Anno 753 In the yeare 753 Toaba was sent to gouerne in Spaine, a
souldier, and a man of worth; but he liued onely a yeare. Ioseph was substituted in his place,
a great enemie to the Christians: who hauing beene vnfortunate in his warres against king
Fruela, who slue aboue 50000 of his men in two battels: he was disdained by the Moores in
Spaine, who called in Abderramen to rule ouer them.
At that time there were three Sunnes seene in Spaine,Three Sunnes seene in Spaine. and for the space of two yeres there
fell not any raine from heauen, which caused a great dearth of corne, and of all other things:
and soone after king Alphonso died. Some hold that this king was the founder of the towne of
Ouiedo,Ouiedo built. whereof he intitled himselfe king: others say it was Pelagius; and some make it more
auncient. He raigned 19 yeares, and liued 64, and was buried with his wife in S. Maries monasterie
at Cangas. They held him for a Saint, and they say, that at his funerall there were voices
heard singing in the aire, this verse in Latine; Ecce quo modo tollitur iustus, and nemo considerat,
ablatus est a facie iniquitatis, and erit in pace memoria eius: Behold how the iust man is taken away,
and no man considers it; he is taken from the face of iniquitie, and his memorie shall rest
in peace. He had three sonnes by his wife Ormesinde; Froila, who succeeded him in the kingdome
of Ouiedo, Vimaran, and Aurelius; and one daughter Odesinde: he had also one sonne
called Mauregat, by a concubine.


D. Froila fourth King of Ouiedo.
8 IN the yeare 756Ann 756. Froila was king in the place of his father Alphonso.Priests forbidden to marie. They attribute to
him, as a holy ordinance, that he did forbid the Clergie of Spaine to marie, the which they
had vsed, and it may be abused since the raigne of Vitiza, and had made them subiect to the
decree of Pope Gregorie the first, and the Councell of Rome. This act is written of him as
good and holy, although in many other things he shewed himselfe cruell and wicked. Ioseph
gouernour for the Moores being in armes against him, and hauing spoyled the confines of
Gallicia,A great defeat of Moores. they came to battell, which Froila woon: he slue 54000 Moores, and put the rest
with their Commaunder to a shamefull flight.
Garcia Ximines,Nauarre or Sobrabre. who (as we haue said) had begun a principalitie or royaltie in Sobrarbre,
tooke to wife a Ladie of a noble house, called Iniga; by whom he had one sonne, called Garcia
Inigo. He intitled himselfe king of that countrey: wherewith the Nauarrois being discontented,
they abandoned him, and ioined to the king of Ouiedo. The first occasion which the Christians
(inhabiting in the mountaines of Nauarre and Arragon) tooke to erect an Estate, and
make head against the Moores, was of an assemblie at the interment of an Hermit which liued
in the rockes neere vnto Iaca. This Hermit was buried in the place whereas afterwards the
monasterie of S. Iohn de la Pegna was built, the which at the first was a Colledge of Chanoins.
Garcia Ximines raigned 42 yeares, and left his pettie kingdome to Garcia Inigo his sonne, to
whom the Nauarrois submitted themselues againe: but Froila raigning in Ouiedo, forced
them by armes to returne to his obedience.
Froila maried the daughter of Eude Duke of Aquitaine,Ouiedo. called Menine, or according vnto
some, Momerane; by whom he had two sonnes, Alphonso, called the Chast, and Bermond, or
Veremond, both which raigned, although that D. Bermond was made by the Clergie: and
moreouer he had a daughter by her, called D. Ximina, who was mother to Bernard of Carpio.
This king did first vse the title of Dom,Title of Dom first vsed. which the king and all the Noblemen of Spaine haue
euer since obserued. What the furious desire of raigne is, and with what iealousie kings are
often tormented, Froila shewed by the cruell parricide of his brother Vimaran, whom he caused
to be slaine through iealousie,Froila murthers his brother. seeing him to be a gallant Knight, and generally beloued
for his good parts; yet he repented the fact, but too late. For satisfaction whereof, they write,
that he adopted the sonne of Vimaran, called Veremond, to succeed him in the kingdome: the
which hath bred some doubt, whether this Veremond (which came to the Crowne in the

fourth place after Froila) were the sonne of Vimaran, or of Froila himselfe; who soone after
was also slaine by his other brother Aurelius, in reuenge of the death of Vimaran, hauing raigned
eleuen yeares and a halfe, or thereabouts.
9 During the raigne of this king,Moores. the Arabians of Spaine diuided themselues wholly from
the Caliplhes of Damas, vnder Abderramen,Abderramen vsur pes the Soueraigntie in Spaine. who chased, and in the end slew the Gouernour
or Viceroy Ioseph, made himselfe king and Miralmumin or Miramomelin, and held Spaine with
that title 33 yeares, not acknowledging the Emperor or Caliph of Damas in any thing. This
was in the yeare 757 of our redemption, and 138 yeares after the Moores descent in Spaine;
by reason of the diuision of the soueraigne dignitie of the Arabians in the East: for against
Maruan, who had succeeded Hizes Caliph of the Arabians at Damas, there had risen many
tyrants, whereof he punished some, but Asmulin vanquished him. This was of the race of
Mutar, who had raigned in Persia, and followed his sect, maintaining that Ali had beene the
true Prophet, and greater then Mahumet: he commaunded then ouer the Corasenes, a people
in Persia: He was aduised by Cataban his friend, to procure the slaues throughout all Persia
to kill their masters, and to rob them; the which they did, and came rich with their masters
spoyles to Asmulin. Soone after being impatient of ease, they diuided themselues into
two sects, the Caismes and Lamonites; Asmulin taking part with the Lamonites, defeated
the others, and with his victorious bands assayled Iolin, Gouernour of Persia, vnder the Caliph
Maruan,Asmulin Caliph and his victories. whom he vanquished, and Maruan also, who came against him with aboue three
hundred thousand fighting men, forcing him to flie into Egypt, whither he was followed,
defeated, and slaine by Salin, the sonne of Asmulin, by whom through his victories the kingdome
of the Persians was setled in his familie.The Sophies of Persia discended from Asmulin. The rest of Maruans familie and followers
were dispersed in Africke, where they erected the kingdome of Fez, and some passed into
Spaine, which might be that race of Abderramen, of whom we here intreat; who notwithstanding
Vasee affirmes was basely descended: and Garibay on the other side sayes, that he was
issued from the race of Aben Humeia, and from Zaineb the daughter of Mahumet. His father
was called Moabia, and his seat was also at Cordoua: he brought his armie before Valence,
which resisted him, and tooke it. They say, that the bones of S. Vincent were worshipped
there, and that many families among these Christians, ill instructed, fearing the comming
of this Sarracene king, dislodged, and carried these relickes into the woods and mountaines,
which lye betwixt Valence and the mouth of the riuer of Guadiana: and hauing passed vnto
that point which in old time was called the holie Promontorie, they were encountred
by a Moore of Fez,Whence cape S. Vincent in Algarbe tooke the name. called Alibouz, who rauaged the countrey of Algarbe; he slew these
men, tooke their children prisoners, and left S. Vincents bones vpon the field, where they were
afterwards found, and thereof this Promontorie was called Cap S. Vincent.
The Almightie God (although that he had deliuered his Church into the hands of Barbarians
and Infidels, by reason of the prophanation of his name, and that the Spaniards made
little vse of their chastisements) maintained alwaies some light of the Gospell among them,
raising vp men, who entertained some order and shew of Christiantie, and had the Scriptures
and their ceremonies throughout all the towns of the Moores jurisdiction. They make
mention of Verus Bishop of Seuile, at that time a learned man, and of a good life. Cixilas
was Archbishop of Toledo, to whom PP. Adrian (as the Spanish Authors say) did write a
letter, blaming the custome of the Christians in Spaine to eat flesh on Saterdayes; wherefore
they made an order, not to eat any that day but the entrailes, head, and feet of beasts, the
which hath beene since obserued.


D. Aurelius fifth King of Ouiedo.
D. Aurelius succeeded his brother D. Froila in the realme of Ouiedo,Ouiedo. hauing slaine him in
the yeare 767. notwithstanding that,An. 767. he left a sonne called D. Alphonso the chast, with
other children: but the hatred which the noblemen of the countrey did beare vnto his father,
was the cause of his reiection, being then also verie young: whereby it appeares,The right of succession to the Crowne had yet no place in Spaine. that
the right of succession was not in those dayes practised in Spaine. This Prince was politicke,
and of an actiue spirit, yet not giuen to armes: wherefore he made a peace with the

Moores, so as during his raigne they did not attempt any thing one against another. The
bondmen in his countrey being mourned against their masters, and in armes, they were supprest
by the wisdome of this king, and reduced to their first condition of seruitude. They report
a shamefull and abhominable thing of him among Christians, That in his capitulation
with Abderramen to haue a peace, besides that he made himselfe his tributarie, he promised
among other things, to giue euerie yeare to these Barbarians a certaine number of virgins,
yet Vaseus doth attribute it to Mauregat. He married his sister D. Odesinde or Vsende, to a
renowned knight called D. Sillo: and hauing raigned six yeares and six moneths, this king
D. Aurelius died. All these kings were in a manner buried in the towne of Ianguas, which
many write Cangas: We doe not find that he had either wife or children.


D. Sillo, sixt King of Ouiedo.
11 D. Sillo his brother in law,An. 774. and his sister Vsende or Odesinde, obtained the kingdome of
Ouiedo, in the yeare 774.
12 In Arragon there was an Earle called Aznar,Aznar first Earle of Arragon. risen in armes: some hold, that he was
sonne or grandchild to Duke Eude of Guyenne, who comming to serue D. Garcia Inigo king
of Sobrarbre, tooke Iaca, and obtained of him in gift the countrey which lyes betwixt the
two riuers, called Arragon, with the title of Earle or Gouernour: dying, he left two sonnes,
Galinde and Ximen Garses.
As for D. Sillo,Ouiedo. the beginning of his raigne was troublesome, many refusing to obey him:
wherefore to assure his estate, he renewed the peace with the Arabians in Spaine, and subdued
his rebels by a victorie which he got of them vpon the mountaine of Zebrero in Gallicia.
In the end, seeing that he had no children, he resigned the charge of affaires to D.
Alphonso the chast, nephew to his wife, and to her, giuing himselfe wholly to a contemplatiue
life.
In his time the noblemen Arabians enjoying the townes and prouinces of Spaine,Moores. vnder
the Miralmumin Abderramen, impatient one of another, according to the naturall disposition
of this mutinous nation, they fell to warre among themselues: Abubatar Deuisfer,
and others, had chased away Ibnaballa of Saragosse, who is also called Abi Arabi, who called
in Charlemaigne king of France to his aid,The French drawne into Spaine by the Moores diuisions. and he entred into Spaine with a great armie, besieged
Saragosse, tooke it by composition, and setled Ibnaballa in his Seigniorie, making the
noblemen Moores that were his neighbors, his tributaries. Among other conditions accorded
betwixt Charles and the Moores, it was said, that they should suffer (others say heare) the
preachings of the Christians, the seruants of God.


D. Garcia Inigo, second King of Sobrarbre
or Nauarre.
13 IN this growing kingdome of Nauarre,Nauarre or Sobrarbe. D. Garcia Inigo had succeeded his father Garcia
Ximenes in the yeare 758, who raigned 44 yeares. This king enlarged his limits by reason
of the Moores dissentions, and tooke Pampelone from them; the which we read was also
taken about that time by Charlemaigne, king of France: so, as it seemes, that being readie to
come into Spaine to succour Ibnaballa, the pettie king of Sarragosse, he would seize vpon
Pampelone, to assure his passage; and then hauing restored Ibnaballa, and defeated Abderramen,
killing aboue 30000 of his Moores, as the Spanish Authors report, he demanteled it in
his returne into France, so as it was easie for D. Garcia to seize thereon.


D. Mauregat, seuenth King of Ouiedo.
14 D. Sillo died in the yeare 783,Ouiedo. hauing held the royall seat nine yeares and one
moneth,An. 783. and was interred at Ouiedo, in Saint Iohns Church, which he had

built, and was afterwards transported to S. Saluador: After whose decease, by a generall
consent, the realme of Ouiedo was giuen to D. Alphonso the chast: but his vncle D.
Mauregat, bastard brother to his father, as he had beene vnlawfully begotten, so he shewed
himselfe in his actions and affections, both to him and the State, without law, without
pietie, and without honour: for being desirous to raigne, he layed a plot with the Moores,
and by their aide chased Alphonso his nephew out of the Asturies and Leon, forcing him
to retyre himselfe into the countries of Alaua, and Biscaye, where he had many allyes,
who preserued him from the treacherous practises of this tyrant. The accord hee made
with the Barbarians, to procure succours from them, was villanous, and vnworthie of
a Christian Prince:A detestable tribute payed by a Christian Prince to Infidels. for hee bound himselfe to pay them a tribute contrarie to all law
and honestie, which was, fiftie virgines of noble families, and as manie of baser condition,
the which hee should send yearely; this impure and brutish king exposing those
poore Christian creatures, by an expresse agreement, vnto the damnable appetite of Infidels:
by reason whereof he was hated of all men, and (as it is likely) of God also.
He raigned fiue yeares and fiue monethes, dying without children, and was buried at
Prauia.
In his time Abderramen raigning ouer all the Moores in Spaine,Moores. he did wonderfully
spoyle the Christians, being verie mightie; for he had thirtie thousand horse and two
hundred thousand foot in his ordinarie warres:The power of Abderramen. with which forces he draue the kings of
Ouiedo into the mountaines of Asturia, and brought vnder his subjection Gallafray king of
Toledo,His works. who made head against him, with manie other noblemen of his sect. He caused
the Mesquite or Mosquee of Cordoua to be built, of a rich and stately structure. The Cathedrall
Church of that citie, admirable for the greatnesse and number of goodly pillars:
the gardens and castle called Arrizaphe or Alixares, are also his workes. This Prince died
in the yeare 787, and 170 of the Arabians, leauing eleuen sonnes and nine daughters. He
was interred in the castle of Cordoua, and had for his successor in Spaine his sonne Izen, or
Ixeca, or Ismen; for so he is called by diuers Authors.


D. Veremond, first of that name, and eighth
King of Ouiedo.
15 D. Veremond, or Bermond,An. 789. the sonne of Froila, raigned after Mauregat in OuiedoOuiedo.
and Leon, hauing beene of the Clergie, and made a Deacon. Wherefore fearing
to offend God, if he did forsake his Clericall profession to gouerne the kingdome, he
left this dignitie, and resigned it to his brother D. Alphonso the second yeare, or as some
write,A Prince too superstitious. the third, of his raigne. And moreouer, being married to a Ladie called Imoline, from
that time he did forbeare her companie, notwithstanding that he had had two children, Ramer
and Garcia: He liued foure yeares and six moneths after that with D. Alphonso, and lyes
interred at Ouiedo.
16 In his time,Moores. Izen, Osmen, or Ismen, the second sonne of Abderramen, raigned at Cordoua,
who seized on the Crowne, to the preiudice of his elder brother Zuleima, who gouerned
at Toledo. The inhabitants of Toledo, and all that jurisdiction, obeyed Zuleima
still, who tooke vpon him the title of King, seeing himselfe assured of his people. D. Hizen
being jealous thereof,Warre betwixt two brethren Moores. came to assayle him, where there was a great and a bloudie battaile betwixt
the two brethren, neere vnto a place called Vilches, in the which Zuleima was defeated,
and all the passages being stopt, that he could not fortifie himselfe in Toledo, he fled
into Murria; from whence he afterwards passed into Africke, to seeke in-vaine for meanes
to recouer that which he had lost in Spaine. Hizen after this victorie marched towards
Toledo, and did so terrifie them of the towne (who were neither well furnished with
souldiors, nor victuals) as they yeelded presently, vpon honest conditions for the inhabitants.
Thus Hizen remained peaceable king of Spaine, being wonderfully proud and haughtie,
so as presently after he sought to continue the warre in Languedoc,The Moores make warre in Languedoc. which his predecessors
had begun, where he did much annoy the Christians, and carried away great spoyles,

with the which he did enrich the Mosquee which his father had begun at Cardoua, especially
with the pillage of Narbone and Girone. In Spaine he sent a great armie vnto the Asturies,
against king D. Alphonso the chast, who refused to send him that vnworthie and tyrannous
tribute of virgines, whereunto king Mauregat the bastard had submitted himselfe. He
found the Christians in armes neere vnto a Bourg called Ledos or Alado, where they
fought with such obstinacie,A memorable defeat of Moores. as there were slaine aboue seuentie thousand Moores vpon the
place, with their Generall Muguay, by meanes whereof the kings of Ouiedo and Leon were
from that time freed from that villanous tribute. This battaile was woon, whilest that D.
Bermond or Veremond the Deacon yet liued. The Moores were afterwards set vpon by the
French, vpon the confines of Rossillon, who did succour and fauour the enterprises of D. Alphonso
the chast, in Castille and Gallicia, Charlemaigne then raigning. Wee read, that the
French captaines forced Zato or Saad,The Moores of Barcelone tributaries to the French. Gouernour of Barcelone, to yeeld himselfe tributarie
to king Charles, and to receiue French garrisons into many places of that countrey: as they
of Huesca did also, who notwithstanding freed themselues soone after: for Huesca lying
farre into the enemies countrey, they could not so easily keepe it as Barcelone, being a sea
towne. There was then a battaile betwixt the French and the Moores in the valley of Curol,
at this day Corbiere, in the countrey of Cerdane, which the Moores lost. This was the
first Prince of the Moores, which set any fleet to sea in Spaine, hauing rigged forth many
ships and galliots at Almerie, whereof he gaue the charge vnto a captaine called Mahamet,
who sackt the Islands of Maiorca, Minorca, Iuiza, and Sardaigne.
Don Garcia Inigo,Nauarre. second king of Sobrarbre and Nauarre, had some difference at the passage
which they say had been made by the French into Spaine, vnder Charlemaigne; for which
cause Charles demanteled Pampelone, the which he had seized on, comming to Saragosse.
This D. Garcia raigned 44 yeares, and had one sonne called D. Fortun Garces, who succeeded
him in the kingdome of Sobrarbre and Nauarre. He lyes at S. Iohn de la Pegna.
17 In Arragon there had succeeded to Cont Aznar,Arragon. his sonne D. Galinde, surnamed Aznarris,
in the yeare 795.An. 795. This Earles seat was at Iaca, acknowledging the kings of Nauarre
for Soueraignes. We find nothing memorable written of him, but that he was founder of
some Monasteries, and built certaine forts, and among others the castle of Athares. He had
one daughter called Theude, the which he married to Don Fortun, Infant of Nauarre: others
say, that she was first married to one Cont Bernard, a vassale to king Charlemaigne, who hauing
seized on the mountaines of Ribagorsa, did much annoy the Moores. This Earle Galinde
had one some called D. Ximen Aznarris, Earle of Arragon after him, and another
called Endregot Galinde: D. Ximen died in the battaile which D. Fortun king of Nauarre
had against the Moores, who were entred into his countrey by the valley of Roncal, and
left no children.
18 Cattelogne began also at that time to haue Christian Earles.Cattelogue. It is one of the most
fruitfull countries in Spaine both for men and all commodities, and these Princes haue been
alwaies called Earles of Barcelone, without taking any royall title. The name of Cattelogne
is drawne diuersly by writers: some deriue it from the auncient Castellans, which were vpon
those marches neere to the Ausetanes:Whence the name of Cattelogue comes. others from a captaine named Catharlot, or Carthalon:
others from the Gothes and Alains (people which inhabited there together) and make
the word of Gottalnia, since drawne to Cattalania: others not from the Gothes, but from
the Cattes, a people of Germanie, mingled with the Alains: and others will deriue it from
the Catalonicians, vpon the marches of Tolouse. The Christians inhabiting this countrey
(after that vnfortunate yeare 714, when as the Moores made themselues masters of Spaine)
sollicited Charles Martel, (who then gouerned the French State, and had gotten many victories
against the Moores) to be fauorable vnto them, and to helpe them to shake off these Infidels
yo^ake, yea after that there was some forme of Estate erected by the Christians in Asturia
and Nauarre; the which Martel graunted them, and when as his affaires in France gaue
him leaue, he sent a Germane knight called Otter or Oger Cathorlot, who was Gouernour of
Aquitaine, of which countrey Martel had seized after the death of Count Eude. This captaine,
accompanied with some bands of Germanes and French, gathered together such of
the countrey as were fit to beare armes, and tooke some frontier places from the Moores.
Then died Charles Martel in the yeare 741, whose sonne Pepin obtained the crowne of

France, through the counsell and fauour of Pope Zacharie, about the yeare 750. During all
the raigne of king Pepin, the Cattelans maintained themselues in warre against the Moores,
with the helpe of the French, without any great aduantage, or notable successe, that is recorded;
for the histories of those times are rare. After Pepin Charlemaigne raigned, whose
sonne Lewis came oftentimes into Spaine by Cattelogne, and there did some exploits of
armes; as also Charlemaigne in person, both in Cattelogne, Nauarre, and Arragon: And for
that the Cattelans were mingled still with the French, during these warres, the Romane
tongue which they spake (as in a manner all the rest of the Spaniards) came to be corrupted
among them,The Cattelans language. so as they made a diuers language to that which they vse in Castille, not much
different to that they speake on this side the Pyrenees, in Aquitaine and Languedoc. The
French made such warre in Cattelogne, as a Gouernor of Barcelone, a Moore, called Zato,
yeelded himselfe vassale and tributarie to the Emperour Charles: after whose death (for hee
kept his promise,Bernard first Earle of Barcelone, subiect to the French. although he were a Mahumetist) Bernard was made Earle of Barcelone,
counted by the authors for the first, carrying this title, who intitled himselfe also Earle,
Duke, and Marquesse of Spaine, as it appeares in some letters which are found of him in the
monasteries of the country, in Ribagorsa, and at Saint Peters of Tauerna.


Alphonso, second of that name, ninth King of
Ouiedo, called the Chast.
19 IN the Asturies of Ouiedo,Ouiedo. the yeare 795,An. 795. D. Alphonso was sole king, without companion,
D. Bermond being dead. He was called the chast, for he liued holily and chastly,
without the companie of any woman, although he were married to a Ladie called Berthe; a
liberall Prince to the poore, and greatly fearing God, aboue all a friend to Monks, and a
great builder of Couents; yet notwithstanding all these things, he was wife and valiant. He
had (as we haue said) one sister, called D. Ximena, who seeing them carelesse to marrie her, she
contracted her selfe secretly to Don Sandias, Earle of Saldagne, who was of good yeares; for
he was aboue 29 yeares old when as the king D. Froila their father died: of which marriage
came a sonne called Bernard del Carpio. King D. Alphonso (who thought his sister should haue
beene chast like himselfe) was verie much discontented at this marriage,A secret marriage seuerely punished. and hauing caused
Don Sandias to come to the town of Leon, whither he had called the noblemen of his realme,
he condemned him as a traitor, to end his daies in perpetuall prison, in the castle of Lune, hauing
put out his eyes, he caused his sister to be put into a Monasterie of Nunnes, and yet he
gaue order that the infant Bernard should be nourisht in Asturia as his owne sonne, who afterwards
proued one of the wisest knights of his age, but not verie fortunate. They attribute
to this king the building of the chiefe Church in Ouiedo, called S. Saluator, yet others affirme
it was the worke of king Sillo. But howsoeuer it were, D. Alphonso did augment it, and
enricht it with diuers jewels, yea with relickes which had beene transported from Toledo,
and other places, whereof this Church was the store-house: moreouer, with a crosse of gold,
which they say had been made by two Angels, the which presented themselues vnto the king
D. Alphonso in the habit of pilgrims.
20 To this is added the finding out of the Sepulchre of the Apostle S. Iames, neere vnto
Iria, by the Bishop of that place, called Theodemir, at the relation of two men, which the Historie
of Compostella in Latine calls personatos,Inuention of S. Iames sepulchre. that is to say, masked, who said they had seene
Angels and torches about the place where his bodie was found, in a coffin of marble, in a
wood, in the yeare 797, whereat the Spaniards themselues do much wonder, seeing they
find no mention in their Histories of S. Iames Sepulcher in Spaine, in all the time which past
since his death vnto the raigne of this Alphonso: no not in the time of Miron, the first Christian
king of the Sueues in Gallicia, who first errected the king of the Gothes that were Christians,
nor yet since. It was reuealed at that time by such apparitions to Theodemir, who belieued
it to be the verie bodie of S. Iames, and so persuaded the king D. Alphonso, who
was wonderfull ioyfull thereof, and built a temple, endowing it with great reuenewes, taking
this manifestation for a singular fauour of God. The Spaniards haue since made him their
Patron and Protector of their Countrie, calling on him in all their necessities especially in

the warre. Neighbour Princes were amazed at this relickes for we read, that Charlemaigne
(in whose time D. Alphonso began to raigne) being aduertised of this inuention, posted thither,
and afterwards obtained from Pope Leo the third, sitting at Rome, That the Episcopall
Sea of Iria should be remoued to Compostella, vnder the Metropolitane of Braga, from
the which it was since exempt, as wee will shew hereafter. In king Alphonsus time, and (as
some thinke) when Charlemaigne was in Spaine, there were two Councels held against Elipand
Archbishop of Toledo, and Felix first Bishop of Vrgel, and their followers, infected
with Nestorius heresie, who imagined a double person in Iesus Christ, as he consists of two
natures, diuine and humane: for this cause Elipand is not in the catalogue of the Archbishops
of Toledo: Felix had tryed in vaine to draw vnto his error Odesinde widow to king
Sillo.
21 Ahizmen Hizen or Ixeca,Moores. Miralmumin, deceased in the yeare 794, hauing raigned seuen
yeares and seuen moneths;Halihatan fourth king of the Moores: Warre betwixt him and his vncles. to whom succeeded Halihatan his sonne, who either for state, or
for feare and distrust, had an ordinarie gard of fiue thousand horsemen, part Christian renegado's,
part Eunuches. In the yeare 799An. 799. Zuliema and Abdalla his vncle hearing of the death
of Hizen, came out of Africk into Spaine (from whence they had beene chased) to trie if they
might enter into Toledo, whereas Zuleima had raigned: they came to Valence, and armed
themselues with the forces of that towne, and so went to field, giuing them of Toledo to vnderstand
(whom they knew to be affected vnto them) of their comming, and designe: who
acquainting other Moores therewith, they tooke armes for Zuliema, chasing all such out of
the towne, as they thought opposite vnto them and then they did aduertise Zuleima how that
all went well for him; who preparing himselfe to goe to Toledo, was encountred by the armie
of Halihatan his nephew, by the which he was defeated and slaine, this yeare of 799. Abdalla
fled, but afterwards considering that he had no meanes to rayse his decayed fortunes, he
came and yeelded himselfe to his nephewes mercie, who receiued him, and vsed him honourably.
So Toledo fayled the second time to be made a royall seat, by the defeat and death of
Zuleima: yet the inhabitants finding themselues guiltie, would not trust Halihatan, but maintained
themselues in their rebellion, for the space of nine yeares. Halihatan being vnable or
vnwilling to trie his forces against so great and well fortified a citie, sought in the meane time
to win them by all mild and friendly meanes. Among others, he imployed about this reconciliation
a Moore, who was a knight, and borne at Toledo, yet then resident at Huesca, and
Gouernour of those marches: who being come into the citie with letters from king Halihatan,
wrought so wisely, as in a short time the Toledanes returned to the kings obedience,
to whom there was promised assurance, and forgetfulnesse of all they had done; but there
was nothing obserued:Hambroz the Moore betrayes the Toledanes. for this Hambroz, to abuse the Toledanes, said, That he would not
remaine in the castle, for feare to be surprised by the kings men, which arriued dayly, but caused
another lodging to be assigned him, in a street called Moutichel, neere vnto S. Christophers
Church, in the which he made a caue vnder the ground, to murther them that had rebelled against
the king. In the meane time, Halihatan vnder colour to make warre against the Christians,
and to succour the frontier, caused his forces to approach neere the towne, vnder the
commaund of a sonne of his called Abderramen, the which by the means of Hambroz entred
quietly into Toledo, and without any shew to doe harme. Abderramen lodged with Hambroz,
where shewing a good countenance to the chiefe of the Toledanes, Moores, he inuited a
great number of them to a stately feast which he had prepared for them. As these Moores
came one after another, thinking to make good cheere, they were presently layd hold on, and
beheaded, by some that were appointed to that purpose, and then cast into the vault. There
had beene many dispatcht in this manner, when as one of the guests which was inuited, discouering
some bloud, grew amazed, and suddainely slipt out, and gaue an alarme to the towne,
crying out, that they murthered the citizens in Hambroz lodging. The Toledanes being terrified
with these newes, and hauing no meanes to make resistance, and without any captaine to
lead them, found no better expedient then to crie out for mercie, but it was in vaine: for then
they pursued them openly,A cruell reuenge vpon the Toledanes for their rebellion. so as there was aboue 5000 slaine, to punish their offence committed
against Halihatan; against whom, they of Cordoua being also rebelled, he caused 300
of them to be hanged vpon the riuer side: there was a captaine called Abdelcarin appointed
for this execution, who a little before had subdued Calaorra. Halihatan growne proud with

this successe, sent his captaines to annoy the Christians frontiers, who entred into Gallicia in
the yeare 812, where he was vnfortunat in many encounters, by the prouidence of king D. Alphonso.
The like happened to Ores, Gouernor of Merida, who was defeated neere vnto Benevent,
in the territorie of Leon.An. 813. The yeare after 813, another Moore called Alcama, Gouernor
of Badaios, layed siege to Zamorra, but he was forced to retyre. Not content with this, two
armies of Moores entred into D. Alphonso his countrey, in diuers places, against the which he
opposed 2 armies; the one led by himself, the other by Bernard del Carpio his nephew, who was
growne of good yeares, in both which he was victor; so as the Moores did forbeare for a time
to annoy the Christians, and fell to spoile one another: whereupon a great nobleman among
them, called Mahomad, came out of the quarters of Merida, to seeke refuge of king D. Alphonso,
for that he was violently pursued,A Moore se^kes refuge of D. Alphonso: his trecherie and punishment. and could find no safetie in all the Moores countrey. D. Alphonso
entertained him, and assigned him rents to liue on in Gallicia: but he shewed himselfe
ingratefull and trecherous, raising a great armie by the intelligence he had with other Moores,
to inuade the countrey of his benefactor: but they were readie in time to resist him, and gaue
him battaile, where there died aboue 50000 Moores. Mahomad their Generall being taken,
was beheaded as a traitor. At that time Marsil or Massile, successor to Ibnahalla, raigned at Saragosse,
who was at the battell of Ronceuaux, where the French were defeated. It is certaine,
as Authors write, that this battaile was giuen in the time of D. Alphonso the chast, but the
yeare is doubtfull, yet they hold it was a little before the death of Charlemaigne, who died about
the yeare 815.
22 If that which the Spaniards write be true,Ouiedo. it is most certaine, that among these Princes
ambition went before, and religion followed after. D. Alphonso hauing liued chastly, being
sorrie that he had no children, and for that he had receiued great aid from the Emperour
Charles, and it may be presumed, that so mightie a Prince was most necessarie to restore
Spaine to her beautie, and the Christians to their former possession, or else for some other
consideration, he had a determination to make him heire of his estates after his death: but the
Nobilitie of Spaine hauing notice thereof, did not allow it, refusing to be vassales to any forraine
Prince:Charlemaigne made heire of Ouiedo, and afterwards reiected. yet D. Alphonso had by his letters and embassages giuen great hope thereof vnto
Charles, who affected it, and had appointed the realmes of Ouiedo and Leon for Bernard,
sonne to his sonne Pepin, and did prepare himselfe to come vnto Alphonso, vnder colour of succouring
him against the Moores, but he had newes from him, that he was forced by his Earles
and Barons to recall it, and therefore he entreated him to forbeare his comming: the which
Charlemaigne taking for an affront, resolued to force him by armes, to performe his promise:
wherefore he raised a mightie armie of French, Germanes, and Italians, which were vnder his
Empire, and sent it beyond the Pyrenees, led by his best captaines: yea, some (who haue not
duly considered the age of Charlemaigne, who was then 72 yeares old) say, that he was there
in person; whereof the Spaniards being aduertised, they made a league of all the Christian
Potentates, of Gallicia, Leon, Arragon, Nauarre, and others, and of some Princes of the
Moores,League of Christian Princes and Spanish Moores against the French. to whom the gouernment of the French in Spaine was suspected; among the which
was Marsil of Saragosse. All these forces joyned together, stopt the passages, and forced the
French to returne into their countrey, but with great disaduantage and disorder, through the
straits of the mountaines, whereas the Spaniards hauing seized vpon the passages, the foreward
and battaile of the French were defeated, and their baggage taken, with such slaughter,
as they write there were aboue 40000 men slaine that day:Defeat of the French at Ronceual. among the which was Roland,
and all those whom fabulous writers call Peeres of France, with other great personages.
In this action, the valor and good conduct of D. Bernard of Carpio, nephew to D. Alphonso,
was admirable, as also in his warres against the Moores, as the Spaniards write, who was for a
long time held for the kings sonne, and he himselfe beleeued it: but being aduertised of his
parents, and of the calamitie of the Earle of Saldagne his father, he made many petitions vnto
the king, and vsed all the means he could to moue him to pardon the injurie which he pretended
had beene done him, and to free him after so many yeares imprisonment; the which he
could not obtaine: wherefore being discontented, he retyred from Court into his country of
Saldagne, where he shewed himselfe as much as he could an enemie to king D. Alphonso.



D. Fortun, third King of Nauarre:
23 DVring the raigne of this king of Ouiedo and Leon,Nauarre. D. Fortun was the third king
of Sobrarbre and Nauarre,An. 802. who came vnto the Crowne in the yeare 802, after
the decease of D. Garcia Inigo his father. He was not onely to make head against the
Moores, but also against the French, who spoyled his countries of Nauarre and Arragon,
as well as those of the Mahumetists: for souldiours hold nothing holie, but that
which is barren, and yeelds no bootie. During the raigne of this king was that famous
defeat at Ronceuaux, where he was with his Nauarrois, and other confederates, for the
Spanish partie, where the French hauing beene defeated and stripped of their baggage,
they afterwards did all they could to annoy Spaine. This king was married to Theude,
daughter to D. Galinde, by reason whereof he did inherite (as some say) the countrey of
Arragon: yet this vnion of Arragon and Nauarre is not receiued by all Authors, but
is referred to a later time, and there are memorials found of other Earles in that countrey,
after D. Galinde.
Of this marriage came the infant D. Sancho Garces, successor in the realme of Sobrarbre
and Nauarre, to D. Fortun his father, whom it may be this Theude had had to her second
husband: for some Authors say, that she had beene formerly married to one of Charles
his captaines, and of his bloud, called Bernard, not he which gouerned Cattelogne. D.
Fortun had great warres against the Arabian Moores, to whom, with the Arragonois,
and other his allyes, he gaue battaile, at a place called Olcassa, or Olaast, in the which
died D. Ximen Aznaris Earle of Arragon, brother to D. Theude, the which some maintaine
did happen vnder D. Sancho, sonne and successor to D. Fortun, who was vanquished and
slaine by Musa Aben Cacin or Heazin, king of Saragosse. The Christians woon this battaile
of Olcassa, by the valour of them of Roncal, who had for a testimonie thereof, the title and
priuiledges of Gentrie, which they enjoy at this day.


D. Sancho Garces, sixt King of Nauarre.
24 D. Fortun hauing raigned thirteene yeares died,An. 815. and there succeeded him, in the
yeare 815, his sonne D. Sancho Garces, who continued the warres against the
Moores with good successe. There is mention made of a battaile he woon against them,
in the yeare 821, neere vnto Ochauiere; in the which the inhabitants of the valley of
Roncal behaued themselues so valiantly, as they deserued a new confirmation and enlargement
of their priuiledges of Nobilitie. These people although they were subjects of
Nauarre, yet they leuie an annuall tribute of the French, their neighbours, by an accord
made in old time. It is a place vnder the jurisdiction of Sanguesse, situated in the
Pyrenee mountaines of Nauarre, confining vpon them of Val Breton, which are of France,
from whom they exact three Cowes euerie yeare, on the third day of Iune, with certaine
ceremonies obserued of old time. Some thinke this tribute grew by reason of the warres
which this king had with the Gascoines and French, who being incensed with the Cont of
Ronceuaux, did vsually inuade the territories of Sobrarbre and Nauarre, who after they had
beene vigorously repulsed by him and his successors, they were forced to make the abouementioned
peace, and doe the homage.
25 In Arragon,Arragon. D. Ximen Aznar, the sonne of D. Galinde, hauing commaunded with
the title of Earle (a gallant knight, who died in the battaile of Olcassa, following the partie
of D. Fortun Garces of Nauarre, or else in the seruice of D. Fortun his sonne, about the
yeare 803) to him succeeded his vncle, called D. Ximen Garces, notwithstanding that he had
a brother,Diuers Earles of Arragon. whose name was Endregot, whether it were by force, or otherwise, the Histories
make no mention. This D. Ximen Garces liued little, he was wise and valiant, and was

slaine in an incounter against the Moores. After him D. Garcia Aznaris was fift Earle of Arragon,
who also did not long enjoy his estate, and was slaine fighting valiantly against the
Moores in Spaine. D. Fortun his sonne did inherite the Earledome of Arragon, who imployed
himselfe valiantly in the warres against the Moores: he died without any sonne,
so as Arragon was then vnited to Nauarre, by the meanes of D. Vrraca, daughter to D. Fortun,
or as some write, of D. Endregot Galinde, who was married to D. Garcia Inigo, second of
that name, king of Nauarre, sonne to Inigo Arista, the which was the first woman which
did inherite this Countie of Arragon,Succession of women in Arragon. and brought in a custome, that the women should
succeed.
26 Another Bernard, of whom we haue made mention, who intitled himselfe Earle of
Barcelone,Cattelogne. Duke and Marquesse of Spaine, gouerned Cattelogne, about the yeare 796, for
the French, after the death of Zato the Moore, being their vassale and tributarie. He had
beene Gouernor of Prouence and Languedoe vnder the Emperour Charlemaigne. In Cattelogne
he made sharpe warres against the Moores, wherein he was assisted by a Spanish
knight called D. Geoffrey, the hairie, which succeeded in the gouernment of Barcelone. This
Geoffrey was Lord of the castle of Arria, in the territorie of Conflent, and Countie of Barcelone;
with the helpe of which D. Bernard he tooke from the Moores all the countrey which
lyes betwixt the two riuers of Noguera and Lobregat: but after the death of Charlemaigne,
a Gouernor of Guienne, called Aymon, hauing rebelled against the Emperor, Lewis his sonne
and successor, besides the hurt he did in that Prouince, entred into Cattelogne, and tooke
townes and castles, being fauoured by Abderramen king of the Moores at Cordoua: and in
the yeare 820, these rebellious French and the Moores hauing joyned their forces together,
they came and besieged Barcelone.
27 This Abderramen,Moores. second of that name, had succeeded his father Halihatan, who died
in the yeare 819, and of the Arabians 202, hauing raigned 24 yeares, who of many wiues,
which Mahumets law doth allow, had left 19 sonnes and 21 daughters. This warre of Cattelogne
was one of Abderramens first exploits, in the which Barcelone was taken in the yeare
820, but soone after recouered by the Christians.
In the yeare 824 died Don Alphonso the chast,Ouiedo. hauing instituted for his successor D. Ramir,An. 824.
sonne to D. Bermond or Veremond the Deacon, rejecting D. Bernard of Carpio his sisters
sonne, who was his lawfull heire. This Prince raigned 29 yeares, and was buried at Ouiedo,
in S. Maries Church, which he had built. He was a great benefactor of the Clergies. Wee
find a donation made by him to the Church of Compostella,Letters of donation suspect. of about a league of ground about
S. Iaques sepulchre, but the date of these letters are of the yeare 835, which agrees not
with that which Authors write of the death of this king.


D. Ramir, first of that name, and tenth
King of Ouiedo.
28 D. Ramir was sonne to the king D. Veremond,Ouiedo. called the Deacon, and adopted by D. Alphonso
his vncle, a generous and worthie Prince, and not inferior to any of his predecessors
in vertue. In the beginning of his raigne he married a Ladie, called D. Vrraca, borne
in old Castille, of which were borne two sonnes, D. Ordogno who raigned, and D. Garcia. This
king did that which all other Princes abhorre,Two brothers kings in one kingdome, and agree well; a rare example. for he receiued his sonne to be a companion
with him in the kingdome, and caused his brother D. Garcia to raigne with him, so as there
were two courts and two kings in Ouiedo and Leon. The first warre which troubled this king
was ciuile, by the rebellion of a nobleman of Asturia, called Nepotian, against whom D. Ramir
assembled his armie, in the towne of Lugo, and being come to battaile, he vanquished him,
and put his men to flight: himselfe being taken some few dayes after, had by the kings commaundement
his eyes put out,A rebell punished. and was put into a cloister of Monkes; an vsuall punishment in
those dayes for traitors and rebels.
In this kings time, the fame of the miracles which S. Iaques did at Compostella, began to
be spred ouer all Europe, so as many pilgrims came thither both by sea and land, from all parts
of Christendome:An. 827. but about the yeare 827, the coasts of Gallicia were annoyed with Norman

pyrats, a people of the North, who since vnder Rollo and other captains, inuaded France
and planted themselues in the Prouince, called by their name Normandie. These pyrats, moued
with another zeale than to visit S. Iaques, kept the sea and spoyled the coast with a great
number of ships.Norman pyrats defeated vpon the bankes of Gallicia. D. Ramir came and charged them at a place called Far, where he made a
great slaughter: those which remained, recouered their ships, and came into the mouth of
Guadalquibir, where hauing landed, they spoyled Seuile, and the countrey thereabouts, and
then returned into their countrey. This king D. Ramir was troubled with another sedition;
Aldered and Piniol, two Earles of his countrey, being risen in armes against him in the yeare
828,An. 828. against whom he marcht with his armie, tooke these two rebels, slew Piniol, with his
seuen soones, confederates of his rebellion, and caused Aldereds eyes to be put out, and cast
him into prison.
Abderramen Miralmumin of Spaine,Moores. had continued long in peace with D. Alphonso king
of Ouiedo and Leon: but some yeares after his decease, he had a desire (for that he had had
some good successe against the Christians in Spaine, and also at the persuasion of Idriz,
who raigned then in Fe^) to demaund of king D. Ramir the tribute of a hundred virgines,
which king Mauregat had promised to pay to his predecessors, kings of (...): the
which was denied, as vnjust and vnworthie, by a generall consent of the Prelates and Nobilitie
of the countrey, assembled to this end in the towne of Leon; where by the same
meanes there was a warre concluded against the Moores, to abate their pride. King D. Ramir
hauing then called all the Nobilitie of his countries of Asturia, Leon, Gallicia, and other
places vnder his obedience, and leuied great numbers of souldiors, he entred into the
Moores countrey, by Rioie to Nogera and Aluenda, and came and encamped neere to Logrogne,
whither the Moores armie came soone after, where there was a cruell battaile, to the
great losse of the Christians;Christians defeated. so as without the approaching night it is thought they had bin
all defeated: the king retyred to a place called Clauijo, where at this day there is a Bourg
neere to Logrogne. The night gaue the Christians means to retyre, and to rallie themselues,
who by the will of God resumed courage in such sort, as the next day they presented themselues
againe in battaile. The Moores contemning them whom they had vanquished the day
before, came to charge them without any great order; but they found such resistance, as they
were forced to leaue the field,Moores defeated. and to flye; where they lost (as Histories report) aboue 60000
men, and as it is set downe in a Charter which is the Treasurie of S. Iaques of Compostella,
in the which mention is made of an apparition of the Apostle to king D. Ramir, the night after
his men were defeated, who encouraged him to affront the enemie againe, promising him
victorie, and that he himselfe would be in the battaile, as Parron and Protector of his kingdome:
and they affirme, that the armies being joyned the next day, S. Iaques appeared againe,
mounted vpon a white horse,Apparition of S. Iaques, as the Spaniards say. carrying a white standard, with a red Crosse, fighting and encouraging
the Christians as he had promised. Such apparitions will be receiued according
to euerie mans pietie and good instruction. There are yet at this day found heads of
darts and of launces in the place whereas D. Ramir obtained this victorie: by fauor whereof,
he tooke Calaorra from the Moores, with other places along the riuer of Ebro; but
they returned soone vnder the dominion of the Moores, whose commaund was great at that
time in Spaine.
After this victorie,Ouiedo. D. Ramir being at Calaorra with his brother D. Garcia, the Queene D.
Vrraca, and the infant D. Ordogno, being accompanied with the chiefe Prelates and Noblemen
of the countrey, it was held fit to acknowledge the fauour and assistance, which they did beleeue
S. Iaques had done them. Wherefore this king being persuaded either by his dreames,
or by his Priests, ordained, That all such as dwelt about Compostella should pay yearely a
certaine measure of corne and wine to that Church, out of their reueneues, for the vow, for so
this tribute was called; the which is payed at this day. Moreouer, that after any victorie
gotten against the Moores, when as they came to diuide the spoyle, S. Iaques Church should
hold the place of a knight, and haue a share. The letters graunted by king D. Ramir, beare
date in the yeare 834,Tribute called vow payed to S. Iaques Church. at which time we find by the Histories, that he was not liuing. It is called
S. Iaques vow, it was confirmed by Pope Celestin, then holding his Sea at Rome. Some
haue written, That in this kings time the Order of the Knights of S. Iaques began, but it was
later, as we will shew.

In Cattelogne,Cattelogne. the Christians being much oppressed by the Moores, vnder the Miralmumin
Abderramen the second, the Emperour Lewis the gentle sent an Abbot to comfort them:
for he could send them no souldiors (say the Spaniards.) This Abbot was called Elizachar,
who encouraged the Christians in such sort, as Abderramen returning to the siege of Barcelone,
accompanied with Cont Aymon, they found such resistance, as they were forced to abandon
it, about the yeare 830. Bernard being much esteemed for his valour, he was called
home by the Emperour Lewis, who made him his Chamberlaine, and graunted him then (as
some say) the title of Earle of Barcelone, and for this cause is accounted the first Earle of the
Cattelanes: but it appeares elsewhere, that he had this title of Earle, yea of Duke and Marquesse
long before, the which was nothing but Gouernor of the Countrey, or Prouince.


D. Ximen Inigo, fift King of Sobrarbre
and Nauarre.
29 TO D. Sancho Garces king of Sobrarbre and Nauarre (who died,Nauarre. as some report, in an
encounter of the Moores, led by Musa Aben Cacin, pettie king of Sarragosse) succeeded
his sonne D. Ximen Inigo, in the yeare 832. Of the deeds and manners of this king the
Histories make no mention, yea many Authors passe ouer these first kings of Sobrarbre, and
begin the Historie of this Kingdome with D. Inigo Arista, who came afterwards to the
Crowne. They hold, that D. Ximen is interred in the Couent of Saint Sauior of Leyre,
with D. Nugna his wife.


D. Ordogno, eleuenth King of Ouiedo.
30 D. Ordogno,Ouiedo. which is as much to say as Fortun, sonne to D. Ramir, came vnto the Crown
of Ouiedo and Leon, in the yere 831,An. 831. according to the common opinion. Being entred
into the gouernment of the State, he had warre with some people of the mountaines of
Cantabria (which are not specified) whom he vanquished, and brought vnder his subjection.
He married a Ladie called D. Monadona, or Munia Donna, that is to say, Donna Nugna, by
whom he had fiue sonnes, D. Alphonso, who was king after him, D. Bermond, D. Nugno,
D. Odaire, D. Fruela, and one daughter. He did enlarge and beautifie the buildings of the
townes of Leon, Astorgo, Tuy, Amaya, and others.
They make mention of a miracle in his time,A miracle. in the person of a Bishop of Compostella, successor
to Theodoric, and second Prelate of that Church, named Ataulphe; who being accused of
Apostasie, and that he had reuolted from the Christian religion to that of the Moores, being
called to Court to purge himselfe, he came to Ouiedo vpon a holie Thursday, when as they
did bait a Bull with dogs, hauing an intent to expose the Bishop to the furie of this beast as
soone as he should arriue. But the Bishop hauing said Masse (as the Storie reports) attyred in
his Episcopall robes, came boldly to the kings palace, and passing by the place where they did
hunt this Bull, as he saw him comming towards him, he opened his armes to take him, relying
in God and his owne innocencie: but the beast came quietly vnto him, and suffred him to take
him by the hornes, who led him vnto the king: whereat the king and all the assistants were so
amazed, as they did presently judge that he had beene wrongfully accused. But this holy man
leauing his Church and flocke, retyred himselfe into the deserts, there to liue with beasts, and
became a Hermite. Of this Buls hornes they afterwards made relickes in the Church of S. Sauior
at Ouiedo. Sisenand succeeded in his Bishoprick, and was so vehement to pursue the punishment
of such as had falsely accused Ataulphe, as he neuer ceased vntill he had gotten a
graunt from the king, that all their kinsfolkes should be deliuered for slaues to the Church of
Compostella, although they were not guiltie.
31 About the beginning of this kings raigne,Moores. there were great ciuile dissentions among the
Moores. A nobleman among the^, a Goth by nation, but a Moore by profession, called for this
cause Musa Aben Cacin,Musa Aben Cacin makes himselfe king of Toledo. Musa of the linage of the Gothes, rebelled against Abderramen
Miralmumin. He raigned at Sarragosse, and drew to his partie Huesca and Tafalla, and by
his example he caused the^ of Toledo to take armes, being ill affected to Abderramen, by reason

of the rigours which his father Halihatan had vsed against them. This Moore fortified with
these townes, raysed a great armie, and caused a sonne of his called Abin Lope or Loth, to enter
into Toledo, and then to ouerrun the countries of Nauarre and Cattelogne, and so passed
the Pyrenees, into the territories of the French. At his returne he caused himselfe to be
proclaimed King and Miralmumin of Spaine, and tooke a towne belonging to the king D.
Ordogno, called Albayda, fortified it, and put a garrison into it: but his furie was stayed by D.
Ordogno, who came and besieged Albayda, and then with part of his forces he went to encounter
him.Moores defeated. as he aduanced to succour the besieged, fought and vanquished him, killing 12000
horse Moores, and an infinit number of foot, with Garcia sonne in lavy to Musa; he himselfe
escaped, being wounded in three places. The spoyle of this armie was great, and Albaydareturned
to the Christians: After which rout, Lope who had beene left Gouernour at Toledo,
made a league with D. Ordogno, the which he faithfully maintained both in warre, and all other
things during his life.Aben Lope king of Toledo. This Lope is numbred for the third king of Toledo, being a Moore. D.
Ordogno did soone after assayle Ceyt, Gouernor of Coria, and Museres or Micaudi of Salamanca,
Moores, whom he vanquished, and tooke their Townes and Gouernments.
About the yeare 839 Abderramen died,An. 839. leauing by his wiues 87 children, that is, 45 sonnes
and 42 daughters, hauing held the realme of Spaine at Cordoua twentie yeares. It was in
the 222 yeare of the Arabians.The qualities of Abderramen 2. This Prince was full of state, and was much pleased to make
great buildings: he caused the places and streets of Cordoua to be paued, and brought a great
fountaine thither through pipes of lead, whereof some markes are yet to be seene about the
Cathedrall Church, which was then the Mosquee. He was politicke, and was somewhat inclined
to justice: he reformed the vnjust law of the Gothes, by the which the brother did succeed
the brother, although he had children: he suffered the Christians which were vnder his
commaund to liue in great libertie, so as in the chiefe citie of Cordoua they had many Churches,
as that of the Ascile, Zoilus, Faustus, Ianuarius, Martial, Cyprian, Genesius, and Eulalie. And
in the suburbes, or neere vnto, there were eight Monasteries; that of S. Christopher, of the virgin
Marie, called Cuteclair, S. Sauueur, Zoilus, Felix, Martin, Iustus, and Pasteur. He brought the
making of silkes, with many other handie trades, into Cordoua: he caused money to be coyned
with his name thereon.
His eldest sonne Mahumet succeeded him,Mahumet Miralmumin at Cordoua. who was the first Miralmumin in Spaine of that
name, and the fift king of Cordoua. Being setled, he marcht with an armie into Nauarre, from
whence he was repulsed: wherefore he turned his forces against Toledo, which was in league
with king D. Ordogno. Wherefore the Christians who desired to abate the power of the
Moores, and to keepe them diuided all they could, came to succour the Toledanes, being led
by one of the sonnes of king D. Ordogno: both armies met not farre from the citie, neere vnto
the riuer of Guadacelette,Mahumets victorie. but Mahumet had the victorie: there were slaine in this battaile
13000 Moores of Toledo, and 8000 Christians; yet all this could not make him master of
the towne. Mahumet being victor, he caused the heads of his enemies to be carried into diuers
townes, to strike terror into those that would rebell; for it was the custome of that nation
at the change of Princes to stirre vp new troubles. This warre continued three yeares, vnto
the death of the king D. Ordogno.
33 Cont Bernard of Barcelone liued at this time,Cattelogne. much fauored in the Court of the Emperour
Lewis the Gentle, not without enuie, especially of such as had had the gouernment of
Prince Bernard the sonne of Pepin king of Italie, in his youth. He was accused to haue committed
adulterie with the Empresse Iudith:D. Geoffrey Earle or Gouernour of Barcelone. whatsoeuer the cause were, D. Geoffrey of Arria
succeeded him in the Countie of Barcelone, in the yeare 839.
In the yeare 841,Ouiedo. king D. Ordogno being much afflicted with the Gout, and other infirmities,
was withall oppressed with griefe for the rout of his men which he had sent to succour
the Toledanes, whereupon he fell grieuously sick and died, hauing gouerned the realme
of Leon and Ouiedo tenne yeares. The letters and titles of the Church of S. Iaques of Compostella,
giue longer liues to these kings: for there is one found of king D. Ordogno, of the yere
854, and another of the yeare 862, yea of 874, wherefore there is no great certaintie of the
time in the raignes of the kings of Ouiedo and Leon. These letters and titles differ aboue 33
yeares from the common opinion.



D. Alphonso, third of that name, twelfth
King of Ouiedo.
34 ALphonso the Great,Anno 841 sonne to D. Ordogno,Ouiedo. was but foureteene yeares old, or ten, as some
say, when he began to raigne: a prince endowed with all royall vertues, whose life
and gouernment was long. His entrie was disquieted by a knight of Gallicia, called D. Froila
Bermudes; who contemning the kings youth, did rise and seise vpon the Crowne. D. Alphonso
being retired to Alaua, to preserue himselfe against this tyrant, as he was busie to raise
an armie of his friends and subiects, he had newes, that D. Froila being come to Ouiedo, the
chiefe towne of the whole realme,Tyrannie and vsurpation iustly punished. to be crowned there, he had beene slaine by the Senators
and Councellors, which had conspired against him: wherefore he came thither, was receiued,
and recouered his realme in peace. Then was there gouernour in Alaua a knight called Eylo,
or Zeybon, brother to one Zenon, which some Authors say, had beene Lord of Biscaie. This
Eylo, as soone as Alphonso was setled in his realme of Ouiedo, rebelled against him, and drew
from him all which the kings of Ouiedo held in that prouince. D. Alphonso (who was then at
Leon) being aduertised of this disorder, marcht with such forces as he could gather readily
together, towards Alaua, where his presence caused him to be generally obeyed. He tooke
this gouernor and carried him to Ouiedo, where he ended his dayes in prison.
Mahumet,Moores. first Moore of that name, raigned then in Spaine; against whom the earle of
Barcelone made sharpe warres, but with small successe. He sent an armie against the Christians,
led by two captaines, Imundar and Alcama, the which came and lodged about Leon, as
if they would besiege it,Anno 842. in the yeare 842. But king D. Alphonso succoured it, and forced the
Moores to retire. In the end of Abderramens raigne there had beene a great persecution against
the Christians, which dwelt in the Moores countries; whereof their insolencies and
rebellions was the cause.The libertie of Christians among the Moors in Spaine. They had, as we haue said, libertie of their religion, and they were
suffered to build Temples and Monasteries at their pleasures: their Priests and Monkes did
freely vse their seuerall habits: They had Iudges and Rectors among them to administer iustice,
vnder the authoritie of the Mahumetane kings: onely they were forbidden to enter into
the Mosquee, and not to speake ill of their Prophet Mahumet* They payed tributes, the
which were sometimes augmented, as necessitie required, or according to the passions of
their kings. Whereupon many Christians tooke occasion to murmure, and to make bitter
complaints, the which did incense the Moores. Some Christians of more iudgement exhorted
the rest to patience, foreseeing the mischiefe, but it was in vaine; yea Accafred a Bishop,
and Seruand an Earle, who were of these moderators, were condemned by a Councell, and
are blamed by the Authors of Histories, who haue made no scruple to put in the number
of Martyres those rebells which perished in this massacre, the which was great, and continued
ten yeares, for an aduertisement to all others, not to rise against their prince, to whom they
are made subiect by the will of God, especially for their temporall goods.
In the meane time the quarell betwixt this Miralmumin and them of Toledo, continued;
and their obstinacie was such, as Mahumet, seeing they would not acknowledge him vpon any
conditions, he sent a mightie armie against them, vnder the conduct of his brother, or as
some hold, of his sonne, called Almondir, who spoyled, rased, and burnt all that was within
the territorie of Toldo, and yet no man durst make head against him, his forces were so great.
King D. Alphonso imbracing this occasion of the Moores diuisions, being entred into league
with the French and Nauarrois,D. Alphonso spoyles the Moors country. he entred and spoyled their countrey. They hold that Bernard
of Carpio was chiefe of this armie. Mahumet did aboue all things desire to subdue them
of Toledo, the which was a great and strong citie, and therefore hard to be forced: Wherefore
he resolued to reduce it to extremitie of victuals, by a long siege, and so force them to
yeeld.Anno 848. And hauing raised a great armie in the yeare 848, he led it himselfe in person against
the Toledanes, who issued out of the towne, resoluing to fight with him, but it was to their
losse and confusion, for they were forced to retire with shame; the towne was besieged, the
bridge vpon the riuer of Tayo (the worke of king Hisem) was beaten downe (the Moores
call bridges Alcantara) and all meanes of succours taken from the inhabitants. Wherefore they

began somewhat to yeeld,Toledo reduced vnder the obedience of the Morres at Cordoua. and to talke of a composition; wherein they were heard and satisfied:
so as Mahumet entred the citie with great ioy, hauing reduced so great a people vnder
his obedience: From whence he sent some troupes to spoile the Christians countrey, as far
as the riuer of Duero; who were charged, repulst, and forced to leaue their bootie, by D. Bernard
of Carpio, and others. Lope, who called himselfe king of Toledo, saued himselfe, and
fled with his brethren, and Abdalla his sonne, to the king D. Alphonso; who receiued them
courteously, and made such esteeme of these Moores, as he gaue them his sonne D. Ordogno
to instruct in armes and ciuilitie. Abdalla made no long aboad there, for being thrust on with
enuie against his vncles, he made his peace with king Mahumet, and retired to Cordoua, from
whence he made great spoile vpon the Christians countrey: but he was incountred and defeated
at a place called Cillorico, and forced to raise his siege from Pancoruo with shame. Afterwards
he came to fight with two Zimaels, the one his vncle, the other his brother, in the territorie
of Toledo, whom he vanquished, and tooke prisoners: And as he was of a stirring spirit,
and enemie of all rest, he drew vpon him both the Christians and Moores, by the surprise
he made of Sarragosse, where he maintained himselfe, notwithstanding all the forces of Mahumet,
who sent Almundar his sonne, and Aboaly a captaine, against him, with great forces.
And although that Abdalla were on the other side molested with the forces of D. Alphonso,
(who during these warres had seene the monasterie of S. Faconde burnt, the which he afterwards
caused to be built vp againe) yet his posteritie raigned at Sarragosse. Mahumet hauing
disposed of this new conquest, returned to Cordoua, vnder whose commaund Toledo remained
for some yeares.
After these happie exploits the Moores were content to rest a while, and to suffer the Christians
to liue in peace, and D. Alphonso in the meane time gaue himselfe to works of pietie, according
to the inclination and instruction of those times. He caused S. Iaques church to be new
built of free stone,The worke of pi^tie of D. Althonso. and i^richt with pillers and other workes: imploying therein part of the
spoile which he had taken from the Moores; for this church at that time was but of earth. He
bestowed great almes of the poore, and widowes. He was solicited by Bernard of Carpio, to
deliuer the earle D. Sandias, his father, out of prison, where he had remained so many yeares:
but (notwithstanding all the great seruices which he pretended to haue done) he could not
preuaile.Bernard of Carpio neglected: his rebellion. Wherefore he resolued to declare himselfe an enemie to D. Alphonso, retiring to
Salamanca, where neere vnto it he built a fort, which he called Carpio, of his owne name,
from whence he did much annoy the Asturians, and them of Leon. It was situated three
leagues from Salmanca, vpon the riuer of Tormes.


D. Inigo Arista, sixt King of Sobrarbre
and Nauarre.
36 D Inigo, surnamed Arista,Nauarre. An. 940. came to the Crowne of Nauarre about the yere 840. Some
say he was sonne to D. Ximenes aboue mentioned; others (among the which is Surites
the Spaniard) affirme, that he was son to the earle of Bigorre, called Simon; and that he
was chosen by the suffrages of the men of war, king of Sobrarbre, by reason of his vertues and
valour: so little certaintie there is in antiquitie, especially of the beginning of races and families.
The name of Arista was giuen him, by reason of his vehemencie and heat in war. The Spaniards
call a couragious and hardie man Arisco. He was the first of the kings of Nauarre, that
was annointed and crowned after the maner of our kings of France, the which was obserued
in the other following kings, although some beleeue, that this custome came onely into Nauarre,
after they had kings of the house of Champagne. The French, among other Christian
nations,The custome to ann^int kings taken from the Hebrewes haue retained it of the ceremonies of the ancient law of the Iewes, by the aduice of
their Bishops. He tooke for his Armes a Crosse argent in a field azure. During his raigne, and
some yeres after, the Episcopall seat of Pampelone was in the royall abbey of S. Saluator of
Leyra, yet holding the title of Bishop of Pampelone, or of Iruna, by reason of the warre and
spoyle which the Moores made. There is no great certaintie among writers of his deeds, the
time of his death, nor of his funeralls, nor yet of his wiues familie, whom some call Oneca,
which is to say, Iniga; others Theude: bringing the one from Pampelone, the other from
Biscaie. It may be he had two so named.

D. Geoffrey of Arria was earle of Barcelone after the death of Bernard,Cattelogne. about the yeare
840, by the liberalitie and grant of the Emperor Lewis the Gentle. He was maried to a French
ladie, called D. Almira, by whom he had a sonne called D. Viffred, or Geoffrey the hairie, who
was the first proprietarie earle after his father,Cattelogne vnder the soutraigntie of France. but not immediate. Cattelogne was then vnder
the soueraigntie of France; and there are priuiledges found, granted by king Charles the
bauld, sonne to the Emperour Lewis, in the yeare 844, whereby the inhabitants of Barcelone
are made as free as the French, hauing libertie to administer iustice, and to liue according to
the auncient lawes of the Gothes. This Cont Geoffrey imployed all his meanes to make war
against the Moores, he attempted the towne of Tortosa, but in vaine: yet hee tooke from
them, and from the tyrant and rebell Aymon, that which they had vsurped of his gouernment
some yeares before. He was pursued by a Cattelan knight, called D. Salamon, earle of Cerdagne,
who enuied him, and slandered him to the king his Soueraigne: wherefore being called
to Court,Earle of Cattelogae murthered. as he was going vpon the way, he was slaine in Auvergne, in the yeare 858, according
vnto some.
During these yeres king, D. Alphonso was much troubled with the war which D. Bernard of
Carpio made against him,Ouiedo. who gaue him diuers routs; so as he was forced to leaue the Lions
skin, and to vse the Foxes, at the least there was great shew of deceit: for the king seeing that
he could not suppresse D. Bernard, he offered to release his father, who was now verie old, if
he would deliuer into his hands his new fort of Carpio: the which Bernard, by a singular pietie,
did willingly grant, and was readie to deliuer his fort into the kings hands, the which he
did presently rase Those which went to the castle of Lune, to draw D. Sandias out of prison,
found him dead,Crueltie of king D. Alphonso. as they reported: wherefore Bernard holding himselfe abused, made great
complaints vnto the king; but he was commaunded to depart out of the territories of Ouiedo
and Leon, and the dependances thereof. Whereupon he retired into Nauarre, and then
into France? yet some say, that he returned into Spaine, and there died, and that he was buried
the monasterie of Aguilar del Campo.
Zeno brother to D. Eylo, or Zethon, whom we had confined into Ouiedo, in the beginning
of the raigne of this Alphonso; who being made earle or gouernour of Biscaie, by the kings
bountie, would rebell as his brother had done,Rebellion of the gouernor of Biscate. forcing the king to send an armie against him,
by the which he was vanquished, taken, and led to Ouiedo, where he ended his dayes in prison.
This Zeno left two daughters, the one called Theude, was maried (according vnto some) to
D. Inigo Arista, king of Nauarre; and the other D. Iniga, to the infant D. Suria, of whom we
shall hereafter speake. This was in the yeare 856.
All this time, and to the yeare 859,Moores. Anno 859. there had beene a suspension of armes, betwixt king D.
Alphonso and the Moores; but that yeare king Mahumet went to armes, and came and besieged
the towne of Coimbra, belonging now to Portugal: but D. Alphonso forced him to raise his
siege, and not content therewith, entred into the Moores countrey, wasted it, and returned
with great spoyles, continuing euerie yeare to annoy them in such sort, as they were constrained
to accept of a truce for three yeares, with the preiudice of their reputations, and great disaduantage
in their iurisdictions. Then there raigned in Sarragosse a Moore, called Aben Alfaie.
The rest of Mahumets raigne vnto his death, was spent in voluptuous lust and idlenesse.
In his time there was a great earthquake in Spaine, and a little before his death lightening
entring into the Mosquee, where he was, slew two Noblemen Moores, neere vnto
him.


D. Garcia Inigues, third of that name, and seuenth
King of Nauarre.
37 About the yeare 867,Nauarre and Arragon vnited as some Authors write, died D. Inigo Arista, king of Nauarre, to
whom succeeded D. Garcia Inigues, his sonne, the third of that name, who vnited the
countrey of Arragon to Nauarre, by marying with D. Vrraca daughter to D. Fortun, the last
earle, or of D. Endregot Galinde, of the same house and familie of Arragon. He had two sons
by this Ladie, D. Fortun, and D. Sancho Abarca; and one daughter, called D. Sanctiua, or Sancha.
They write this fable of D. Sancho, That the king going inconsiderately with his queene

through the mountaines of Nauarre, he was surprised by certaine Moores, and slaine, and the
queene ouerthrowne, being thrust into the bellie with a Moores launce, at such time as she
was great with this D. Sancho. Some houres after, a knight whom they called D. Sancho of
Gueuara, passing that way, met with this pitifull spectacle, and saw that the child had thrust
forth a hand by the mothers wound, and had laboured to come forth there: wherefore this
knight lighting from his horse, made the wound greater, so as he drew forth this infant aliue,
without any harme: then he carried it to his house with good witnesses, where he caused it to
be nourished according to his degree, vntill he grew great, and then he presented him to the
Estates of the realme, and made him be acknowledged for their lawfull king. But, as we say,
it is like to be a fable, and hath no great authoritie; yet they say, that the surname of Ladron,
which is peculiar to the house of Gueuara, came for that this knight did secretly nourish the
infant D. Sancho. D. Sanctiua the daughter, was maried to king Ordogno the second, sonne
to Alphonso the great.
38 They hold opinion,Biscaie. That the lords of Biscaie had their beginning at this time in D.
Suria, whose posteritie was famous for many yeares: for after that D. Zeno had beene vanquished,
and led prisoner, as we haue said, the Biscaines seeing themselues without a head, fell to
mutinies and seditions. Thither was sent D. Ordogno, sonne to king D. Alphonso, whom they
called Earle of Asturies, who began to ouerrun and spoyle the countrey. The townes and
comminalties assembled to make head against him, chusing D. Suria for their captaine, who
was descended from the bloud royall of Scotland, by his mother; and had maried a daughter
of Cont Zenos, called D. Iniga, but at that time deceased. The forces of either part came to
fight, in a place called then Padura: The battell was sharpe and cruell; and for that the whole
countrey did swim with bloud, the place was from that time called Arrigoriaga, which in the
countrey language signifies, a vermilion stone. The Biscaines, with the aid, and by the valour
of D. Sancho Estiguis, Lord of Durando (who ended his dayes in this battell) won it; which
was in the yeare 870. After this victorie the Biscaines chose D. Suria for their Lord, as well
for that he was sonne in law to their last Earle and gouernour Zeno (by his daughter, notwithstanding
we doe not read that he had any children) as for the valour and good conduct
they had seene in him in this warre. This D. Suria did presently after marie the daughter
of D. Sancho Estiguis, in whose right he got the Seigniorie of Durando, which was vnited
vnto Biscaie: whose posteritie did enjoy those lands, vntill the time of D. Henrie the second
of that name, king of Castille and Leon. The linage of D. Suria, was called de Haro. Castille
the old had also an Earle, called D. Diego Porcello.
39 Mahumet Miralmumin of Cordoua,Moores. Anno 874. hauing liued some time in peace, by reason of
the last truce made with the Christians, died in the yeare 874, leauing 54 children by his
wiues, whereof 34 were males, and 20 females. He had held the kingdome 35 yeares, and
his death was in the 257 yeare of the Arabians raigne.Almundir sixt king of the Moores at Cordoua. His sonne Almundir succeeded him,
who liue but two yeares, hauing done nothing worthie of memorie; against whom they of
Cordoua rebelled, notwithstanding that he offered to free them of the tenth part of their
tribute, which they paid. He left six sonnes, and seuen daughters.
Such was the estate of Spaine in the time of king D. Alphonso, who had to wife a Ladie of
the bloud royall of France, called Ameline,Ouiedo. but they changed her name to D. Ximena; by
whom he had foure sonnes, D. Garcia, D. Ordogno, D. Fruela, who raigned, and D. Gonsalo the
Archdeacon. This king in his later dayes gaue himselfe wholly to workes of pietie, building
of churches and monasteries, indowing them with rents and great reuenewes, and adorning
them with iewels, vessels of gold and siluer, and precious ornaments, according to the ceremonies
brought in and maintained in the Church.
In the yeare 877 the church of S. Iaques was consecrated at the instance of this king, and
by the authoritie of Pope Iohn the eighth, where many Bishops were present. And it is to
be noted, that in those dayes the citie of Ouiedo was full of Bishops without any flockes; for
they did chuse Bishops of townes that were in the Moores possession, keeping an account of
their succssion;Ouiedo the towne of Bishops. all which did liue in Ouiedo, and therfore it was called the Towne of Bishops.
This king being verie desirous to aduance the Hierarchie of the Clergie, laboured to haue
the Episcopall sea of Ouiedo,Ouiedo made an Archbishoprick. and the Cathedrall church of S. Sauucur, made an Archbishopricke
Metropolitane; and the first Archbishop thereof was D. Hermenegilde, who was Bishop

thereof before: in which towne of Ouiedo there was a Councell celebrated. Whilest this
prince was thus busied in these workes of pietie, D. Garcia his eldest sonne, by the bad aduice
of D. Ximena his mother, rebelled against him: but the father caused him to be surprised in
Zamora, and to be brought prisoner to the castle of Gordon. This towne of Zamora was
called Sentica, or Sarabris, and had beene held, and in a manner ruined by the Moores, who
called it Medina Zamorathi, that is to say, the citie of Lazul, or Turkish: for about it there are
certaine mountaines hauing many veines of stones, which we call Lapis Lazuli, or azure
stones.
The imprisonment of D. Garcia incensed the other brethren against the king their father, being
alwaies animated by the counsell of the queen their mother, who loued not her husband.
These princes, with D. Nugno Fernandes, father in law to D. Garcia, and other noblemen of
this conspiracie,A king forced by his children to leaue his Crowne. made warre against D. Alphonso, the which continued two yeares, and in
the end forced him to leaue his Crowne and royaltie. These troubles gaue meanes to D. Suria,
now earle of Biscaie, to settle his estate. King D. Alphonso being thus forced, resigned
his Scepter to his sonne D. Garcia,An. 886. in the yeare 886, hauing raigned 46 yeares. To D. Ordogno,
his second son, was assigned Galicia,Galicia a kingdome. with the title of a Royaltie. And in this manner these
wicked children, by the instigation of an indiscreet, and ill affected mother, diuided the spoyls
of their liuing father. You must obserue, that the yeares of the decease of these kings of Ouiedo,
are verie vncertaine, for if we shall beleeue the letters of donation, and priuiledges, which
are extant in the churches of Spaine, it will appeare that this king raigned in the yeare 899.
The prouince of Alaua was great,Nauarre. and carried the title of a kingdom in those times among
the Moores, who enioyed a part thereof, residing in the vallie of Burunda, against whom the
kings of Nauarre had continuall warre; and especially in the time of D. Garcia Inigues, mention
is made by some writers, and also by the titles of the Church of Pampelone, of a battell
fought in the vallie of Iunquera, betwixt Abderramen king of Cordoua, and the Christian
kings, D. Ordogno, and this king D. Garcia, the which was lost by the Christians: But the computation
of times contradict it: of which famous battell there shall be more ample mention
made in the life of D. Ordogno. The most approued Authors write, that D. Garcia Inigues died
in the vallie of Ayuar, in a battell against the Moors, in the yere 885; whereof the inscription
vpon his tombe makes mention, at S. Iohn de la Pegna, the Aera 923.


D. Garcia the first, and 13 King of Ouiedo.
40 D. Garcia was the first of that name which raigned in Ouiedo. There is no mention
made in stories of his vertues and generous deeds;Ouiedo. it may be by reason of his impietie,
hauing dispossest his father D. Alphonso of his kingdome,A king dispossest makes himselfe his sons lieutenant. who of a king became his sons
lieutenant, if it be credible, that being desirous to aduance the Christians affaires, he demanded
forces of D. Garcia to inuade the Moores, the which the sonne raigning, granted him, relying
in the bountie of his deposed father. And in this qualitie D. Alphonso did many exploits
of armes, gaue routs, and did much harme to the Infidels. We read, that about the yeare
887 this deposed father died in the towne of Zamora,Anno 887. and was buried at Astorga, and some
time after transported to Ouiedo.
After the decease of D. Alphonso, the king D. Garcia led an armie against the Moores, and
spoyled much of their countrey; against whom came a great captaine of that nation, called
Ayola, so as there was a furious battell, but D. Garcia had the victorie.Moors defeated The Moores defeated,
and their captaine prisoner, as they led him away he escaped, for want of good gard. D. Garcia
hauing raigned three yeares, he died at Zamora, in the yeare 889, hauing no children.
41 At that time Abdalla was Miralmumin,Moores. Abdalla 7 king. or Soueraigne King in Spaine ouer the Moors,
who had succeeded king Almundir his brother, in the yeare 876. In the first yeare of his raigne
there was a surcease from armes, betwixt the Mahumetists and the Christians, vntill the yere
886, that D. Alphonso, no more king, but in qualitie of his sonnes lieutenant, began to annoy
the Moores, and after his death D. Garcia his sonne, gaue the foresaid rout to Ayola, whom
some call Ayaya. King Abdalla died in the yeare 889, according to the most approued, leauing
11 sonnes, and 13 daughters, hauing raigned 13 yeares.



D. Fortun, second of that name, eighth
King of Nauarre.
42 THe Scepter of Nauarre,Nauarre. after the death of D. Garcia Inigues (although that some haue
written of an Interregnum of many yeares, whilest that D. Sancho was yet vnknowne,
and bred vp in the house of Gueuara) came without all doubt to his eldest sonne D. Fortun the
second of that name, in the yeare 885; after whose decease there could be no Interregnum,
seeing he had a daughter maried to D. Ordogno the second, of Ouiedo, who without doubt
should haue succeeded her father: for the right of succession had euen then taken place, euen
of women, aboue the election, which had been accustomed in all auncient time among those
people. There is a testimonie of this king D. Fortun, in a Charter of donation which he made
to the monasterie of Leyre, in the Aera 939, which comes to be the yeare 901. It is written in
the remembrances of the house of S. Sauueur of Leyre, That when as the king D. Garcia
his father was slaine, he was at Cordoua. Whereby it appeares, that the Moores which slew
him, were not of the league with the kings of Cordoua, but some theeues, or factious persons,
as this nation had beene accustomed to liue in perpetuall diuision and quarels. D. Fortun
being king of Nauarre, he was also earle of Arragon, by succession from his mother.
There is not any notable thing written of this kings gests, but that he was verie deuout, and
did cherish Monkes, and religious persons, to whom he gaue great gifts.
43 In Cattelogne after the death of Cont Geoffrey,Barcelone. who was slaine in Auvergne, D. Salamon,
earle of Cerdagne, who had beene his competitor, and enuied him, was made earle
and gouernour. The Spaniards hold, that Cattelogne, and the countie of Barcelone, was
then fallen to the Soueraigntie of Prouence and Bourgongne, whereof Charles, sonne to the
Emperour Lothaire, and nephew to Lewis the Gentle, was king; by whose grant this earle of
Cerdagne did for his life-time inioy that title and dignitie, whilest that the son of D. Geoffrey
(who carried the fathers name, and was afterwards surnamed the Hairie) was bred vp in Flanders,
in a knights house, to whom king Charles had recommended him. About the yeare 864
kings Charles died, and Prouence came to the hands of the Emperour Lewis the second, his
brother, who also died in the yeare 876, and the empire fell to Charles the Bauld, his vncle,
king of France, and by consequence Prouence and Cattelogne, which depended thereon: during
whose empire D. Geoffrey the Hairie, being now great, came to Barcelone, whereas the
countesse Almira, his mother, yet liued, by whom he was knowne, and made knowne to the
chiefe men of Barcelone, who had been friends to his deceased father: who made no delay to
conspire with D. Geoffrey, for the killing of the earle D. Salamon, the which they did presently
 effect in the place of Bercas in the yere 877: and by that meanes D. Geoffrey the Hairie was restored
to his fathers dignitie W^ hilest he was bred vp in the house of this Fle^mish knight,D. Geoffrey the hairie, first earle in proprietie of Barcelone. they
say, he fell in loue with one of his daughters, with whom he contracted a secret mariage, the
which notwithstanding came to the knowledge of the mother, who could well conceale it
vntill a fit opportunitie. Finding himselfe setled in his estate and dignitie, at Barcelone, he sent
for his wife, and confest the mariage vnto his father in law, who was nothing displeased therwith;
by whose meanes he obtained pardon for the murther which he had committed on the
person of Cont Salamon, of the king of France, and Emperour Lewis the Stuttering, successor
to Charles the Bauld, his father, by whom the Flemmish knight was much fauoured. And the
Spanish histories report, That the Emperour Lewis receiued good seruice from Geoffrey the
Hairie, in the warres he had against the Normans, whither he led a goodly troupe of horse
out of Barcelone, and shewed great proofes of his valour and conduct; so as he was greatly
esteemed, and beloued. And as in a certaine defeat of the Normans he had beene wounded
in diuers parts of his bodie, so as his Armes were all couered with bloud; shewing himselfe in
this estate before the Emperour Lewis, he besought him to giue him Armes, which he and his
posteritie might lawfully carrie. The Emperour being glad of his demaund, stretching forth
his foure fingers, he dipt them in the bloud which ran from the earls wounds, and made foure
markes vpon a golden shield which he carried, being plaine, without any deuice; and said vnto
him, Earle, hereafter these shall be your Armes. For the which he most humbly thanked the

Emperour:The Armes of Barcelone and Arragon. so as euer since they haue carried foure bloudie strokes, which we call Guenles,
in a field Or. This is the beginning of the Armes of the earles of Barcelone, and since
kings of Arragon, although that their beginning was from Cattelogne.
He did likewise serue king Charles the Grosse, who was Emperour after Lewis the third, in
his warre against the Normans: but in his absence the Moores entred the territorie of Barcelone,
and committed great spoyles. Whereof Cont Geoffrey being aduertised, he demaunded
leaue, and besought the king to grant him men and money, to repulse the Infidels
out of his gouernement: but not able to obtaine it, by reason of the weaknesse of his
affaires, he had a better condition: For in consideration of his valour and good seruice,
king Charles gaue the countie of Barcelone in proprietie to him and to his heires for euer,
in the yeare 884,Cattelogne giue in proprietie to Geoffrey the Hair^e, vnder thy soueraigntie of France. reseruing onely the soueraigntie to the kings of France: the which continued
vnto the time of Lewis the ninth. We will therefore place this earle for the first of
them of Barcelone, for that he was a Proprietarie.
Returning to Barcelone with this grant, he brought with him many strange knights, with
whose helpe he recouered all that which the Moores had vsurped vpon the territories of Barcelone,
and Cattelogne. He is commended for his religion, for that he did build (to burie
himselfe and his successors in) the monasterie of our Ladie of Ripol, where his eldest sonne Rodolphus
made himselfe a Monke; who, they say, was borne in Flanders, before the mariage
was published; and was Abbot of Ripol, and afterwards Bishop of Vrgell. Others say, That
this monasterie was founded by D. Geoffrey of Arria, his father. He had other children by
this Flemmish ladie, which were D. Geoffrey, who died of poison, being but young; D.
Mir, who succeeded him in the eastedome; D. Suner, or Seniofrid, who was earle of Vrgel;
and one daughter. He was founder of the monasterie of Monferrat, and did many such like
workes.


D. Ordogno, second of that name, and 14 King of
Ouiedo and Leon.
45 TO D. Garcia his brother D. Ordogno had succeeded in the realme of Ouiedo,Ouiedo. in the
yeare 889. The bountie of this prince made the Spaniards thinke that his father
D. Alphonso was risen againe, he did so well imitate his vertues in all the course of his
life. His religion, after the manner of those times, is commended, for that hee caused
Mondognedo to be made a Bishopricke, and did much good to churches. He was maried
first to D. Munta, whom others call D. Eluira, by whom hee had foure sonnes,
D. Sancho, D. Alplionso, D. Ramir, D. Garcia, and one daughter, D. Ximena, whereof
D. Alphonso and D. Ramir were kings of Ouiedo. For his second wife hee maried D.
Arragonde, or it may be, Radegonde of Gallicia, whom he did repudiat for certaine causes.
Lastly, he tooke to wife the Infanta of Nauarre and Arragon, D. Sancha, or Sanctiua, daughter
to king D. Garcia Inigo, and of D. Vrraca.
The first exploits of Armes he did, were in Galicia, when as he was but a pettie king
or gouernour, ouerrunning the Moores countrey confining vpon him, euen vnto Andalousia,
and carried backe great spoyles, with the which he retired safely to Viseo, which is at this
time in Portugal.
At the same time Abderramen,Moores. Abderramen Almansor, 8 king of the Moores at Cordoua. the third of that name, came to bee king of the
Moores; hee was surnamed Almansor, and Ananzer Ledin Alla, which signifies, Defender
of the Law of God. Some are of opinion, that he was the sonne of Mahumet
the sonne of Abdalla, to whom hee succeeded: against whom D. Ordogno raised an armie,
and entring the territories of Toledo, came and besieged Talauera, which is now
called de la Roine. Hee defeated the succours of Moores which Abderramen sent,
tooke the Generall of this armie, and forced the place and sacked it. Wherewith Abderramen
being much moued, meaning to reuenge it with assurance, hee demaunded
succours from Almotaraph, king of Mauritania Tingitana, where the kingdomes of Fez
and Marocco are at this present. And hauing by that meanes assembled a great armie of

Moores, Affricans, and Spaniards, he spoyled the Christians countrey, as farre as the riuer
of Duero, and the towne of S. Stephen de Gomas, where there was an incounter, and the
Moores vanquished;Moores defeated. and the Generalls and Lieutenants of the two kings, Abderramen and
Almotaraph, slaine; which incouraged D. Ordogno to proceed: so as in the yeare 894, hee
entred the countrey called Estrema-dura,Anno 894. crossing the riuers of Tayo and Guadiana, vnto
Merida and Badaios, the territories of which townes he spoyled. The Moores inhabiting
these townes, not daring to sallie forth, they purchased a truce of some monethes, for a great
summe of money.
This losse tormented Abderramen, and inflamed him to reuenge; wherefore in the yere
895 he entred Galicia with a great power,Anno 895. where he committed infinit spoyles. In the end
both armies being met, there was a bloudie battell, which continued almost a whole day,
with vncertaintie which had the victorie. Abderramen being afterwards fortified with new
succours from Affricke, he came againe to wast the countrey of king D. Ordogno, and entred
by the prouince of Alaua, into the territories of the king of Nauarre, which should
be at that time D. Sancho Abarca, or rather his brother D. Fortun the second, and not D. Garcia
Inigues, their father, who they hold died in the yeare 885: And then there was a great
battell giuen in the vallie of Ionquera,Battell of Ionquera lost by the Christians. in the which many braue Christian knights were
slaine. The Mahumetists being victors, many townes and forts of Nauarre fell into the Infidells
hands. King Abderramen returned victor vnto Cordoua, leading with him many
prisoners, and a rich bootie. In this troupe of prisoners were the Bishops of Salamanca
and of Tuy. He of Tuy, called Hermogius, not able to endure the hardnesse of the prison,
being old, laboured to get out, giuing for hostage of his ransome a nephew of his, called
Pelagius, a goodly young youth, about fourteene yeares old, who had beene bred vp religiously,
and in the feare of God. Being come into the Moores hands, king Almansor being
thrust on with a detestable desire, would haue abused him at his pleasure, and haue persuaded
him to follow Mahumets sect: the which this holy youth did vertuously resist. Wherefore
the king being inraged, he caused him to be murthered with many torments, and to be
cast into the riuer of Guadalquibir,Pelagius a holy youth cruelly murthered. where his bodie being found, it was buried by the
Christians: Whose memorie, for his great vertues in so tender yeares, merits to liue for
euer.
King D. Ordogno desirous to repaire the losse which the Christians had receiued in the vallie
of Ionquera,Ouiedo and Leon. entred in the yeare 896,Anno 896. into the Moores countrey with great forces, where
hee tooke and ruined many townes; and meeting no incounter, hee returned to Zamora.
As for the religious deeds of this king, they make particular mention of the building of S.
Maries church, in his owne royall Palace of Leon, which he made the Cathedrall church
of that towne, and indowed it with reuenewes, and many iewels; inducing the other noblemen,
by his example, to doe the like. He caused himselfe to be crowned in this new
Temple with great solemnitie being the first of those kings which intitled himselfe king
of Ouiedo and Leon: for vnto these times they hold, That these kings tearmed themselues
onely kings of Ouiedo, without any addition of Leon. Before the Cathedrall church
of Leon, were those of Saint Peter and Saint Paule, without the circuit of the walls in those
times, the which he did inlarge, and made the towne much bigger, enriching it with many
buildings, exemptions, and priuiledges.
We haue said before, That there was a great errour in the computation of the raignes of
these kings of Ouiedo, and great confusion in conferring them with those that haue raigned
in Nauarre, and the other Potentates of Spaine: for the Authors doe ill agree with the
Charters and titles of priuiledges, donations, and foundations, which are found in the true
stories of Monasteries, and other churches of Spaine: especially it is vncertaine what kings
of Nauarre were in the time of king D. Ordogno, nor when he maried his last wife D. Sanctiua,
daughter to king D. Garcia Inigues the second, whether in his life time, or during the raigne
of D. Fortun, and D. Sancho Abarca, his children: the fact is cleere, but the time is doubtfull.
Some Authors write, That this king D. Ordogno, made this league with D. Sancho Abares,
king of Nauarre; and that hauing ioyned their forces together, they inuaded the countrey
of Rioje, which the Moors held, and hauing forraged it, they returned with great spoyles, hauing
found no resistance.

47 The worthie and memorable deeds of this king are blemished with the cruelties hee
vsed against the earles of Castille.Castille. We haue made mention of Cont D. Diego Porcello, or Lechon,
in the Spanish tongue, who gouerned Castille in the time of king D. Alphonso the great:
besides there is mention of other earles and gouernors of the countrey, the which for that it
was great, and compassed in by the Moores countrey, had need of many heads and captains
to defend the frontiers of Ouiedo and Leon, vnder whose soueraigntie Castille was. Among
others, we find D. Nugno Fernandes, who it is likely was father in law to D. Garcia, king of
Ouiedo, brother to this king D. Ordogno, D. Almondar le Blanc, D. Diego his sonne, D. Fernando
Anzures: all these commaunded there, and were great noblemen in the said countrey
of Castille, about the yeare 889, which they hold to be the first of D. Ordogno, king of Ouiedo
and Leon. It is not verified vpon what subiect they fell in disgrace with this king, if it
were not by reason of the practises of D. Nugno Fernandes, and D. Garcia, against king D. Alphonso
the great; kings being alwayes iealous of their estates,Enuie and iealousie familiar passions in great men. and enemies to them that attempt
against their Soueraigne Princes, the which in some is accompanied with an enuie of
their glorie, whom (being their subiects) they know to be aduenturous, fit for great enterprises,
and to execute them happily. So it may be D. Ordogno fearing that these earles (who had
fought valiantly against the Moores, and well defended their prouinces; for the which they
were beloued, and respected of the people) should grow too great, to the prejudice of his
royall Maiestie, he meant to murther them, He therefore called them vpon a safeconduct
to a place called Regular, vpon the riuer of Carrion, making shew, that he would treat secretly
with them of matters of great importance. Whither being come, he caused them to
be apprehended, and carried with good gards to Leon,Earles and gouernors of Castille murthered where some dayes after, without any
formall proceeding, he caused them to be murthered in the prison. D. Diego Porcello, as some
thinke, was of this number. D. Nugno Bellides maried his daughter D. Sulla, of whom were
borne two sonnes, D. Nugno Nugnez, Razura,D. Diego Porcello the stemme of the princes of Castille. grandfather to the earle D. Fernand Gonsales,
and the other was Iustus Gonsales, grandfather to the Lord of Lara.
A yeare after this tyranous action, the king D. Ordogno died, according to the common
opinion, in the yeare of our saluation 897; but according to the letters and titles of donation
of the abbeyes and churches of Spaine, he liued in the yeare 919, as Garibay saith, who
hath made a diligent search: Of the authoritie and truth of which charters we may iustly
doubt. This king raigned eight yeares, and was buried at Leon, in the new Cathedrall
church of Saint Marie the great, the first of those kings which had beene interred at
Leon.


D. Froila, second of that name, and 15 King of
Ouiedo and Leon.
48 AFter the death of D. Ordogno,An. 897. the realme was held by his brother D. Froila, who vsurped
it from his nephewes, D. Alphonso, and D. Ramir, sonnes to the deceased. He is not
put in the catalogue of the kings of Ouiedo, it may be by reason of the shortnesse of his
raigne, or in detestation of his cruelties, which purchased him the surname of Cruell; or for
some other considerations.Genealogie of Ouiedo and Leon. He had maried a ladie called D. Munina, or D. Nugna, by
whom he had three sonnes, D. Alphonso, D. Ordogno, and D. Ramir; and by a concubine, a
bastard called D. Fruela. Of this bastard issued D. Pelagius, called the Deacon, who maried
D. Aldonsa, grand child to D. Bermund the Goutie, whereof we will make mention. King D.
Fruela was a tyrant,Tyrants alwaies feareful, suspitious, and cruelt. and therefore fearefull and suspitious, so as he vsed great crueltie against
the noblest personages in Spaine, he put some to death, banished many, and afflicted euerie
estate. Among the rest he put to death the children of a noble knight, called D. Olmunde, or
Dimunde, banished D. Frominio their brother, who was Bishop of Leon, and committed
many other such outrages; yet couered with the cloke of iustice, as tyrants doe vsually.
49 The people of Castille incensed at the crueltie vsed against their earles by D. Ordogno,
rebelled against the Crowne of Ouiedo and Leon,Change of the Estate of Castille and made an Estate apart, chusing two

Gouernors or Iudges among them, whereof the one should haue charge of the war,Iudges chosen in Castille. and the
other should take knowledge of ciuile causes. These were Nugno Razura, and Flauin Caluo his
sonne in law. Nugno Razura was sonne to Nugno Bellides, a German knight, who they say was
the first founder of the citie of Burgos, so called by him, of a German word, signifying a habitation
of people. This knight comming into Spaine vpon deuotion, to visit S. Iaques sepulchre,
was there maried to D. Sulla, daughter to D. Diego Porcello and had by her this D. Nugno
Razura, a knight, who was wise, valiant, and much esteemed, by reason of his modestie. He
had one sonne and one daughter by his wife, D. Gonsalo Nugnes, and D. Eluira Nugnes, or else
D. Theresa Nugnes, surnamed Bella, either for that she was exceeding faire, or to seeme to be
so: for the custome of the auncient was to giue their children pleasing names and surnames,
thinking they should thereby purchase fauour with men; and that a goodly name gaue some
marke or impression to the person conformable to that which it did signifie. This ladie D. Bella
was maried by her father, to Flauin Caluo, a knight of Castille, lord of Biuar, by whom descended
by fiue degrees, Cid, Ruys, Diaz, who was a wise and valiant knight. By these two Castille
was gouerned without opposition: for that the king D. Fruela being hated, and ill obeyed,
by reason of his tyranie, and tormented with continuall distrust, being also growne a leaper,
could not bring any armie against them. Wherefore this manner of gouernement was
setled among the Castillans, and the countrey was dismembred from the Crowne of Ouiedo,
for a time; and the riuer of Pisorga diuided Castille the old from the kingdome of Leon.
D. Nugnes determined of ciuile causes with great equitie and iustice. Flauin Caluo managed
matters of state, and warre.
Mention is made in certain priuiledges giuen by the first kings of Castille, to certain towns
of that countrey, of a volume of the Castillian Lawes, according to the which iustice should
be administred, called the booke of Iudges: the which was of great authoritie, vnto the time
of king D. Alphonso the Wise, sonne to D. Fernand the third, that the Lawes of the seuen
parties were brought in, according to the which this realme was afterwards gouerned.
King D. Fruela,Ouiedo and Leon. without rest among his subiects, without warre against the Moores and
Infidels, without honour in any of his actions, and without health in his person, infected with
leprosie, raigned onely foureteene monethes, and was interred at Leon, in the chiefe church,
in the yeare 898, according to the common opinion: but there are letters in the treasurie of
Saint Iaques, of a donation, of twelue miles of ground to this church, made by this king, dated
the 28 of Iune 924, which Garibay saith he hath seene.





@ THE SEVENTH BOOKE OF
the Historie of Spaine.

The Contents of the seuenth Booke.
1 D Sancho Abarca, second of that name, and ninth king of Nauarre.
2 D. Alphonso, fourth of that name, and 16 king of Ouiedo and Leon.
3 D. Ramir, second of that name, and 17 king of Leon, leauing the title of Ouiedo.
4 D. Gonsal Nugnes, Iudge of Castille: his vertues.
5 D Fernand Gonsales, first earle proprietarie of Castille.
6 D. Mir, second proprietarie earle of Barcelone.
7 D. Ordogno, third of that name, and 18 king of Leon.
8 D. Garcia Sanches, fourth of that name, and 10 king of Nauarre.
9 D. Seniofrid, third earle of Barcelone, sonne to D. Mir.
10 D. Sancho, first of that name, and 19 king of Leon, called the Fat.
11 Hali Hatan, ninth Souer aigne king of the Arabians or Moores, in Spaine.
12 D. Ramir, third of that name, and 20 king of Leon.
13 D. Garcia Fernandes, second proprietarie earle of Castille.
14 Hizen, second of that name, and 10 king of the Moores at Cordoua.
15 D. Bermund, second of that name, 21 king of Leon, from whom the citie of Leon was taken by
the Moores.
16 D. Sancho, third of that name, and 11 king of Nauarre.
17 D. Borel, fourth proprietarie earle of Barcelone.
18 D. Alphonso, fift of that name, and 22 king of Leon.
19 D. Sancho Garcia, third earle of Castille.
20 D. Raymond Borel, fift earle of Barcelone.
21 Decay of the Moores power in Spaine, by their ciuile dissentions.
22 Zuleima and Mahumet, 11 and 12 kings of the Moores at Cordoua.
23 D. Garcia, fift of that name, and 12 king of Nauarre.
24 D. Sancho, fourth of that name, and 13 king of Nauarre, surnamed the great, who inherited
Castille by his wife.
25 Confusions and ciuile warres among the Moores in Spaine, among the which there raigned, Hali,
Cacin, Hiaja, Abderramen, Mahomad, Hizen, Ioar, and Mahumet, who was the 20 and last
Soueraigne king of the Moores at Cordous.
26 D. Bermund, third of that name, and 23 king of Leon.
27 D. Garcia, fourth earle of Castille: and the vnion of the earledome to the house of Nauarre.
28 D. Berenger Borel, sixt earle of Barcelone.
29 Vnion of Leon and Castille in D. Fernand, sonne to the king D. Sancho of Nauarre, the fourth
of that name.


@ The names of the Kings and Princes of Spaine, mentioned
in this seuenth Booke.

OVIEDO and LEON.
Kings.
16 Alphonso 4.
17 Ramir 2.
18 Ordogno 3.
19 Sancho 1.
20 Ramir 3.
21 Bermund 2.
22 Alphonso 5.
23 Bermund 3.


NAVARRE.
Kings.
9 Sancho Abarca 2.
10 Garcia 4.
11 Sancho 3.
12 Garcia the trembling 5.
13 Sancho 4.


CASTILLE.
Iudge.
Gonsal Nugnes.


Earles.
1 Ferdinand Gonsales.
2 Garcia Fernandes.
3 Sancho Garcia.
4 Garcia.
D. Nugna maried to King D. Sancho
the Great, of Nauarre, who inherited
the Earledome of Castille, and vnited
it to Nauarre.


BARCELONE, or CATTELOGNE.
Earls.
1 Mir.
2 Seniofrid.
3 Borel.
4 Raymond Borel.
5 Berenger Borel.


MOORES.
9 Hali Hatan 2.
10 Hizen 2.
11 Zuleima.
12 Mahumet 2.
13 Hali.
14 Cacin.
15 Hiaja.
16 Abderramen 4.
17 Mahumet 3.
18 Hizen 3.
19 Ioar.
20 Mahumet 4.

We haue apparent Arguments in this seuenth Booke, of the religious disposition in auncient Princes,
in the resolution which two Kings of this age tooke, the one of Nauarre, the other of Leon, to leaue
their regall Scepters and become Monkes: A president which was not rare in that age, but was afterwards
imitated by others. Whether this proceeded from zeale of Religion, grounded vpon any
certaine knowledge, or from basenesse, and want of courage, and from meere ignorance of their ranks
and royall callings, they can best iudge, who know by good and holie instructions, what ordinarie occasions
Kings, and other Soueraigne Magistrates, haue in their lawfull calling, to shew themselues,
and to be, truely religious.

D. Sancho Abarca, second of that name, and
ninth King of Nauarre.
1AFter the death of King D. Garcia Inigues, his sonne D. Fortun being
come to the Crowne in Nauarre and Arragon,Nauarre. about the yere 885,
as we haue said in the former Booke, hauing raigned some years, being
moued with deuotion,D. Fortum king of Nauarre, makes himselfe a Monke. and seeing himselfe without children, and
old, he became a Monke in the monasterie of S. Sauiour at Leyre, the
which they hold was in the yeare 901; leauing the realme of Nauarre,
and the earledome of Arragon,An. 901. to D. Sancho Abarca, his brother,
so called by reason of a certaine kind of breech which he ware: Who, they say, being
come with the queene D. Toda his wife, to the said monasterie of Leyre, receiued the blessing

of his brother D. Fortun, from whom also they receiued a Crowne, with many other
precious jewels.
The king D. Sancho had by this wife a sonne called D. Garcia Sanches, bearing his grandfathers
and fathers names together: some giue him three sonnes more, D. Ramir, D. Gonsal,
and D. Ferdinand. He had fiue daughters by her, whereof the eldest, called D. Vrraca Ximenes,
was wife to D. Alphonso the fourth of that name, king of Ouiedo and Leon: the second,
D. Maria, Countesse of Barcelone, being married to D. Seniofrid, the fist Earle: the third,
D. Theresa, who was married to D. Ramir, king of Ouiedo, brother to D. Alphonso: the
fourth, D. Sancha, Countesse of Castille, the second wife of D. Fernand Gonsales: and the
youngest was D. Blanche Velasque, whose marriage is vncertaine. This was a generous and
worthie king, and in continuall warries against the Moores raigning in Alaua, and vpon the
confines of Nauarre; whose lands he did often ouerrun, razed many places, and built others:
the particularities whereof are vncertaine, by reason of the negligence or defect of writers of
those times:The auncient confines of Nauarre. but in generall they hold, that he did subject vnto his Crowne and made tributarie
all the people which were betwixt his confines and the mountaines of Oca, of either side,
following the course of Ebro vnto Tudele, and from the mountaines to Huesca: yea, passing
the Pyrenees, he conquered from the French that part of Gascoine where the Basques are,
which is at the foot of the mountaines: but whilest he was thus busied, the Moores came
and besieged Pampelone, thinking to take it before that the king D. Sancho should come to
succour it; but it happened otherwise: for the besieged were not onely relieued, but the
Moores chased away, and pursued farre into their countrey, with great losse of their men.
In these warres the vertue and prowesse of them of Sobrarbre and Ribagorsa was great, especially
of a captaine called Centullo.


D. Alphonso, fourth of that name, and 16 King of
Ouiedo and Leon.
2 BY the death of king D. Fruela,Ouiedo and Leon. the kingdome of Ouiedo and Leon came to the children
of D. Ordogno; and Alphonso the fourth, called the Monke and the blind, raigned:
who hauing held the Crowne little aboue fiue yeares, and had had a sonne by D. Vrraca Ximenes
his wife, which he called D. Ordogno, afterwards surnamed the bad, had a desire to become
a Monke, and for want of courage to passe his life in idlenesse, leauing the charge
which God had giuen him, to rule and gouerne the Christian people preserued in Spaine:
wherefore he gaue his brother D. Ramir to vnderstand thereof, who was then resident at Viseo,
one of the frontiers of the Moores countrey, persuading him to come vnto him, meaning
to resigne the Scepter of Ouiedo and Leon. These newes were not a little pleasing vnto
D. Ramir,D. Alphonso leaues his Crowne to become a Monke. who presently came to Zamora, where king D. Alphonso remained, and was there
seated by him in the royall throne. D. Alphonso retyred himselfe into a Monasterie called Dominus
Sanctus, at this day Sahagun, vpon the riuer Cea, a house built by king D. Alphonso the
great, the third of that name.


D. Ramir the second, and 17 King of
Ouiedo and Leon.
3 THus D. Ramir became king beyond his expectation,Leon. in the yeare 904, of Ouiedo and
Leon. From that time the royall title was attributed to the citie of Leon,An. 904. suppressing
Ouiedo,Ouiedo supprest in the kings titles. for that it was the greatest towne, and best peopled of all this kings Estate. D. Ramir
had by his wife D. Theresa, daughter to king D. Sancho Abarca of Nauarre, three sonnes, D.
Bermundo, D. Ordogno, and D. Sancho, and one daughter D. Eluira, who was professed a
Nunne in the Monasterie of S. Sauueur, in the citie of Leon, built by the king her father for
her sake. The warres betwixt the Christians and the Moores, which had lyen long dead, were
now reuiued at the comming of this king, for the which he prepared himselfe. D. Alphonso

(soone wearie of his Monkish life,D. Alphonso repents that be become a Monke. into the which he had rashly entred) repenting himselfe,
that he had resigned his kingdome, meant to recouer it by armes, seizing vpon the towne of
Leon, where he fortified himselfe with his confederates. D. Ramir hauing leuied a great armie,
with a designe to imploy it against the Infidels, was forced to turne head against his
owne subjects, and came to the siege of Leon, the which continued two yeares: in the end
D. Alphonso being vnfurnished of all necessaries, as well as of judgement, yeelded to his brothers
discretion, who kept him prisoner.
The children of king Froila,D. Alphonso besieged and taken by his brother. by reason of the warres betwixt the two brethren, did rise in
Asturia, and the eldest, whose name was Alphonso, caused himselfe to be called King: the rest,
with most part of the Asturians, did honour and reuerence him as their king. The confederates
of this Alphonso, sonne to Froila, desirous to surprise king D. Ramir, gaue him to vnderstand,
That if hee came with a small traine, they would turne to him: but D. Ramir
considering wisely what was most profitable and safe, would not goe without great forces,
with the which he vanquished the Asturians, and tooke the children of king Froila,
the which he sent prisoners to Leon, with his brother D. Alphonso, whereas soone after he
caused all their eyes to be put out, then (as if he had repented him of this rigour) he drew
them out of prison,D. Ramir puts out his brothers and his nephewes eyes. and confined them into the Monasterie of S. Iulien, not farre from
the citie of Leon, the which he caused to be built for them, and there entreated them honourably,
during their liues; where they were buried, with D. Vrraca Ximena, wife to king
Alphonso.
4 These diuisions did the more assure the reuolt of Castille,Castille. and the new Estate of that
countrey, vnder Iudges elected, whereof the two first being dead in the time of D. Alphonso
the Monke, D. Gonsalo Nugnes had succeeded in the gouernment of Castille. This knight
was bred vp in all vertue, ciuilitie, and good behauiour, by the care of D. Nugno Razura his
father, who being wise and vertuous, was carefull to giue him good masters, in all commendable
exercises,The commendable and fatherly care of a Prince. worthie of a child issued from a noble familie: and moreouer, had made all
the best families of the countrey partakers of this happinesse, causing the gentlemens sonnes
of Castille to be bred vp with his sonne in the same discipline; so as in a short time the Court
of Castille was furnished with as many gallant young gentlemen as any countrey in the
world. Thereof grew a great loue and respect of the noblemen and knights, both fathers
and sonnes, vnto their Gouernour, proceeding from the bond they had, to haue receiued by
his meanes so good education and instruction; a benefit, which to speake truth doth exceed
all the gifts and fauours a Prince can doe vnto his subjects. Stories are defectiue in relating
the particular acts of these Earles or Iudges of Castille, although it be most certaine, that
they wanted no subject of warre to defend themselues as well against the Moores, as against
them of Leon and Ouiedo. Their residence and judiciall seat was at Bourgos, and in another
towne of Castille the old, called in respect of them Vijueses. D. Gonsalo Nugnes had to
wise D. Ximena, daughter to Cont D. Nugno Fernandes, who was slaine in prison, with the
rest, by king D. Ordogno, and of them was borne the Earle D. Fernand Gonsales, first proprietarie
of Castille, one of the discreetest and best accomplished knights of his age, who
succeeded his deceased father, about the yeare 910, who for his interment caused the Monasterie
of Arlansa to be built, as the Monkes of that place report, who shew many markes
and testimonies of this Earle or Gouernour D. Gonsalo, and of his wife D. Ximena, but ill agreeing
 with the computation of times, and the truth of the Histories. D. Fernand Gonsales
being established Earle and Iudge of Castille,D. Fernand Gonsales first Earle of Castille. during the time that king D. Ramir was at
strife with his brother, and the children of king D. Fruela, he gouerned the estate of that
Prouince in such sort, as peace and abundance lodged there, and the people held themselues
most happie to haue such a Commaunder. He did wonderfully affect religion, according to
the time, and hauing no better instruction from the Pastors in those dayes, then it is to be
presumed, he gaue himselfe superfluously to the works of pietie of that age, which was wholly
imployed to build Churches, and to giue reuenues, for the entertainment of Priests and
Monkes, and of their ceremonies. He had a particular deuotion to S. Peter and S. Emylian,
whom the Castillans had chosen for their Patron and Protector of their countrey, as they
of the kingdome of Leon did flye to S. Iaques. The Monasterie of S. Peter of Cardegna
was his worke. He was just of his word, faithfull in his promises, and endowed with manie

other good gifts, which purchased him the fauour and loue of all men, and aduanced him to
the dignitie of soueraigne Earle of Castille. He married twice: his first wife was D. Vrraca,
by whom he had one daughter of that name: after whose decease, he tooke to wife D. Sancha,
Infanta of Nauarre,Genealogie of Castille. daughter to king D. Sancho Abarca: he had many sons, but it is vncertaine
by which of these 2 wiues they were borne, there remaining in a manner no other memorie of
them, but the inscriptions of their tombes obserued by writers, at S. Peters of Cardegna: the
names of his sons are, D. Gonsalo Fernandes, D. Sancho Fernandes, D. Garcia Fernandes, who was
Earle after the father, it may be by the death of the two elder, D. Pedro, who had two sons, as
it appeares by the tombes at S. Peter of Cardegna, D. Gonsalo Nugnes, and D. Fernando Gonsales,
and for the last D. Baldwin. Now this Earle D. Fernand Gonsales began to carrie himselfe
as a companion in armes, and no more subject to the kings of Leon: yet king D. Ramir hauing
(after that he had subdued his rebellious kinsmen) led his armie into the territories of Toledo,
taken the towne of Madril from the Moores, of whom (as we haue said) Abderramen was Miralmumin
and king at Cordoua, and razed the walls thereof, the Moores being desirous to be
reuenged of the Christians for this affront, being entred with a great armie into the territorie
of Castille, which was neere vnto them, and there done exceeding great harme, the Earle D.
Fernand Gonsales was forced to entreat K. Ramir to joyne his forces with them of Castille, and
to oppose them against the common enemie: the which he did, and hauing encountred the
Moores neere to the towne of Osme,Moores defeated. these two Princes gaue them battaile, and woon it, with
great slaughter of the Infidels. Aben-Aya raigned at Saragosse, vnder Abderramen Almansor,
and was assayled by the victorious Christian armie, and forced to come to composition with
king D. Ramir, by the which he made himselfe his vassale, and all his subjects, in the yere 912:
whereof some refusing to submit themselues to the Christians yoake, and rebelling against
Aben-Aya, were forced to obedience by the Kings and Earles armie, who were no sooner retyred
into their countries, but Abderramen incensed at the reuolt of Aben-Aya, ran vpon him
with all his power: but the Moore, who had not yeelded vnto the Christians, but to auoid the
present danger, submitted himselfe presently to the Miralmumin, and returned to his seruice
and obedience as before: then both together, with a mightie armie, entred the country of K.
D. Ramir, spoyling it as farre as the towne of Simancas, whereas the Christians armie presented
it selfe in battaile,Battaile of Simancas, and the great victorie of the Christians. the which was one of the most memorable that hath beene in Spaine,
betwixt the Christians and the Mahumetists, where the Moores were defeated, and so great a
number of them slaine, as many Authors affirme, they exceeded 80000. Aben-Aya was prisoner,
and Abderramen forced to saue himselfe by flight with twentie horses onely. They hold,
that it was in the yeare of our Lord 914,An. 914. but there are letters of priuiledge and donation,
which they call vow, made by Cont D. Fernand Gonsales, in the Monasterie of S. Emylian, for
this and other victories dated in the yeare 934, where it appeares, that king D. Ramir was alone
in this first battell, without the Castillans, and that he hauing put to rout a part of the Moores
armie, the rest which retyred by Castille, were encountred by this Earle and his armie, who
wholly defeated them; and then was the vow to S. Emylian accomplished, which seemes had
beene made in the beginning of this warre, by all the Christian Princes raigning in Spaine, for
there is a confirmation thereof made by D. Garcio Sanches, king of Nauarre. Euerie familie in
Castille payed vnto the said Monasterie, by reason of this vow, some sheepe, some oxen, corne,
oates, wine, oyle, fish, waxe, cheefe, flax, yron, lead, and other things contained in their letters,
from the riuer of Arga, which is in Nauarre, vnto that of Carrion, and from the mountaine of
Araboya vnto the Biscane sea; whereby it appeares, that that yeare 934 the country of Guipuscoa
was vnited to the countie of Castille, being withdrawne from the realme of Nauarre,Guipuscoa a member of the realme of Nauarre.
to the which it was afterwards annexed againe. The yeare of this battaile of Simancas, the
Sunne was darkened for the space of an houre, and the starres were seene glistering, and as it
were mouing in the firmament.
King D. Ramir after this victorie retyred into his countrey,Leon. carrying with him Aben-Aya,
and a great number of other prisoners, with rich spoyles; but soone after he found
himselfe ingaged in a new warre by the practises of some knights of Leon, ill affected vnto
the king, or ill rewarded by him: whatsoeuer the subject were, they conspired with a
captaine of the Moores, called Accipha, who entring into the countrey by the riuer of
Tormes, spoyled all the territories of Salamanca and Ledesma: Garibay calls these knights



which had conspired against their king, D. Fernand Gonsales, D. Diego Nugnes, and D. Rodrigo,
who did great harme with their owne forces, in the Asturies: but king D. Ramir (although
it may be he had giuen subject of these rebellions, by his austeritie, or ingratitude)
surmounted them:God is not pleased with rebellion, no though the Prince be a tyrant. being often seene, that God doth most commonly fauour and support the
royall Majestie against rebellious subjects, how just soeuer their cause be, reseruing to
himselfe the immediate punishment of tyrants. Wherefore the Moores were not onely
repulsed, but also these knights were taken and brought to Leon, and to the castle of Gordon,
from whence notwithstanding the king freed them within few dayes after, without any
other punishment, than their promises and oathes, to continue loyall and faithfull. So as
hauing been too rigorous against his owne bloud, he was too mild and remisse to these, who
had conspired with the Mahumetists, enemies of the Christian religion. These things past in
the yeare 915.An. 915.
King Abderramen grieued,Moores. that the warre against the Christians succeeded not well for the
good of his Estate, he began to persecute the Christians which liued vnder his commaund,
yet some attribute this persecution to his sonne and successor Halihatan.
The generall Historie of Spaine makes mention of a warre betwixt D. Sancho Abarca of
Nauarre,Nauarre. and D. Fernand Gonsales, Earle of Castille, grounded vpon the reparation of many
domages done by the Nauarrois, passing and repassing through the countrey of Castille, vnder
colour of making warre against the Moores: with whom the king D. Sancho made a
peace, to the prejudice of the Castillans and others their neighbors; the which did much discontent
them. Wherefore the Earle D. Fernand demaunded restitution of the spoyle and
excesse which had beene committed in his countrey: but his messengers were sent backe
with injurious words and disgrace; by reason whereof they came to armes, and there was a
sharpe encounter of two armies,Warre betwixt Nauarre and Castille, for iniurie done to the embassadors of Castille. in a place called Era de Gollanda, where there was much
bloud spilt. The two Princes D. Sancho and D. Fernandes encountring during the fight, they
ran one at another with such animositie, as both horse and men were ouerthrowne to the
ground. The king D. Sancho was found dead with the charge of a launce, and D. Fernandes
sore wounded. This misfortune being knowne in the Nauarrois armie, daunted their courages,
so as the Castillans woon the field. The same generall Historie reports,D. Sancho Abarca king of Nauarre slaine by the Castillans. that an Earle of
Tolouse being come with a great armie to succour the king D. Sancho, being desirous to reuenge
the death of his friend and allie, and hauing joyned with the remainders of the forces
of Nauarre, he was againe fought withall, vanquished, and slaine by D. Fernand, who deliuered
the bodies of these Princes thus slaine to their subjects to burie them. Of the time of this
defeat, or of the manner of D. San. Abarcas death, there is no great certaintie in that which is
related in this generall Historie, yet they conjecture it was about the yeare 920. It is without
all question, that he was a valiant and couragious Prince, and so famous, that euen at this
day there is not so poore a woman in the kingdome of Nauarre, nor any other person (although
he be ignorant of the name of other kings) which knowes not that of D. Sancho Abarca;
all which speake and make an honourable mention of him, as of a wise and vertuous
Prince. He did enlarge the limits of Nauarre,The worthie memorie of D. Sancho Abarca. conquering much on euerie side from the
Moores, euen along the riuer of Ebro, whereof a castle neere vnto Sarragosse doth beare
witnesse, which carries his name vnto this day. There are many other markes found of him
in Spaine: the castle of Ses, and that of Arrasate (since called Mondragon) in Guipuscoa,
(but ruined at this day) are his workes. They hold, that he did people the towne of Logrogno
in Rioje, and walled it about. There is ample mention made of him in a Charter of priuiledge
and donation, of the places of S. Vincent and Ledena, to the Monasterie of S. Saluator
de Leyre, dated in the yeare 919, whereby many things which are written doubtfully of
this king, are made plaine and confirmed: among others, it appeares thereby, that he was
sonne to D. Garcia Inigues, brother to D. Fortun, and husband to D. Toda.
About this time, king D. Ramir desirous to enlarge his kingdome,Leon. and to diminish the
power of the Moores in Spaine, led a mightie armie into the countrey of Toledo, so as in the
yeare 923 he besieged Talauera,An. 923. called at this present, La Roina: and as the Moores came
to succour it, he gaue them battaile, where he slew twelue thousand, and tooke seuen thousand
prisoners. This was the last exploit of warre which this king did. A little before he
had married his sonne D. Ordogno to D. Vrraca,Moores defeated. daughter to the Earle of Castille, D. Fernand

Gonsales, and by this marriage he confirmed a peace, and renewed the accords made with
the Castillans. The rest of his dayes, which were but short, he imployed in religious works,
according to those times, and as he was persuaded by the Pastors and Bishops. This king caused
the Monasterie of S. Sauueur of Leon to be built,The religious deeds of D. Ramir of Leon. there to lodge his daughter D. Elurra.
Moreouer, he founded a Monasterie to S. Andrew; one of S. Christopher, vpon the riuer Cea;
one of the virgin Marie vpon Duero; one of S. Michel called Destriana, in the valley of Orne:
in which things he was diligent and prodigall, and alwaies assisted by D. Theresa the
queene his wife. He died in the yeare 924 of his naturall death at Leon,An. 924. where he was buried
in S. Sauueurs Church.
6 In this kings raigne,Cattelogne. Cont Geoffrey the hairie died at Barcelone, hauing enjoyed the
Principalitie of Cattelogne (since the renounciation made vnto him of those lands in proprietie,
by Charles the Grosse, Emperour and King of France) thirtie yeares, and lyes at S. Pablo.
After him, his sonne D. Mir was Earle, in the yeare 914, of whom we read no memorable
thing. He married somewhat late,D. Mir Earle of Barcelone. and begatt three children, the first was called D. Seniofrid,
who was Earle of Barcelone after his father, the second D. Oliban, he was surnamed
Cheurette, by reason of a bodily infirmitie, whereunto he was subject; for when he would
speake, he must of force scrape the earth, before he could pronounce a word, he had such an
impediment in his speech: he had for his portion the Countie of Cerdagne and Besalu, after
the decease of his father. The third called D. Mir, was Earle and Bishop of Girone. All his
children were young at the decease of the Earle their father, who made D. Seniofrid, Earle of
Vrgel, his brother, executor, to order his childrens portions: he ruled Cattelogne fifteene
yeares, and lyes in the Monasterie of Ripol.


D. Ordogno the third, and 18 King of Leon.
7 TO D. Ramir of Leon succeeded D. Ordogno his second sonne,Leon. in the yeare 924, but the
titles and letters of Monasteries and Churches of Spaine, as of S. Iaques of Compostella,
of S. Emylian of Cogolla, of S. Felix of Oca, of priuiledges, donations, and confirmations
graunted vnto them by king D. Ramir, and other noblemen of his time, shew, that he
was yet liuing in the yeare 934: but there is little certaintie in the computation of these
kings raignes, nor in the charters which are produced by men of our time. This Prince D. Ordogno
is commended by the Spaniards to haue beene mild and courteous, so as he was greatly
beloued of his subjects. He had some crosses in the beginning of his raigne,Flatterers make D. Sancho rebell against the king his brother. by the flatterers
and corrupters of young Princes (an ordinarie plague in Courts) who debaucht his
younger brother D. Sancho, and persuaded him to rebell against him, who fled into Nauarre,
to be assisted with the forces of that kingdome to execute his designe.


D. Garcia Sanches, fourth of that name, and tenth
King of Nauarre.
8 THere are some errors which are remarkable in this place in stories;Nauarre. that is, who raigned
at that time in Nauarre: for some hold, that the young Prince D. Sancho had recourse
vnto king D. Sancho Abarca, his grandfather by the mothers side: others say, it was to
his sonne Garcia Sanches, the which is more probable, the most diligent Authors affirming,
that the king D. Sancho Abarca died during the raigne of D. Ramir, father to this king D. Ordogno,
about the yeare 920, hauing raigned twentie yeares or little lesse ouer his subjects,
and valiantly repulsed the Infidell Moores, gouerning in Alaua, and elsewhere in his confines;
to whom his sonne D. Garcia Sanches succeeded in the realme of Nauarre and Countie
of Arragon. Wherefore without all doubt Prince D. Sancho, brother to D. Ordogno of
Leon, had recourse vnto him, and by his meanes was also fauoured by Cont D. Fernand of
Castille, the warres being pacified betwixt the Castillans and the Nauarrois: of which nations
hauing raised a great armie, these three Princes entred the territories of king D. Ordogno,
and marcht as farre as the royall citie of Leon: but king D. Ordogno had so wisely

prouided for his affaires, as they were forced to returne, and to abandon their enterprise, reaping
nothing for their paine, but the hatred of the king of Leon; the which did so incense
him,D. Ordogno king of Leon puts away his wife D. Vrraca. as he put away his wife D. Vrraca, daughter to the Earle D. Fernand Gonsales, and married
a Ladie called D. Eluira, by whom he had a sonne, called D. Bermond, which came to the
Crowne of Leon. By reason of these troubles, the Gallegos, or they of Gallicia rebelled against
king D. Ordogno: but he soone reduced them to their obedience by armes: and being
encouraged by this happie successe, he entred into the Moores countrey, and passed the
riuers of Duero and Minio, wasting the countrey with fire and sword, euen vnto Lisbone, finding
not any one to make head against him, so as he returned safe with his armie, laden with
great spoyles; and without any great stay being incensed with the injurie which he had receiued
from Fernand Earle of Castille, who had fauored and succoured D. Sancho his brother,
who was rebelled, marcht with his forces towards Castille, with an intent to doe him all the
harme he could.
The wisdome and dexteritie of D. Fernand was such,Castille. as of an enemie he made him a friend,
so as he returned into his countrey well satisfied, and after that time they joyned their sorces
together to annoy the Moores: whose king Abderramen residing at Cordoua, desirous to reuenge
the outrages which the Christians and their king D. Ordogno had done in the territories
of Lisbone, and others of those marches, hauing also a new subject by the taking of
his castle of Carranso, by the Earle D. Fernand, he raysed a mightie armie of Moores, in the
which they say was aboue 80000 fighting men: and hauing giuen charge thereof to a Moorish
knight much esteemed, whom they called Alhagib Almansor, he sent him into the territories
of Castille, the which did much trouble D. Fernand, for that all his forces of Castille
were small to oppose against so mightie a power as that of the Moores, wherefore he demaunded
succours, and obtained them from king D. Ordogno; yet Castille was ouerrun by
the Moores armie, from S. Steuen of Gormas vnto Burgos. In the end, D. Fernand did
so pursue them, as hee forced them to fight, neere vnto a place called Dozio, where the
Moores were defeated,Defeat of Moores. with great slaughter of their men. The Spaniards report, That D.
Fernand was foretold of this defeat of the Moores by a holie hermit, dwelling neere to Lara,
called Pelagius, and that the armies being farre one from the other, D. Fernand being encamped
in that place, he had a desire to hunt, and hauing rowzed a Boare, he pursued him
to the hermits cell, where he shut him vp. There was a Chappell and an Altar dedicated to
S. Peter, for the reuerence where of the Earle would doe no harme vnto this beast. Whilest
he stayed there, the hermit arriued, who entreated the Earle to lodge that night with him
and his religious, being late, the which he did. In the morning the hermit Pelagius reuealed
vnto the Earle,An hermit firetelling the Earle of Castilles victorie. that he should be victor ouer this great armie of Moores, exhorting him
to take courage, and to trust in God, and aboue all to remember the poore Friets, when he
had gotten this victorie. So the Earle returned to his armie so full of hope, as no counsell
could dissuade him from the Moores armie, being great and mightie, with a handfull of men;
and he had the victorie, as we haue said. Returning to Burgos, he remembred the religious,
whom he made partakers of the spoyle,Monasterie of Peter of Ar^ce, built by Fernand insales. and in time built a Monasterie for them to S. Peter,
vpon the riuer of Arlance, and gaue it good reuenues, where this Earle and his successors
were afterwards buried. The Moores hauing leuied new troupes, returned into Castille, and
were againe vanquished by the Castillans and Nauarrois, about the yeare 927, and neere vnto
the towne of S. Steuens, vpon the riuer of Duero.
The king D. Ordogno hauing raysed a new armie a little before,Leon. to inuade the Moores, he
was surprised with sicknesse in the towne or Zamora, where he died the fift yere of his raigne,
and of our redemption 929,An. 929. which opinion is not verie certaine.
9 In which yeare they hold, that D. Mir Earle of Barcelone also died, and to him succeeded
his sonne Seniofrid, according to his will and testament.


D. Sancho the first, and 19 King of Leon.
10 TO D. Ordogno there succeeded in the realme of Leon D. Sancho his brother,Leon. who
was surnamed the fat, for that he was exceeding corpulent; wherefore it seemes

he was more carefull to pamper his bodie, then to attempt any great actions: and for that
in those dayes the Arabians had the fame to be verie expert in the art of Phisicke, and that
the towne of Cordoua was full of such people, especially the Court of king Abderramen, he
entertained friendship with this king, and went to Cordoua, that he might haue aduice and
helpe for his indisposition; wherein Abderramen shewed himselfe courteous and faithfull,Arabian Phisitions in great request.
receiuing him with all the honour fit for such a king, and furnishing him with the best Phisitians
of his Court, by whose diligence and judgement he was freed from the infirmitie which
had long troubled him.
Whilest that D. Sancho was in the Phisitians hands at Cordoua, the Leonois conspired
against him,Rebellion in the kingdome of Leon. and did aduance to the royall throne D. Ordogno, surnamed the bad, sonne to
D. Alphonso the Monke, whereunto they were sollicited by D. Fernand Gonsales, Earle of
Castille, whose daughter D. Vrraca, who had beene rejected by D. Ordogno last deceased,
they caused this other Ordogno to marrie: but D. Sancho being aduertised of these newes at
Cordoua, he entreated king Abderramen to continue him his fauour and friendship, and as
he had beene the meanes for the recouerie of his bodily health, so he would also assist him to
maintaine his estate and dignitie: Whereunto the king did verie kindly consent, and gaue
him great troupes of his nation and sect, with the which he marched towards his countrey,
the which he recouered without any great difficultie, for that the conspirators of the countrey
could not of themselues resist so great forces. And as for the Earle D. Fernand, he had
worke ynough in his owne countrey,D. Bela of Nagera treubles the estate of Castille. whereas a nobleman, called D. Bela de Nagera, had put
all in trouble and sedition during his absence, in laying the plot against the king D. Sancho,
with them of Leon; who being vnprouided of force and counsell, retyred with D. Ordogno
into the Asturies, to liue there in the mountaines and places of strength: but D. Ordogno not
finding himselfe safe ynough in those parts, he fled into Castille, to his father in law; who obserued
in that, and other actions of his, a notable cowardise: whereat he was so incensed,
as he tooke his daughter Vrraca from him, and chased him out of his countrey. So D. Ordogno
not knowing whither to flye, went vnto the Moores, but he was slaine neere vnto
Cordoua.
This partie of the Moores had beene embraced with better successe,Castille. a little before, by D.
Bela de Nagera, who had rebelled against the Earle D. Fernand, and was expelled by him; who
it may be persuaded the expedition which was made into Castille,An. 931. in the yeare 931, by king
Abderramen, vnder the commaund of Alhagib Almansor, who had alreadie (to his losse) tryed
the force of the Christians, as we haue said: against whom, D. Fernand hauing fortified himselfe
with the succours of the Biscaines, and of their Lord D. Lope Diaz, who was grandchild
to D. Suria, and sonne to D. Inigo, surnamed Esguerra, which signifieth deafe in the countrey
language, and with other friends his neighbors, he presented himselfe in battaile neere to Hazignas,
where they fought three seuerall daies, with great obstinacie on either side: but in the
end the Moores were vanquished,Moores defeated. and lost more men than they had done in the former battailes.
The Spanish writers make mention here of another apparition of S. Iaques, fighting
for the Christians against the Infidels, to whom they attribute the honor of this victorie.
The king D. Sancho being restored,Leon. he married D. Theresa, and hauing punished some confederats
of this rebellion, he made a generall assemblie of noblemen, both of his subjects and
allies, at Leon. D. Fernand Gonsales could not well excuse himselfe, wherefore he went well
accompanied, and was notwithstanding verie honourably entertained by the king. They report,
That among other exquisit things which D. Fernand brought out of Castille, to make
shew of in that Court, he had a goodly horse, and one of the best Goshawkes that could be
seene, whereof the king was wonderfully desirous, causing some to entreat the Earle to sell
them to him, and that he should aske what price he pleased. The Earle answered, That he
would willingly giue them vnto the king, but he would not sell them: but the king would
not receiue them of gift, but made such meanes by his friends to buy them, as in the end
there was a price set,A rash baragaine made betwixt Princes in sport, and entertained by force. which was to be payed at a certaine time, vpon condition, That if the
king failed at the day of payment, the summe agreed vpon should be doubled, to the benefit
of the creditor: of which accord there were letters drawne and signed. The rest of the
time which D. Fernand remained in the king D. Sancho his Court, was spent in pleasure.

In the end of the Assembly, there was a particular treatie of the marriage of D. Fernand,
a widower with D. Sancha the Infanta of Nauarre, daughter to D. Sancho Abarca,
and sister to D. Garcia, then raigning in Nauarre, and Arragon. This marriage was propounded
by the Queene. Theresa, mother to the king D. Sancho Gordo, and sister to D.
Sancha; not for any loue she bare to the Earle of Castille, but to intrap him in the snares
which she had prepared for him, in hatred and reuenge of the death of king Sancho Abarca
her father, whom he had slaine in warre, as we haue said before. The Earle consented
to this marriage, and tooke his leaue of the King and Queene, and of the Noblemen of
the Court, and went into Castille, to prepare himselfe for his future marriage: but he
found, that during his absence the Nauarrois had spoyled his countrey, and done manie
acts of hostilitie against his subjects; whereof he complained first by embassages and messages,Warre betwixt Castille and Nauarre.
and demaunded restitution of that which had beene taken, but it was in vaine:
Wherefore being a prince full of courage, he went presently to armes, and entred into
the territories of Nauarre, where he encountred an armie of Nauarrois, and defeated it,
and so righted himselfe.
The treatie of marriage was still continued,Nauarre. by the meanes of the Queene mother of
Leon, sister to D. Sancha, Insanta of Nauarre, who had plotted with the king D. Garcia
Sanches, her brother, to entrap the Earle vnder this colour of marriage, and to be reuenged
of him at their pleasures. There was such sending on either part, as in the end the Earle
was persuaded to goe into Nauarre to conclude this marriage, and hauing agreed with
D. Garcia, king of Nauarre, That their enterview should be at a place called Cireugna,
either of them accompanied with fiue knights onely. The Earle being arriued, the king
came with fiue and thirtie horsemen; wherefore the Earle seeing himselfe thus surprised,
thought to saue himselfe in an hermitage neere adjoyning,D. Fernand Earle of Castille surprised in Na^arre, and detained prisoner. but the holinesse of the place
could not defend him, but he was besieged, and forced to yeeld, vpon condition they
should not put him to death. Being taken, he was shut vp in a sort called Chasteau Vieil,
or the old castle, and but hardly entreated. A while after, an Italian knight of Lumbardie,
going in pilgrimage to Saint Iaques of Compostella, that way, and hearing that
the Eatle D. Fernand was detained prisoner there, he was verie desirous to see him, for
that he had heard so much same of his vertues and valour, and at length found meanes
to speake with him. At his departure from thence, this knight went to the Infanta D.
Sancha, who was both faire and louelie, whose heart he did so mollifie with good words,
as she began to loue, and to desire D. Fernands libertie and companie. This Ladie moued
with this affection,D. Fernand of Castille deliuered out of prison. wrought in such sort, as one night she deliuered him out of prison,
hauing plighted their faithes, and promised marriage one vnto the other, without
the priuitie of the king D. Garcia Sanches, and together tooke their way to Castille, where
they had scarce entred the limits, but they met with great troupes of souldiours. These
were the Earles subjects, who vpon the newes of his imprisonment had assembled themselues
together in armes, and hauing made an Image like vnto their Lord, they had all
taken a solemne oath before it, That not any one of them should returne vnto his house,
vntill the Earle were deliuered,^oue of subiects to their Prince. and that whosoeuer should doe otherwise, should bee
held for a traitor. Being thus resolued, they came into Nauarre, when as they had this
happie encountet of the Earle D. Fernand, and the Countesse D. Sancha his spouse, whom
they receiued with all the honour and signes of joy, that the place and their furniture
would permit.
The king D. Garcia Sanches being aduertised of his sisters flight,Castille. and the Earles deliuerie,
was wonderfully incensed; he leuied an armie, and entred into the territories of Castille,
whereas the Earle came to encounter him with a great power, and gaue him battaile,
in the which the Nauarrois were defeated, and the king D. Garcia taken prisoner, being ouerthrowne
with the blow of a launce,Nauarrois defeated, and the king D. Garcia Sanches taken prisoner. by the Earle himselfe, who had sought for him, and encountred
him in the sight. So he was led to Burgos, and there remained thirteene moneths
in safe keeping. Then at the entreatie of the Countesse D. Sancha he was set at libertie, and
sent into his countrey honourably attended. Yet for all this, the quarrels betwixt Castille
and Nauarre were not ended: for a while after, the Earle D. Fernand being gone to Leon,

the king of Nauarre came againe with an armie, by the mountaines of Oca and Bureua,
and ran as farre as Burgos, doing what he could to persuade the Countesse D. Sancha to
goe away with him, but she would giue no eare to him; wherefore the returned with a
great bootie, hauing much spoyled the countrey. The Earle at his returne being informed
of all which the king of Nauarre had attempted, complained first by embassages,
and demaunded reparation of dommages which his subjects had endured, and hauing no
reason done him, nor any good answer made, he tooke the course of armes, and led an armie
into Nauarre, where he gaue battaile vnto his enemies on the plaines of Valpierre,
neere to Nagera and Brion, where the Nauarrois were manie in number, and well appointed.
Those of Castille were in great danger, yet the equitie of their quarrell gaue
them force and courage,Another defeat of Nauarrou. so as they remained victors, and the Earle had full satisfaction
of the wrongs and injuries which the king of Nauarre had done him. Such were the occasions,
progresse, and end of the quarrels, betwixt Nauarre and Castille, according to the
Spanish Chronicles,An. 934. to the yeare of our Lord 934. After this, the countrey of Castille
was in peace for a time, and the Earle D. Fernand had no other care, but to gouerne his
subjects well, vnder good lawes, when as in Leon there was great trecherie practised against
him, by the king D. Sancho, who was sorrie that the designes of Nauarre had not
succeeded as he desired.
This king made an Assembly of all the Earles and Noblemen, and appointed his Court
in the citie of Leon, whither the Earle of Castille was also called: who although hee
were sufficiently informed, whence all the wrongs came that were done him, and of the
little good they wisht him in that Court, yet could he find no meanes to excuse himselfe,
and (which was worse) there were verie few of his friends. Being come to the gates
of the citie, he might easily perceiue that he was not welcome, for that no man came to
meet him, as they had done at other times; wherefore he entred into the citie like a priuate
man, and of meane estate. Comming to kisse the kings hands, he was receiued with
a frowning countenance,The Earle of Castille kept prisoner in Leon. and sowre speeches, telling him, that he detained the Earledome
of Castille from him: Whereupon the Earle seeking to satisfie the king with good
reasons, hee was not heard, but put in sure gard, and kept in the citie of Leon, in the
yeare 936.An. 936.
The newes of his restraint did much trouble all Castille, but especially the Countesse,
whom the good and well affected knights of Castille sought by all meanes they could to
comfort, promising all their meanes for the Earles deliuerie. This Ladie being of a noble
courage, and confirmed by the loyaltie she found in his subjects, put her selfe presently
vpon the way, being accompanied by the chife of the nobilitie of the countrey, and going
by secret and unknowne passages, shee came neere vnto the citie of Leon; where shee
left her troupes in ambush, and taking the habit of a pilgrime, pretending to goe and visit
the sepulchre of S. Iaques, shee entred into the citie, being accompanied onely with two
men. The king being presently aduertised of the Countesses arriuall, he came vnto her,
and desirous to doe her honour, being his aunt, he suffered her to see her husband who was
prisoner, and to remaine that night with him, and commaunded for her sake, that they
should take off his yrons, wherewith he was bound. These two louers passed that little time
which was allowed them to be together, in comfroting one another, and in praying vnto
God; and hauing concluded betwixt themselues what was to be done, this vertuous Princesse
D. Sancha gaue an example to all her sex,A rare example of coniugall loue. of what power conjugall loue is in a generous
heart; for she attyred her husband so handsomely in her pilgrimes weed, as the keepers
of the prison being deceiued therewith, let him goe, thinking it had beene shee. The
Countesse in the meane time remained prisoner: so as before they could discouer the
fraud, D. Fernand had meanes to get out of the towne, and to come vnto his knights,
which lay in ambush, by whom hee was conducted into his countrey. This fact of the
Countesse being reported vnto the king, he was so farre from blaming her, as admiring
the force of so holie a loue,Vertue is reuerenced euen of enemies. he deliuered her, honoured her, and sent her home to her
husband, with a traine fit for her calling, although he were varie sorrie that the Earle
had so escaped.

The king D. Sancho was still a debtor to the Earle of Castille, not onely for the price
of his horse and hawke, but also for the multiplication thereof, the day of payment being
long before expired: wherefore the Earle sent to demaund his money of the king: and
hauing neither payment, nor good wordes, he began to spoyle the territories of Leon:
whereupon the king commaunded his Treasurers to verifie this debt, and to seeke for
meanes to discharge it. The summe was so often doubled and multiplied, from day to
day, after the terme prefixed, as they reported vnto the king, That all the wealth of the
kingdome of Leon would not be sufficient to pay that which was due vnto the Earle of
Castille: wherefore after manie consultations and messages sent on either part, the king
D. Sancho and the Earle D. Fernand fell to an agreement, That the king to be freed of this
excessiue summe of money,Castille exempt from all subiection by a foolish bargaine. did remit vnto the Earle D. Fernand the lands and seigniories
of Castille, to enjoy them absolutely, without any reseruation of fealtie, homage, nor
vassallage to the Crowne of Leon, but freely and as Soueraignes, he, and his in perpetuitie,
whereof letters were passed in the yeare 939. This was the meanes, as the Histories
of Spaine report, of the Soueraigntie of Castille, and separation thereof from the realme
of Leon and Ouiedo, the which countrey from an Earledome became a royaltie, and in
the end the mightiest of all the Continent, as we see it in our time. The Earle D. Fernand
did at that time hold in the Prouince of Rioje, the lands of Cerezo and Granon, and by
many letters of donation graunted by him to the Churches and Couents of his countrey,
he is intitled Lord of Alaua: whereby we must note, that the countrey of Alaua was in
his time of a larger circuit then it is now: for the kings of Nauarre held much of it, and
did also tearme themselues Lords: so did the Moores, dispersed ouer all Spaine, and holding
great Seigniories, townes, and forts there, vnder their king Abderramen, being resident
at Cordoua.
This Arabian king,Moores. for his last exploit of warre, had sent an armie of Moores into
the territories of Leon, which layed siege before the citie, from whence notwithstanding
they were forced to retyre, by the vertue and good gouernment of those that were
within it, as well souldiors as citizens. Soone after this king died, the which, according
vnto some, was about the yeare nine hundred thirtie nine, and of the Arabians raigne
three hundred twentie two, hauing raigned fiftie yeares in Spaine. Hee was a louer of
learning, so as in his time, Philosophie, Phisicke, and all other Arts, did flourish at
Cordoua.
11 Hali Hatan his sonne succeeded him,Hali Hatan 9 Soueraigne King of the Moores in Spaine. to whom king D. Sancho sent a great embassage,
to treat a peace betwixt the two kingdomes, whereof D. Velasco, Bishop of Leon, was the
chiefe, who had charge to demaund the bodie of the infant Pelagins, slaine by king Abderramen,
to make a relicke thereof.
During this time,Leon. there arose a great tumult and sedition in Gallicia, vpon certaine
priuate mens quarrells,Sedition in Galicia who slew one another cruelly, without any respect vnto the
king nor justice: Wherefore the king D. Sancho was forced to lead an armie thither,
with the which he did punish some of the mutines, and did force some of the rest to
leaue the countrey. They passed the riuer of Duero, and yet retyred into a countrey
which did belong vnto the jurisdiction of Leon, in that quarter, the which was gouerned
by an Earle, or Gouernor, called D. Gonsales, vnder the king D. Sancho. This bad vassale,
in stead of supporting the kings justice against these mutines, tooke armes in their fauour,
and was so rash as to oppose himselfe against the kings forces, which pursued them
into his gouernment: but remembring his owne follie in time, he had recourse to the
the kings clemencie, who pardoned him, making his onely to confesse his fault, and to
take a new oath of fealtie:Notable disloyaltie. yet this trecherous and ingratefull wretch, smothering in his
breast the venome of treason, within few dayes after poysoned his king and naturall Prince
with an apple which he gaue him. The king, who distrusted nothing, did presently bite of
it, but his heart being suddainely infected with the poyson, he began to shake, and to shew
other signes that he was strucken with death; wherefore he made hast to returne to Leon,
but he died vpon the way, in the twelfth yeare of his raigne, and of our redemption
941, and lyes at S. Sauiours in Leon. He had by wife D. Theresa one sonne, called

D. Ramir, who succeeded him in the realme of Leon. They find it written, That a little
before his death there were great flames of fire seene rise out of the Ocean,Prodigie. the which
being carried vp into Spaine, burnt a great countrey, and manie villages, as farre as
Zamora.
In the meane time the Earle of Vrgel gouerned in Barcelone and Cattelogne,Barcelone. as tutor
to his nephewes, sonnes vnto the Earle D. Mir, the last deceased, being vnder age,
whereof the eldest, to whom the Earledome belonged, was called D. S^niofrid, as his tutor
was. Of this Earle of Vrgel issued two sonnes, D. Borel, who was the sixt Earle of
Barcelone, and D. Armingaud Bishop of Vrgel, who was reputed a Saint. The State of
Barcelone and Cattelogne was gouerned by him in qualitie of tutor, for the space of
twentie yeares.
The religion of Spaine in those times was wholly reduced to the seeking out of Martyrs
bones,Religion in Spaine in those times. and other relickes. The building of Monasteries, gifts, and foundations, were
held most meritorious, as well for the liuing as for the dead. The inuocation of Saints
deceased, whose victories, peace, and other prosperities, well knowne to the world, were
then in credit. Most of the Bishops and Pastors were either verie prophane, or exceeding
superstitious and ignorant.
In the raigne of D. Ramir, Ordogno the third,The Bishops of Spaine in those dayes. and Sancho the fat, there had beene Bishops
of Compostella, after Sisenand the fourth, Gundesin, who was much vnlike vnto his
predecessor in holinesse of life, whose health was obtained by the prayers which his mother
(a verie deuout woman) made continually (as the Spaniards say) before S. ^aques Sepulchre,
which the Angelicall voices (heard at the Bishops decease) did witnesse; after
whom, Hermigild was chosen, a very prophane man: then came Sisenand, as bad as the other.
You may conjecture, that the other Bishoprickes were no better furnished then that of
Compostella. These kings made foundations, and gaue infinite priuiledges to Abbots
and other Clergie men, for the redemption of their soules, and of their predecessors, as
their letters aboue mentioned containe.
D. Garcia Sanches,Nauarre. did also confirme the vow of S. Emylian in his
countrey, by letters dated in the yeare nine hundred thirtie foure. The Bishops did the
like for their parts. Galinde Bishop of Pampelone, for the great deuotion which he had vnto
the Couent of S. Sauiour of Leyra (where sometimes had beene the Episcopall seat of
Pampelone) gaue vnto the Abbot and religious of that place all the titles of the Archpresbiterie
of the valley of Onsella, by an Instrument dated nine hundred thirtie eight. The
King D. Garcia, and D. Theresa his wife, gaue Villar de la Tour, neere vnto Nagera, with all
the territorie and jurisdiction, to the same Monasterie, in the yeare nine hundred fortie
three. Moreouer, by other letters, dated in the yeare nine hundred fortie foure, D. Garcia,
and the Queene his wife, and D. Galinde the Bishop, (who is there called by the King, his
lord and master) confirme the donation of part of the titles belonging to the Bishop, of the
places aboue mentioned: And besides, there is another donation made of all that the king
of Nauarre should conquer from the Moores, Infidels, and Barbarians.


D. Ramir, the third of that name, and twentieth
King of Leon.
12 IN the yeare nine hundred fortie one,Leon. D. Ramir was setled king at Leon: at whose
comming the Norman pyrats did much annoy the coast of Gallicia. This king being
verie young, he was gouerned by the Queene D. Theresa his mother, and by D. Elu^ra,
sister to the deceased king his father, being a religious woman. The peace which had
beene treated with Hali Hatan, was confirmed by the mediation of the Bishop D. Velasco,
who was at Cordoua, at the death of D. Sancho, and had brought with him the bodie
of the infant Pelagius,Monasterie of S. Pelagius. the which was layed in a Monasterie built to that end by the deceased
king.

The Normanes which came into Gallicia, being led by a captaine called Gundired, spoyled
all along the sea shore; and entring into the maine land, they burnt townes, villages,
and castles, spoyling and putting all to the sword they encountred, holding as it were the
possession of Gallicia for the space of two whole yeares, the which the king D. Ramir had
no meanes to resist, by reason of his nonage: yet in the end he was persuaded to send some
troupes of souldiors, vnder the commaund of an Earle called D. Gonsalo Sanches, who watched
his opportunitie so well, as he defeated the Normanes, slew their captaine Gundired,
and burnt their shippes. D. Sisenand second Bishop of Compostella, had beene slaine by
these pyrates: he was a turbulent man, and an vnworthie Prelate, of whom Histories report,^isenand bishop (...) Compost^lla, ^urbulent (...).
that for his vices, prodigalitie, and lewd life, the king D. Sancho the fat had caused him
to be put in prison; in whose place Rodosinde was chosen, a holie man and of good fame, a
Monke of the Order of S. Benet: but after the death of D. Sancho, Sisenana being gotten
out of prison, he came with force to enter his Bishopricke, being resolued to kill Rodosinde:
the which he had effected, if this holie man had not willingly quit the place, returning
to his Monasterie, where he ended the rest of his dayes. Afterwards, Sisenand pursuing
the Normanes, being more fit to commaund souldiors then to gouerne the Church
of Christ, hee was slaine with an arrow neere vnto Formellos. Such were the Bishops for
the most part in those times. The Estate of Leon was by this meanes peaceable, both within
it selfe, and in regard of enemies abroad, hauing peace with the Moores.
King Hali Hatan being loth that the beginning of his raigne should passe without some
famous exploit,Castille. being also sollicited by D. Bela of Nagera, a knight of Alaua, who (as we
haue said) had beene expelled by D. Fernand, Earle of Castille, and was retyred to the
Moores Court at Cordoua, hee raysed a mightie armie, the which hee sent to ruine the
Earle of Castille (against whom he had a spleene, for the former warres) and tooke from
him Sepuluedas,An. 942. S. Estienne of Gormas, and other places, about the yeare 942, the which
the Earle of Castille could not suddainely preuent, whereat he was so much discontented
as within few dayes after he died in Burgos, to the great griefe of all the people of
Castille, and was interred in the Monasterie of Arlansa, which he founded. There is some
reason to doubt of the yeare of his death, for that there is found in the Instruments and
Titles of donation made by him, to the Monasterie of S. Emylian, of the towne of Saint
Marie de Pezuegos, dated in the yeare 944; to the Church of S. Martin of Granon, the
yeare 945; of certaine houses in the towne of Salines; of the Church of S. Stephen of Sabredo,
dated 947, to the same Monasterie: of the Church of S. Iohn Baptist of Ciguri, vpon
the riuer of Tiron, the which runnes into the riuer Ebro, neere vnto the towne of Haro:
where it is expressely said, that the Earle D. Fernand and D. Sancha his wife make this
donation to the Abbot and religious of the said Monasterie, and to their successors, for
the loue of the glorious Confessor S. Emylian, that at the dreadfull day of judgement they
might deserue to heare that comfortable voice of the Lord, Come ye blessed of my father,
etc. In these letters D. Ferdinand did intitle himselfe Earle of Castille, of Alaua, and of
Nagera.
There are registers and memorials found also in the Monasterie of S. Emylian, making
mention of the Earle D. Fernand and of D. Vrraca his first wife, of the yeare 964, the which
without doubt is false and counterfeit,Donations, priuiledges, and other titles of Monasteries vncertaine. as in the truth there is no great certaintie in anything
which the Monkes produce of their priuiledges, donations, exemptions, and other graunts
of auncient kings. It is to be seene vpon the tombe of D. Sancha, Countesse of Castille, in
the great Chappell of S. Peter of Arlansa, that she died that yeare 964: and in the Aera 1002,
to Cont Fernand Gonsales succeeded his third sonne D. Garcia Fernandes, the first of that name
in the Earledome of Castille, and other places aboue mentioned, in the yeare, according to
the common opinion, 942.
13 The Moores being masters of the field in Castille,Moores. there being no forces together to
withstand them, being pust vp with successe, they entred the territories of Leon, breaking
the peace which they had with the king D. Ramir, without any subiect, and came and besieged
the towne of Zamora,Zamora taken and ruined. the which they tooke, and ruined. Vntill that time, which was about
the yeare 950,An. 950. the Christians dwelling vnder the gouernment of the Arabian Moores,

whom they called for the respect Musarabes, had remained in great tranquilitie and peace,
without forcing them in their religion in any sort whatsoeuer: Moreouer, they had justice
duely administred, paying the pensions and tributes which were imposed vpon them, whereby
they were assured from all violence. But Hali Hatan being come to the Crowne, he was
so zealous in his religion, and conceiued so great a hatred against that of the Christians, as he
published an edict,A cruell edict made by Hali Hatan against the Christian his subiects. by the which all Christians dwelling vnder his iurisdiction, were commanded
to abiure the religion of Iesus Christ, and causing themselues to be circumcised, to imbrace
that of Mahumet, vpon paine of death. Then did the spirit of God quicken in the hearts
of many, the fire which had beene smothered by the humane traditions; and instructing them
inwardly (seeing that ordinarie meanes failed, or were corrupted) made it appeare vnto the
world, that the true religion hath no better meanes of propagation, than persecution: for
loue and charitie surmount nature, making the dull quicke witted, causing them which were
in a manner dumbe to speake, and giuing force and courage to the simple and weake. Many
Christians of all sexes and ages, did vertuously confesse the saluation we haue in Iesus Christ,
by his onely merit and satisfaction, before the Inquisitors and Iudges, which were sent by this
barbarous king. The names of which holie martyrs are worthie of memorie, to be a president
to all the faithfull;Martyres vnder the Moores. but we haue too few of them. In the citie of Cordoua there were put to
death, for the testimonie of Christs truth, Aurelius, Gregorius, and Felix, with their wiues,
Natalia, Crescencia, and Liliosa. In the territorie of Rioje, Victor, borne at Cerezo (who had
long defended his fellow citizens from the violence of the Moores) was beheaded. At Bosca,
neere to Nagera, Nunilla and Allodia, two holy sisters, suffered death: Yet by the letters and
priuiledges of the kings of Nauarre, giuen to S. Sauiour in Leyre (where they say they were
buried) it seemes their death was long before this persecution. In Arragon, in the towne of
Iaca, the holie virgine Eurosia suffered: and many others in diuers parts of Spaine, where the
Moores commaunded. Thus were the Christians afflicted both in peace and warre, by armes,
and by vniust proceedings.
The Authors of the Spanish Historie make no mention,Leon. that the king D. Ramir had any
great care to suppresse the insolencie of these Arabian Infidels, nor to be reuenged for their
breach of peace, and the ruine and euersion of such a towne as Zamora was: but they onely
say, That about the yeare 955, being of full age, he maried with a ladie called D. Vrraca, by
whom it is not found that he had any children: and abandoning himselfe to a voluptuous life,
he contemned all good counsell: so as the earles and noblemen of Gallicia,The vices of princes causes of sedition. seeing his sollie,
and discontented with his vices, they skorned him, and would no more acknowledge him for
their king. Whereupon they did chuse D. Bermund, sonne to the last king D. Ordogno, and
intitled him King of Gallicia: which title and countrey he enioyed ten yeares,Gallicia made a kingdome. notwithstanding
all the attempts of D. Ramir, who made warre there two whole yeares, with great losse
of his best men.
D. Garcia Fernandes new Earle of Castille,Castille. resisted the Moores valiantly, and being also
inuited by the basenesse of king D. Ramir, and it may be by the remembrance of the injuries
done by the king D. Sancho to the Earle D. Ramir,Basenesse of king Ramir occasion of new tumulis. and the wrongs done by him also vnto
the Earle D. Fernand his father, he entred the territories of Leon, and withdrew some
places from him, so as falling to an accord, the riuer of Carrion was made the bounds betwixt
the Estates of Leon and Castille. They hold, That this earle D. Garcia Fernandes, did
build in Curuas Rubias, the monasterie of S. Cosine and Damian, and indowed it with great
priuiledges, lands and possessions: retaining such a right of patronage, That if any gentlewomen
of his familie should want meanes to marie them according to their estates, or would liue vnmaried, they should be prouided for, and entertained: leauing to the religious which
serue in the monasterie, a competent pension to nourish them. This earle did augment the
number of horsemen in Castille to six hundred, which at his fathers death were but two hundred.
He maried twice to French ladies, but vnfortunatly: his first wife was called D. Argentiua,
daughter to a French earle, with whom hee fell in loue, when as in the companie of her
father and mother, she past through Castille,A mariage for loue vnfortuna^ in pilgrimage to S. Iaques of Compostella, and
demanded her of her father: but she proued vnchast, abandoning her selfe to a French knight,
who came from S. Iaques, and carried her away into France, the earle being sicke in bed, six
yeares after thier mariage. The Spaniards report, That being cured, and much incensed at

the wrong this knight had done him, he went out of Castille, and left the gouernement of
his countries of Gilp^res of Bauardillo, and Fernand Peres, two of his vassalls; and went into
France in a disguised habit, where as this knight dwelt, and enjoyed D. Argentina: where
he wrought in such sort, as he woon the fauour of his daughter, called D. Sancha, or according
vnto some, D. Ogna, with whom he laid a plot (vpon promise that he should take her to wife)
That one night she should giue him entrance into her fathers house to reuenge his wrongs:
Where as the earle slue those two adulterers in their bed, and so returned into Castille, carrying
with him. D. Sancha, or Ogna, his new spouse, whom he maried in the citie of Bourgos.
The name of this second wife is diuersly set downe by Spanish writers; some call her
Sancha,G^nerall of ^^^ulle. others Ogna: the inscriptions of. Peter of Arlance, name her Abba. D. Garcia Fernandes
the earle, had one sonne by her, called D. Garcia Roldanis, who died young, as it appeares
by the inscriptions of the said monasterie. Moreouer, he had another sonne, called D.
Sancho Garcia, who was earle. In the inscriptions of Saint Peter of Cardegna (where she was
buried with her husband) it is said, the she was neece to the Emperour Henrie: and is in
all places called Abba, or Ogna. Besides these two sonnes, shee had one daughter called
D. Vrraca, who was profest in the monasterie of S. Cosme and Damian, about Arlansa, During
the time the earle was in France to seeke meanes to be reuenged, and to get his new
wife, the Moores entred into Castille, and spoyled all the countrey euen vnto Bourgos:
and they write, That in the way they forced the monasterie of Saint Peter of Cardegna, and
slue the Abbot and three hundred Monkes;A great slaughter of Monkes made by the Moores. some Authors write but two hundred, and that
the destruction of this monasterie was some yeare before. But this place was reedified by
the earle D. Garcia Fernandes, and inriched with rents and jewels more then before. This
happened during the time that D. Ramir king of Leon made warre against his rebellious subiects
in Gallicia.
14 About the yeare 956Anno 956. died that cruell enemie of the Christian Religion,Moores. Hali Hatan,
king of the Arabians at Cordoua, the sixteenth yeare of his raigne, and 339 of the Arabians:
to whom succeeded Hizen his sonne, the second of that name, called by others Izica.
The forces of this king of the Moores,Moores drawn into Gallicia by the faction of a Bishop. were drawne into Gallicia, by the factions of a Bishop
of Compostella, who had beene deposed for his vices. The zeale of their ambition was such,
as they made no conscience to expose Christians to the crueltie of Arabian Mahumetists. It
is written in the Spanish Histories, that D. Bermond raigning in Gallicia, by an accord made
with D. Ramir king of Leon, and making his ordinarie residence in the towne of S. Iaques,
there came to the Episcopall dignitie of that place, D. Pelagius, Bishop of Lugo, sonne to
Cont Roderigo Velasques: who shewing himselfe a prophane man, and disposing of Ecclesiasticall
dignities to vnworthie men, deserued to be expelled, by the king D. Bermond, who aduanced
in his place a Monke of Saint Benoist, called D. Pedro of Monsorio, of a reasonable
good life. Cont Roderigo and his followers being incensed at this disgrace done vnto
his sonne, called the Moores into Gallicia, to be reuenged of the king D. Bermond. King
Hizen was verie young at the decease of his father Halt Hatan; wherefore a nobleman among
the Moores, valiant, and verie famous, called Mahomad Ibne, Aben Hamur, and by
surname Alhabib Almansor, tooke vpon him the gouernement of the realme of Cordoua,
and of all Spaine vnder the Moores jurisdiction, the which he held fiue and twentie yeares:
and they report, that during his life, they entred two and fiftie times into the Christians countrey;
and that he was of such credit among the Moores, as all was done by his aduice and
counsell, Hizen hauing nothing but the bare name. Considering the name and surname of
this great captaine, it is to be presumed he had beene sent out of Affricke, by Mansor, Miralmumin
of Maroc, then raigning, to gouerne Spaine during the minoritie of the king of
Cordoua: for Alhabib Mansor, is interpreted, Captaine, or protector and defendor of his
king Mansor: Almansor signifies victorious. The proper name of the Miralmumin was Balharabo.
The Moores in Spaine drew great succours from Affricke, in manner of a Croisadoe,
and vnder the title of religion. The first passage of the Moores into the Christians countrey,
in the raigne of this king, was in the yeare 963, at the instance of Roderigo Velasques, into
Gallicia, where he committed infinit spoyles, and ruined part of S. Iaques church. But the
plague being in his campe, he was forced to retire, and could not wholly ruine the countrey,
as he had intended.

The king D. Bermond,Leon. and the noblemen of Gallicia, after the Moores retrait, repaired the
spoyles which they had made, as well as they could. In the meane time the king D. Ramir
died without children, in the yeare 965: so as the kingdome of Leon came to the king D. Bermond.
D. Ramir was interred at Destriana, a monasterie of a royall foundation, and a long
time after transported to Astorga. S. Iaques church being repaired, and newly consecrated,
D. Pedro of Mansorio, the Bishop, died; and in his place D. Pelagius Diaz was chosen, a lewd
man,Prophane Bishops at Compostella. and a contemner of all religion: wherefore he was iustly expelled, and Vimare his brother
aduanced in his stead, who for his vices deserued by a just judgement of God, to be drowned
in the riuer of Minio. There was another substituted to him of as bad a life, the which
was put in prison by the king D. Bermond. Thus was the church of S. Iaques still furnished
with bad Pastors.


D. Bermond, second of that name, 21 King of
Leon, called the Goutie.
15 DOn Bermond,Leon. or Veremond, or Bermund, sonne to king D. Ordogno the third, vnited the
two realms of Leon and Gallicia, being receiued after the death of D. Ramir,Anno 965. without
any difficultie.
In the beginning of his raigne,Moores. or thereabouts, Alcorrexi was famous: hee was the first
Moore (of whom any mention is made) that was called King of Seuile,Seuille a royall seat of the Moores. since the Monarchie
of the Arabians in Spaine: who spoyled all that part of Gallicia which now belongs to Portugal,
and lyes betwixt the riuers of Duero and Minio; and passing on he wasted all the countrey
vnto S. Iaques, the which he sacked, and ruined. His armie was infected with the plague,
as that of Almansor, or Mahomad Ibnc, Aben Hamur, had beene; who returned into the territories
of Leon, and that knight of Alaua, aboue mentioned, marching with him, accompanied
with a band of Christians his friends and partisans, he defeated the king D. Bermond in
battell, at the riuer of Estolle, beyond Duero, and besieged the citie of Leon, from whence
he was forced to raise his siege, by reason of the waters and Winter. In the Spring he returned
to this siege, into the which the king had put an earle, called Don Guillen Gonsales, gouernour
of Gallicia, who did his best indeuor to defend it: for being sicke in his bed, he caused
himselfe to be carried in a litter, to the place where as the Moores made their greatest attempt,
and defended it three dayes: but in the end, not able to resist so great a power, the
towne was taken,Leon the capitall citie of the Christians, taken by the Arabians D. Guillen, and many other braue men, were slaine, and the sacke giuen to
the souldiers. D. Bermond had beene carefull to retire the bodies of kings his predecessors,
and especially the reliques and other jewels of the temple, the which he caused to bee transported
to Ouiedo. This calamitie happened in the yeare 968, the which fell also vpon Astorga,
Valence de Campo, Sahagun, Gordon, Albe, Lune, and other townes which were ruined.
Then the Moores entring Castille, they tooke and sackt the townes of Osma, Berlanga, Atiensa,
and other places, whereof some were ruined and some made tributarie. And with this
successe they returned with their victorious armie to Cordoua, with great spoyls, and (which
was most lamentable) a great number of poore Christian slaues of all sexes and ages: and to
increase their miseries,Diuision of Christians giues an entrie to the Infidels. and to aggrauate their guilt, they were for the most part so carelesse
of God and all religion, as they betrayed their brethren and companions vnto the Moores,
without respect of bloud, countrey, profession, or honour.
In Castille there was a knight called D. Ruy Velasques,Castille. lord of Villaren, whose sister D. Sancha
was maried to D. Gonsal Iuste, sonne to that Iuste Gonsales who was issued from a daughter
of D. Diego Porcello; and who enjoyed the Seigniories of Salas and of Lara. D. Gonsal
Iuste, and D. Sancha his wife, had seuen sonnes, whom they commonly called the children of
Lara, or of Salas, bred vp in all vertue, by a discreet knight, called Nugno Salido, who was valiant
and hardie; all which were made knights in one day, by the earle D. Garcia Fernandes, vnto
whom they were allied. It happened, that D. Ruy de Velasques, their vncle by the mothers
side, maried a ladie borne in Bureua, the chiefe towne of which country is Birbiesca: her name
was D. Lambra, allied also to the earle D. Garcia Fernandes: she was young indiscreet, proud,
and high minded. Whose mariage was celebrated with great pompe in the citie of Burgos,

whither came many knights from Castille, Leon, Nauarre, and other places, and among
others, D. Gonsal Iuste, and his wife D. Sancha, with their seuen sonnes assisted. During the
solemnitie of this mariage, which continued fiue weekes, the younger brother of the seuen
had some vnkind speeches with D. Aluaro Sanches, cousen to D. Lambra the Bride, who were
for that time reconciled by the meanes of the earle D. Garcia, and of D. Gonsal Iuste, father
to one of the contendants. But the new maried wife was so incensed for this breach with her
cousen, as she conceiued a deadly hatred against all the house of Lara. The mariage being ended,
D. Sancha went with her seuen sonnes, to accompanie the maried couple to their house
at Barbadillo, whereas D. Lambra espying one day the younger brother (which had the quarell
with her cousen) in an orchard,^^sposition of a woma^ inclined to reuenge. bathing a Goshawke, she commaunded a groome to cast
a filthie Cocumber at him, to doe him a despight: wherewith the knight, and his brethren,
who were present, being moued, they pursued this groome in such a rage, as thinking to saue
himselfe by the fauour of his ladie, he was slaine neere vnto her, who could not saue him.
At the same time neither D. Ruy Velasques, nor D. Gonsales Iuste, were with their wiues, for
they did accompanie the earle D. Garcia, who presently after this mariage, went to visit his
countrey, and the forts of Castille: but when as they were returned to Barbadillo, they vnderstood
(to their great griefe) of this outrage. Euerie one retires to his own house; D. Lambra
mad with rage and impatiencie, wept, and exclaimed continually, saying vnto her husband, That
if he did not revenge this affront done vnto her selfe, she should neuer liue contented. And
such was the importunitie of this woman to her indiscreet and ill aduised husband, as, to satisfie
her, he resolued to commit an act, vnworthie not onely of a Christian knight, but of any one
that carried but the shape of a man: For he had secret intelligence with Almansor, Constable
of Cordoua,A notable treason and impietie of a Christian knight, against his owne bloud and religion. vtterly to ruine this familie of Lara. Making shew therefore to haue some
businesse of importance with this Moore, and his king Hizen, he intreated his brother in law
D. Gonsales Iuste, to goe to Cordoua, with letters which he gaue him; whereunto he offered
himselfe willingly. In the meane time the traitor Velasques had written to Hizen and Almansor,
That they should put him to death; and moreouer, that if he sent any one with a good troup
into Castille, he would deliuer the seuen sonnes vnto him, which were the most redoubted
knights, and the greatest enemies to the Arabians, that the earle of Castille had in his Court.
D. Gonsales Iuste being arriued at Cordoua, and hauing presented his letters vnto the king, he
was presently put in prison: for the king being wise, although an Infidell, would not altogether
countenance so great a treason.A Mahumetist more courteous to a stranger, the D. Ruy de Velasques a Christian, to his own bloud. Wherefore he kept this embassadour aliue; yet he sent
presently towards the countrey of Almenar (where these brethren should be deliuered vnto
him) a captaine with a great troupe of souldiers, where (as they write) D. Ruy de Valasques
gaue such order, as the seuen brethren fell into an ambush of Moores, being accompanied
onely with two hundred horse, which made resistance: but the enemies were so many, as one
of the brethren called Fernand Gonsales, and all the two hundred, with Nugno Sallido, were
slaine vpon the place:The lamentable death of the seuen brethren of Lara. the other six escaped, and hauing drawne together three hundred
horsemore, and returned to the combat, they were againe defeated, and taken by the Moors,
who cut off their heads, and sent them all to Cordoua, as well those of the seuen brethren, as
that of their Gouernour Nugno Sallido.
The king was verie glad to see himselfe freed from such redoubted enemies; and to afflict
the father, who was prisoner, he caused these heads to be shewed vnto him: who knew them,
and was so opprest with griefe, as he fell downe dead vpon the place. Being taken vp, and reuiued,Humanitie of king Hizen to his prisoner.
he made such pitifull lamentations, as euen the barbarous king himselfe was much moued,
and thought euen then to set him at libertie, detesting the wickednesse of that traiterous
Christian D. Ruy de Velasques.
They say, That whilest D. Gonsales Iuste was detained in prison, but not verie straitly, being
often visited by noblemen and ladies, that were Moores, there grew so great familiaritie betwixt
him and one of the chief ladies of the kings house, which, some say, was his sister, as he got
her with child: which perceiuing, about the time of his deliuerie, they tooke good order for
the infant, when it should be borne. It was a sonne, whom they called Mudarra Gonsales, who
reuenged the treason of D. Ruy Velasques, committed against his father and brethren. D. Gonsales
Iuste returned to Salas, with gifts from the Moorish king. As for the bodies of the dead,
they were interred, but no man knowes where; for there is some question about it, betwixt

the Monkes of S. Peter of Arlansa, and those of S. Emilian of Cogolla; the which we cannot
deside, either of them maintaining to haue in their churches and conuents, the tombes of
these seuen brethren, their father, and Gouernour, without any great proofe of their assertions,
as in other things. Such was the disposition and affection of men of that age, who called
themselues Christians.Anno 969. They hold, that these things happened in the yeare 969; some say it
was some yeares before. But euerie one to reuenge his priuate quarels, did hazard the publick:
and not able to oppresse their enemies by open force, they vsed vnlawfull and damnable
meanes, to wrong one another, making way for the Moors, or rather inuiting them, to inuade
the Christians countrey.
In the yeare 975 a great armie of Moores,Leon. both Spaniards and Affricanes, led by that famous
captaine Alhabib Almansor, inuaded the countrey betwixt Duero and Minio,An. 975. and
from thence into Gallicia:S. Iaques taken by the Moores. so as the towne and church of S. Iaques was taken by them, sackt
and ruined. Yet the Spaniards say, That the Apostles sepulchre could not be violated, being
terrified with a great light which came out of it: but they onely tooke the little bells in the
steeple, and carried them away with the rest of the prey to Cordoua, where they made them
serue for lampes to their great Mosquee. In the meane time (as Authors write) the
Moores armie was so afflicted with the plague, and bloudie flix, as being forced to disperse
themselues, they were cut in peeces by D. Bermonds troups, which he had sent to follow them
in their retrait: So God by his power did supplie the defects of indiscreet and cowardly Christian
Princes.
The king D. Bermond, as the Spanish Histories write, was wise, but withall had great defects.
He was light of beleefe,Pleasures corrupt both mind and bodie. and soone incensed; and withall, so much giuen to his delights
and pleasures, as he had both bodie and mind corrupted. He did incestuously entertaine two
sisters for his concubines, before he maried; by the one of which he had a sonne called D. Ordogno;
by the other a daughter named D. Eluira. After which he maried D. Velasquita, whom
he put away, after that he had had a daughter by her, called D. Christina. To his second wife
he maried a ladie called D. Eluira, by whom he had D. Alphonso, who was king after him, and
one daughter called D. Theresa, who was profest a Nunne, and was borne before her brother
D. Alphonso. He became full of the gout, by reason of his excesse, so as he was lame of his
limmes, and therefore was called the Goutie.


D. Sancho Garces, third of that name, and
eleuenth King of Nauarre.
16 THere is no great certainetie of the exploits of the kings of Nauarre in these times,Nauarre. either
through the negligence of Historians, or the losse of their writings. They coniecture,
that the king D. Sancho Garccs liued vnto the yeare 969; and that he was interred in the
monasterie of S. Sauiour of Leyre: to whom succeeded his sonne D. Sancho Garces, whom he
had by D. Theresa, by whom he had also D. Ramir his second sonne, who gouerned the prouince
called Vicaria. He had daughters, D. Vrraca, Ermesilda, and Eximena. The king had to
wife a ladie called D. Vrraca Fernandes, by whom he had three sonnes, D. Garcia, D. Gonsales,
and D. Ramir.
This king D. Sancho Garces,Leon. the third of that name, raigning; the king D. Bermond seeing
the great miseries which fell daily vpon the Christians, by reason of their diuisions, whereof
the Infidell Moores made their profit, he sought by all meanes possible to make a good vnion
betwixt Leon, Nauarre, and Castille: the which tooke good effect, for all the Princes and
Lords of these Estates, shewing themselues readie, and desirous to be reuenged of the wrong
which the Moores had done in Gallicia, Castille, and elsewhere, they vnited their forces, and
came to incounter the Moores with a goodly armie (theirs being not lesse) at a place called
Calacanasor,Battell memorable at Calacanasor. an Arabian word, which signifies yoake: where there was a memorable battell,
and great effusion of bloud, especially of the Moores: and yet the fight hauing continued a
whole day, the victorie seemed doubtfull. But Alhabib the Arabian hauing gathered his forces
together, and viewed his great losse, he dislodged in the night, with so great griefe, as he died
within few dayes after, at a place called Begalcoraxo, or Borgecorex. The Christians at the

breake of day, seeing their enemies dislodged, sacked their campe; and by the conduct of
of D. Garcia Fernandes, earle of Castille, who was the chiefe Commaunder in this warre (for
the king D. Bermond, although he caused himselfe to be carried in the armie, was vnable, by
reason of his gout) pursued the Moores, whereof they made a great slaughter, putting all the
rest to flight in great confusion. This Alhabib the Arabian, was without doubt a great souldier;
and,Death of Alhabib Almansor. they say, that for griefe of this losse he would neither eat nor drinke, and so aduanced
his owne death. The Moores carried him to Medina-Celi, then called Zelim, where they buried
him. He left one sonne, called Abdemelic Abundasin, who had accompanied him in all his
warres, and was in like manner a braue and valiant knight: who had the same charge of Captaine
generall, as his father: and being desirous to reuenge this losse, led an armie the same
yeare towards Leon, the which he ruined, euen to the verie foundations. D. Garcia Fernandes,
earle of Castille, gathered together all the forces he could in Leon and Castille, fought with
him, and put him to rout: so as after that time the Moores came into the dominions of Christian
Princes with more respect. After which things, the two Princes restored the noblemen,
gentlemen, and others, to their possessions and rights which belonged vnto them, and sought
to giue euerie man contentment, in regard of priuat quarels, that by these occasions the Mahumetists
might not attempt against their Estates. These spoyles which the Moores had
made in the countries of Leon and Castille, were the cause of a great dearth, the land being
vnpeopled both of men and cattell, so as it lay wast: And withall there was a great drought,
the wrath of God hauing shut vp heauen for many dayes, without sending any raigne in that
region. And for that in those dayes they held no crime so capitall, as to lay hands vpon Clergie
men, the Spaniards did beleeue, that these calamities had fallen vpon them, besides the
warres, for that the king D. Bermond had caused D. Gudesteo, Archbishop of Ouiedo, to be
put in prison, or giuen him in gard to D. Ximeno, Bishop of Astorga, vpon some slaunderous
accusations, wherewith this Prelate was charged, and too lightly beleeued by the king, who
was much subiect to that vice of credulitie. And thereupon they say, That God had reuealed
to certaine religious men, that he was resolued to send the plague for a third scourge, by
reason of the vnjust imprisonment of this Bishop. Whereof the king D. Bermond being aduertised,
he was verie sorrowfull for his offe^ce, and repenting, demaunded pardon. Wherefore
vpon the Bishops deliuerie the wrath of God was appealed, and it began to raine. From
that time the king gaue himselfe to all workes of pietie, and did, as well as he could, repaire
the ruines which had beene made by the Moores throughout his kingdome, especially of the
church of Saint Iaques. He gaue many gifts, and did almes deeds, yet with the aduice of the
Prelates of those times. As for justice, he had alwayes a care thereof; and, as they say, restored
the auncient lawes of the kings of Gothes, and the decrees of the Church, commanding
that justice should be done to euerie one throughout his realme accordingly. His death,
according to the common opinion,Anno 982. was in the yeare 982, at a place called Berizo, otherwise
the good towne of Beresto; where he was interred, and three and twentie yeares after taken
vp, to be laid in the church of Saint Iohn Baptist at Leon. Among his children we haue made
mention of one daughter, D. Christina; she was maried to a nobleman, or Prince of the bloud
royall,Genealogie of Leon. called D. Ordogno, who was blind; by whom she had three sonnes, D. Alphonso, D.
Ordogno, D. Pelagius; and one daughter, D. Aldonsa. This Aldonsa maried D. Pelagius the
Deacon, sonne to the Infanta D. Fruela, bastard to Fruela the second, king of Leon: of which
mariage issued D. Pedro Ordognes, D. Pelagius, D. Nugno, and D. Theresa, who was ladie of
Carrion, where she caused the church of Saint Pelaio, or Pelagius, to be built.
In Cattelogne the State was quiet,Barcelone. during the minoritie of the earle D. Seniofrid, vnder
the gouernement of the earle of Vrgel, of the same name: from which earle issued
D. Borel and D. Armingol, or Ermengaud, Bishop of Vrgel, reputed a Saint. His regencie
continued two and twentie yeares, which ended in the yeare 950, When as hee resigned the
gouernement of the Estate to his nephew, the earle D. Seniofrid, who was maried to D. Maria,
Infanta of Nauarre, daughter to D. Sancho Abarca, by whom hee had not any children;
and dying about the yeare 967, he left for his successor his cousin D. Borel, sonne to the earle
of Vrgel; for that his brother D. Oliban was vnfit to gouerne such an Estate, by reason of many
imperfections, besides that of his speech, as the Spaniards write: Yet this D. Oliban did
rise in Armes against his cousen, and was the cause of great diuisions and factions in the countrey:

by reason whereof the Arabians watching still their opportunitie to annoy the Christians,D. B^r^l fourth (...) of Barcelone.
entred the territories of Barcelone, where they committed infinit spoyles. This D. Borel
remained earle in the end, and is numbred the fourth proprietarie of Cattelogne. He had
one sonne, called D. Raymond Borel, who was borne in the yeare 970, of the countesse Leodegarde,
his first wife, and was earle after him. To his second wife he maried Aym^rude, and
by her had D. Ermingaud,Genealogie of Cattelogne. or Armingol, who was earle of Vrgel; and one daughter, named
Borella, or, as some say, Engelrade, who was profest a Nunne. He defended his countrey valiantly
against the incursions and furie of the Arabians, but with no great successe. He caused
forts to be made where need required, to stop their incursions, and assure his countrey.
D. Oliban, his cousen, resigned his interest, for that he would not fauour the Infidels by a ciuile
warre, and giue them meanes to inuade Cattelogne, contenting himselfe with a priuate
life. He was father to D. Bernard, surnamed Brisefer, or Breake-yron, who was earle
of Besalu, of D. Geoffrey earle of Cerdagne, and of a third sonne, called D. Oliban, who was
Bishop of Vic d^ Osana, and had beene Abbot of Ripol, a monasterie reedified in the yeare
976, by the earle D. Borel: In the which yeare the Nunnes of Monserrat were transported
to the Monasterie of Mon-Iuhy, neere vnto the castle of the Port, built by the same earle,
and in Monserrat were placed the Monkes of Saint Benoist:Foundations of monasteries by the Princes of Spaine, in those times. to which place the earle
D. Borel gaue great lands and possessions, which he bought from priuate men. D. Oliban
his cousen, was also founder of the monasterie of Saint Benoist de Bages, in the Baronie
of Pinos. About the yeare 979, D. Garcia Fernandes gaue the towne and church of Ezquerra
to Saint Michael de Pedroso; and a little before, D. Sancho, king of Nauarre, had giuen
to the house of Saint Emilian, for the health (as he said) of his soule, the place of Villar
de Monte; and to the Monasterie of Saint Sauiour de Leyre, the towne of Arpados, and
other spoyles of his sonne D. Ramir, who died before him. These Princes sought to win
Paradice by their workes.


D. Alphonso, fift of that name, and 22
King of Leon.
18 AFter king D. Bermond,Leon. D. Alphonso his sonne did inherite, being the fift of that
name,Anno 982. and two and twentieth in order of the kings of Leon, in the yeare 982, being
onely foureteene yeares old. His father had giuen him, to breed vp, to the earle of Gallicia,
called D. Melendo Gonsales, and to his wife D. Maior, whose daughter, D. Eluira,
he maried, when he came to age: of whom descended D. Bermond, who succeded his father
in the realme of Leon, and D. Sancha promised after the decease of the king D. Alphonso,
vnto D. Garcia, earle of Castille; but he dying, she was wife to D. Fernand the Great, the first
which carried that title of king of Castille, sonne to D. Sancho the elder, king of Nauarre. In
the time of this king D. Alphonso, Zephirus Bishop of Astorga liued, who writ some Histories
of Spaine.
We haue heretofore made mention of the loues of Gonsal Iuste,Castille. being prisoner at Cordoua,
with a Princesse, a Moore; the which proceeded so farre, as when he was set at libertie
by king Hizen, she was with child, and was brought in bed of a sonne, named Mudarra
Gonsales. Those that haue written the Histories of Spaine, say, That he was nourished
and instructed in the citie of Cordoua, by the diligence of his mother (whom they
make sister to king Hizen) in all things befitting a Prince; so as hee was much beloued by
the king his vncle, by whom he was armed a knight, at the age of tenne yeares, and became
valiant and redoubted, as much as any of his time.
When he came to yeares to judge of honour, his mother told him who was his father,
and by what meanes shee had beene familiar with him, and especially the death of his seuen
brethren of Lara, by the treason of D. Ruys Velasques, and the damnable appetite of reuenge
of D. Lambra his wife. Wherefore this young nobleman had a wonderfull desire to see and
know D. Gonsal Iuste, his father. Hauing therefore not onely obtained leaue, but also an honourable

traine of noblemen and knights from the king, he came to Salas, where the father
and the sonne had meanes to know and aduow one another, to their great joy and
content: and soone after Mudarra, hauing left the law of Mahumet, was baptized, and
made a Christian. Then he came in companie with his father to Burgos, to kisse the hands
of the earle D. Garcia, and to watch an opportunitie to kill his vncle D. Ruis Velasques, and
to reuenge the death of his seuen brethren; the which he did execute in time, as D. Ruis
went from Burgos to his house of Barbadillo:Old offences punished. and finally, hee found meanes to get D.
Lambra into his power, whom he caused to be hung vp, and then burnt her bodie: but
it was after the death of D. Garcia, earle of Castille, to whom shee was allied. And for
that he was verie like to the youngest of the seuen sonnes of D. Sancha his mother in law,
she did loue him as deerely as if she had beene his owne mother.
The Monkes of Saint Peter of Arlansa shew a tombe in their church, without any inscription,
the which, they say, is the tombe of that knight D. Mudarra: of whom they
make this Genealogie,Posteritie of Mudarra Gonsales, from whence are des^eded the Manriques of Lara. or descent; which is, That he had one sonne, named D. Ordogno
de Lara, from whom issued D. Diego Ordogno de Lara, who did fight a combat at Zamora,
against D. Arias Gonsales: from D. Diego Ordogno descended D. Pedro de Lara, and
from him the earle D. Almarie of Lara, whom others call Malrique, or Manrique, who
was lord of Molina des Comtes: and from him, they say, are descended, the Manriques of
Lara in Castille. This earle D. Almarie, or Manrique de Lara, had one daughter, called
D. Malfada Manrique, who was the first queene of Portugal, wife to D. Alphonso Henrie,
king of Portugal, of whom we will speake hereafter.
About the yeare 982,Rebellio^ of the son against the father. when as king D. Alphonso came to the Crowne of Leon, there
were great alterations in Castille; for that D. Sancho Garcia, sonne and heire to the earle
D. Garcia Fernandes, rebelled against his father, and put Castille into factions. Whereupon
the Moores failed not to enter the countrey of Castille, destroyed the citie of Auila,
tooke Saint Estienne de Gormas, and Crugna in the bishopricke of Osma, slue,
spoyled, and burnt all where they past.
D. Garcia Fernandes being gone to field with those souldiers of Castille whom hee
thought to be best affected vnto him,Defeat of the Castillans, and death of their earle. being but few, in comparison of the Moores, hee
did hazard a battell; in which fighting valiantly, hee was enuironed by a multitude of
his enemies, where his men were cut in peeces, and hee himselfe taken aliue by the
Moores, but so sore wounded, as he died within few houres after. His bodie was afterwards
redeemed for a great summe of money, and buried in the monasterie of Saint Peter
of Cardegna, reedified by him seuenteene yeares before. This happened about the
yeare nine hundred fourescore and ten,An. 990. or according to the inscription of his tombe, nine
hundred fourescore and fiue. Then D. Sancho his sonne, surnamed Garcia, was earle, without
any contradiction; and, except this disodience against his father, he was a good Prince, and loued
his subiects.
19 Whosoeuer was mother to D. Sancho, either Abba, Ogna, or Sancha daughter
to the knight which was slaine by D. Garcia, or else allied to the Emperour Henrie, there
is a tragicall act reported of her in the Histories of Spaine: That, being widow to her
husband D. Garcia Fernandes, shee fell in loue with a Prince of the Moores, whom shee
had heard was verie sufficient in Venus sports:A dishonest desire of a countesse of Castille, and her impietie against her son. so as shee had a secret treatie with him,
to marie him; promising (to the end they might with more ease effect their designe) to
make away her sonne, by poyson, vpon the first opportunitie: But God would haue this
wickednesse discouered to the earle D. Sancho, the day before it should bee put in execution.
Wherefore being verie carefull of all things, as the mother and the sonne dined
together on the day appointed, the earle calling for drinke, they brought him a
cup full of wine, mingled with poyson: Then dissembling what hee knew, he intreated
his mother to drinke first, as if hee would doe her honour; but shee refusing it, hee
still persisted,Custo^ to make the women drinke first in Spaine. and in the end forced her to drinke this poyson, whereof shee died. The
generall Chronicle sayes, That thereof grew a custome in Castille, to make the women
drinke first, the which is obserued at this day in Biscaie, and other parts in Spaine, by way
of ciuilitie.

This accident was the cause which made the earle D. Sancho to build the conuent of Saint
Sautour of Ogna, where he placed Nunnes, and made a daughter of his, called D. Tygrida,
Abbesse; thinking thereby to expiate his offence, for that he had hastened his mothers death.
Since there were Monks put in this monasterie, and the women were transported elsewhere,
by the king D. Sancho the elder,Genealogie of Castille. sonne in law to this eale D. Sancho Garcia, and husband to D.
Nugna: for the earle had by his wife D. Vrraca, one sonne, who was called D. Garcia, who
was earle of Castille after him; and three daughters, D. Nugna, who was queene of Nauarre,
D. Theresa, queene of Leon, wife to D. Bermond the third, and last of that name, these two
sisters were elder than the Infant D. Garcia; and the third was the aboue named D. Tygrida,
Abbesse of this monasterie of S. Sauiour.
20 Whilest these things past in Castille,Cattelogne. the Moores entred Cattelogne with a great
power, about the yeare 986, and gaue a great rout to the earle D. Borel, who thought to repulse
them neere to Moncada and Matabous: After which they besieged Barcelone,Barcelone take and ruined by the Moores. and
tooke it by force, with all the pitifull spectacles of crueltie, couetousnesse, and infamie, that
are vsed in the like case; doing the like in many other places. Then laden with spoyles, and
drawing after them an infinit number of poore Christian slaues, they returned into their
countrey. The earle, who was retired into the mountaines, hauing gathered together
all the horse and foot he could, returned to Barcelone, tooke it againe, and recouered all
the places which the Moores had taken. Cattelogne was againe inuaded by the Moores
which held Tortosa, Lerida, Fraga, and other places, being joyned with them of the Isle
of Majorca, who once againe defeated the earle D. Borel: and thinking to saue himselfe with
about threescore horse, he was pursued; and being forced to shut himselfe vp in the castle of
Gautha,Earle of Barcelone slaine by the Moores. neere to Galdes, he was forced, and slaine there, with all those that were in his companie,
in the yeare 993, hauing beene earle of Barcelone six and twentie yeares, where his
sonne D. Raymond Borel succeeded him. We find, that Lothaire king of France (vnder the soueraigntie
of which kingdome the earledome of Barcelone was at that time) granted a great
priuiledge to the monasterie of S. Cucufat, in the vallies neere to Barcelone, giuen at Compiegne,
in the yeare 987.
But returning to D. Sancho Garcia,Castille. earle of Castille, he being loath to leaue his fathers
death vnreuenged, confirmed the league which his predecessor had made with Leon and Nauarre,
and in the yeare 992 entred into the Moores countrey, by the realine of Toledo, with
a great armie, ruining and spoyling all where he past, as the enemies had done in Leon
and Castille: passing on into diuers other jurisdictions, where he had good opportunitie
to ruine, burne, kill, and carrie away what he pleased, for that the Arabians were then full
of factions for the soueraigntie. There was no head, order, nor councell, to oppose against
the violence of this incensed earle,The exploits and conque^s of D. Sancho, earle of Castille, vpo^ the Moores. so as he ransomed many townes, and drew great summes
of money from them, as well to spare their countrey, as to redeeme prisoners. He tooke the
towne of Sepulueda, which was then a frontier for the Moores towards the strait of Sumosierra.
Hee granted many priuiledges to the inhabitants thereof, restoring them to
their auncient jurisdictions. He recouered the townes of Pennafiel, Maderuelo, Monteio,
Gormas, Osma, and Saint Esteua; which places had beene lost after the battell where
his father D. Garcia was slaine. The earle did all these braue exploits against the Moores:
but some hold, and not without reason, that they were before the death of the countesse his
mother; who at the returne of this voyage (which was in the yeare 992) had newes what this
aboue mentioned Prince of the Moores could doe with women: of whom she grew so far
in loue, as she forgot all pietie, and honour, and in the end lost her life. His name is not
written by any Author. If the earle did much annoy the Moores by open warre, he did no
lesse by secret practises, entertaining factions among them, to trouble their estate, and make
them more easie to be spoyled.
21 There were great seditions among the Arabians after the death of Abdemelic Abundasin,
Captaine generall,Moores. or Constable to king Hizen: for hauing beene substituted in the
place of his brother, called Abderramen, and shewing himselfe too seuere and proud in his
commaunds, his place seeming also to be of too great authoritie, he was slaine by the souldiers:
which bred great quarels and factions. D. Sancho, earle of Castille, and D. Alphonso,

king of Leon,The declining of the Moores Monarchie in Spaine, by their diuisions. sought by all meanes possible to entertaine these diuisions, sometimes fauouring
one partie, somtimes another: so as from that time the Arabians power began greatly
to decline in Spaine, as it had beene alreadie dismembred in the East, by their discord
and furious desire of raigne, the which we will hereafter relate in a more conuenient place.
The Estate of Miralmumin Hizen was wonderfully troubled in those times, by many
which desired either to raigne, or to haue the greatest charges in the kingdome of Cordoua,
namely, the dignitie of Alhabib: among the which there was a Moore, called Zuleima,
stronger than the rest, by the support and fauour hee had from D. Sancho, earle of
Castille: He tooke and shut vp Hizen, after that he had raigned three and thirtie yeares,
foure monethes,Zultima 11 king of the Moores at Cordoua. in the 379 yeare of the Arabians, and made himselfe king of Cordoua,
in the yeare of our redemption 989. He was an African, or Barbarian, and was much sauoured
from beyond the seas. In his raigne was the last rout giuen to the Cattelans, and
their earle forced, and slaine, as we haue said. But he did not long enjoy this Estate of Cordoua;
for another nobleman of great power,Mahumad the third, the 12 king at Cordoua. called Mahumad Mehedi, or Almohadi, of the
linage of Aben Humeya, rose vp against him, and depriued him of his kingdome in Spaine,
in the yeare of our Lord 993, which he had maintained foure yeares, with great toyle and
difficultie.
In his time there raigned a Moore at Toledo,Abdalla king of Toledo. called Abdalla, who was solicited in such
sort by D. Alphonso king of Leon, as they contracted together, and did sweare a perpetuall
offensiue and defensiue league betwixt them: the which was so strongly confirmed, as D.
Alphonso gaue his sister D. Theresa, a Christian, in mariage to Abdalla, an Infidell king, and
sent her to him to Toledo, notwithstanding that she did contradict it all she could. They
say, That this Moore being readie to consummate the mariage, he was admonished by the
Ladie, that it was not lawfull to doe it, seeing they were of two diuers religions; and that
for so prophane a contempt, he might assure himselfe God would punish him grieuously, if
he resolued to proceed. But notwithstanding all her allegations, the Moore would not forbeare
to accomplish his desire;Mariage betwixt a Christian and an Infidell, reproued of God. but he was presently surprised with such a terrour and amazement,
as if death had approached. Wherefore repenting himselfe, he sent backe D. Theresa
to Leon, to the king her brother, with great store of treasure, and rich jewels, for that he
would not touch her. This princesse liued long in Leon, in the habit of a religious woman,
and in the end put her selfe into the monasterie of Saint Pelagius, where she died, and was interred.
In the meane time Mahumad the third, or Mahumet, of the race of Aben Humeia, surnamed
Almohadi, setled himselfe in the realme of Cordoua, and was Miralmumin of the Arabians in
Spaine; who shewed himselfe so cruell in the beginning, against the inhabitants of Cordoua,
partisans to Zuleima his predecessor, of the linage of Aben Alaueci, that many of them fled out
of the citie, and liued in banishment. By reason of this diuision, many other noblemen,
Moores, seised vpon places and prouinces in Spaine, of the jurisdiction of the Miralmumins
of Cordoua: as Abdalla did, who (as we haue said) had seised vpon the citie of Toledo, and restored
the royall seat there, where he was the fourth king: since which time it continued a royaltie,
and returned no more vnder the soueraigntie of the kings of Cordoua. In some Authors
we find a tale of a Gentlewoman called Galiena,Fable of Galiena. daughter to Galafrey, king of Toledo, who
by her beautie drew Charlemaine out of France to Toledo, where he did fight with a knight
called Bramante, that would haue maried her: and, they say, that Charles being victor,
he led faire Galiena into France. But there is no great probabilitie, that this happened to
Charlemaine. It may be that since there was a Galiena, daughter to some Gouernour of
Toledo, called Galafrey, famous for some like act: For we find in the citie of Toledo, a
place called Galienas Palace, where as now the Monasterie of S. Foy is: and in like manner at
Bourdeaux in Guienne. Which shewes, that some ladie of fame came out of Spaine into
France, but conducted by some other Charles than he that was king and Emperor, surnamed
the Great Zuleima being expelled by Mahumet, fled from towne to town, being accompanied
by many Moors and Barbarians, who conspired against him, in fauour of a cousen of his called
Maroan, whom they would chuse for their captaine: but being ready to kill him, Zuleima being
aduertised, and prepared, slue them which pretended to murther him: As for his cousen Maroan,

he saued his life, but he kept him in a strait prison. Being enuironed with so many miseseries,
chased from Cordoua, a vagabond, and not safe among his owne followers, he had recourse
vnto D. Sancho, earle of Castille, crauing succours from him, to recouer his Estates.
Wherewith the earle was verie well pleased, and led a great power of Christians into the
Moores countrey; and with him D. Raymond, earle of Barcelone, as some write. Mahumet
did also make great leuies of souldiers, whereof the Alhabib, or Generall, was Albaharin Almaharin,
who did reside at Medina Zelim, or Coli; and had commaundement to come and
joyne with the armie, with all the forces he could make. Their forces being joyned of either
side,Cruell warres betwixt the Moores. there was a fierce and bloudie battell, betwixt Zuleima and Mahumet; whereas Zuleima
(who had the forces of Castille with him) was victor, haning slaine fiue and thirtie thousand
of his enemies vpon the place: and pursuing his victorie, he chased Mahumet, and those which
remained, as farre as Cordoua. And whilest that Zuleimaes men and the Christians were busie
at the spoyle of the suburbs, the Alhabib Albaharin abandoned his king, and tooke his
way to Medina Celi, with those that would follow him. It was then a great fort and rampat
of the Moores Estate, against Castille, Arragon, and Nauarre. Mahumet seeing himselfe
defeated, and abandon^d, was so saint-hearted, as he shut himselfe vp into the fort of Cordoua,
resoluing to deliuer king Hizen, who was a prisoner there: chusing rather to see Hizen
raigne than Zuleima. The people of Cordoua hearing speake of their true king Hizen,
made so great an exclamation of joy, as Mahumet thinking himselfe lost, and fearing to
die, fled and hid himselfe in a Moors house, who was borne at Toledo, and verie confident vnto
him,Anno 994. with whom that night he fled to Toledo, Wherefore Zuleima entred into Cordoua,
and raigned againe,(...) of the Princes Electors in Germanie. Mahumet hauing beene king but one yeare, which was in the yeare of
Christ 994, and of the Moores 377. A memorable date, for that this yeare the seuen Princes
Electors in Germanie were instituted at the instance of the Emperour Othon, and Pope
Gregorie the fift.
King Zuleima being reestablished in Cordoua, he sent backe D. Sancho, earle of Castille,
and his men, well satisfied, rewarding euerie one according to his degree. Yet he was not
receiued, nor obeyed, throughout all the townes of his jurisdiction, but some maintained
Hizens partie, who was prisoner at Cordoua. Mahumet Almohadi being come to Toledo, Abdalla
raigned there, but not verie quietly in the beginning; but the hatred the Toledanes did
beare to the kings of Cordoua, made his way the more easie. Neither of these two tyrants
raigned long; for Albaharin the Alhabib, who liued at Medina Celi, hearing that Zuleima
was much troubled to subdue the people of the jurisdiction of Cordoua, which were
rebelled against him, he made a leuie of souldiers, both Moores and Christians, and came
to Mahumet Almohadi, at Toledo, who had beene newly made king of that citie; but
the manner how is not specified in Histories. There hauing raised a great armie, they
tooke their way to Cordoua, to deliuer king Hizen, who was prisoner. Whereof Zuleima
being aduertised, he resolued to defend himselfe, calling all his friends and vassals together,
whereof most of them excused themselues, shewing that they were naturally bound vnto
king Hizen, for whose deliuerie they knew Mahumet had taken arms, with Albaharin, and some
Christian captaines which were in their armie, whereof two are called Bermondo, and Argomento.
Notwithstanding this refusall, Zuleima relying vpon the forces of Barbarie, who
assured him that they would neuer forsake him, sallied out of Cordoua, and came and affronted
the enemie,Battell betwixt the Moores. nine leagues from the citie, at a place called Hacantalbasar; where his
first charge was so furious, as he put the formost of the enemies squadrons to rout, and
slue so many, as hee thought all had beene defeated, and Mahumet dead: but the Christians
which were in Mahumets armie, rallied their disordered battell, and charged Zuleimaes
men with such violence, as they made them quit the field, with great slaughter
of the Barbarian Africanes. Zuleima saued himselfe with a small troupe in the fort of
Cafra. They write, that in this battell there died thirtie thousand Moors, and nine thousand
Christians; among which were D. Arnoul, Bishop of Ausa, Aetius Bishop of Barcelone,
and Otho of Girone, who carried armes for the Moores quarels: by the losse whereof
Zuleima left the realme of Cordoua the second time,Hizen a prisoner restored to realme of Cordoua. where hee had raigned a yeare.
This was in the yeare 995. Hizen was restored to his royall Estate by the victors, the people

of Cordoua being affected to him, and did mutine to haue him: and Mahumet was the
more inclined to him, for that he was setled at Toledo. The victor prepared to besiege Casra,
to expell Zuleima, and to spoyle the treasure that was within it: but foreseeing the danger,
he dislodged, and carried away with him what he could.
The castle being abandoned, was taken by them of Cordoua, and that which remained
spoyled, and the souldiers which were found in it, slaine. The bootie which was taken in this
castle, was carried to the great Mosquee at Cordoua, and there consecrated. This doue, Albaharin
the Alhabib, led the armie against some places in Andolousia, which continued in
their rebellion since the former diuisions; he besieged Almerie, which was defended by Afila,
a Moore of a great house, and battered it twentie dayes: the which in the end was forced, and
Afila, with some of his children, drowned. The like happened to the townes of Iaen, Baesa,
and Ariona, the which were kept for king Hizen. In this manner did the Moores make
warre, being diuided into two factions, where of the one held the partie of Hizen, and of the
Moores in Spaine, and the other of the Barbarians, and Moores of Affrick, of whom Zuleima
was the chiefe in Spaine.
Mahumet Almohadi raigned at Toledo after Abdalla verie little;Obeidalla sixt king of Toledo. for the Historians make
present mention of his sonne Obeydalla, sixt king of Toledo: against whom, king Hizen seeing
himselfe now setled in his kingdome, sent his lieutenant with a great armie, to reduce them of
Toledo vnder his obedience: who made a sallie vpon them of Cordoua, where there was a
cruell combate: but the end was shamefull for the Toledanes, who lost their king Obeidalla
there, and many of their men. Yet were they not daunted, neither did they abate any thing
of their rebellious contumacie against Hizen, and the Estate of Cordoua, whom they did
hate extreamely: For presently after their defeat, and the death of their king Obeidalla, they
chose another of the same linage of Aben Hume^a,Hairam seu^eth king of Toledo. called Hairam, the seuenth king in number,
who left the Scepter of Toledo to his descendants, vntill it was conquered by the Christians.
This past about the yeare 1000, when as king Hizen, thinking himselfe to be in more quiet
and securitie then euer, he found himselfe plunged in greater troubles then before: for the
Moores were so greedie of commaund, as those which had any authoritie or power, would
make haed against whom soeuer that would commaund them. The which was no wonder,
for that in the citie of Cordoua, and the jurisdiction thereof, there were infinit families descending
from kings of the Moores, issuing from the race of Aben Humeia: which grew by
reason of their pluralitie of wiues, which their sect allowed; which was the cause of seditions
and reuolts, for the desire of rule.
During these ciuile warres,Cattelogue. the Cattelans and Barcelonians had beene in peace, and free
from the Moores inuasions, and had rather sought to annoy them, or inuade them, either alone,
or joyntly with the Castillans. D. Raymond Borel, the earle, who had succeeded his father,
did burie, in a manner at the entrie of his principalitie, his cousin D. Oliban Cabrica, earle
of Cerdagne and Besalu, at our Ladie of Ripon, in the yeare 994: whose Estates were diuided
among his children D. Bernard Brisefer, and D. Geoffrey. This new earle had fortified Barcelone,
and repaired all the spoyles which the Moores had made during the warre against
D. Borel his father; joyning the Monasterie of Montjuhy to the walls of Barcelone, and called
it S. Peter of the virgines, to gratifie D. Borella his sister, whom some call Engelrade, Abbesse
of that place. There is no mention made of him in Histories, but that he had one sonne
called D. Berenger Borel, in the yeare 995, who succeeded him after his death.


D. Garcia, called the Trembling, fift of that name,
and 12 King of Nauarre.
23 IN the same yere of the decease of the earle D. Borel,Nauarre. which was 993, died (according to
the common opinion of writers) D. Sancho the 3, sonne to D. Garcia Sanches, king of Nauarre;
but it is most vncertaine: for the computation of the liues and raignes of these first
kings of Nauarre, Leon, and other Princes and Potentates of Spaine, is so diuers and
confused in their writings, as no man can judge rightly of them. D. Sancho gaue for the

soules health of his sonne D. Ramir, to the Monasterie of S. Emylian, the towne of Cardegnas,
with all the appurtenances. Afterwards D. Garcia his sonne, surnamed the trembling,
succeeded him in the kingdome of Nauarre, and the Countie of Arragon. This surname
was giuen him, for that when he entred the combate, he did tremble, not for feare, but by a
naturall custome* the which did afterwards turne into force and valour, being a little heat.
In a certaine priuiledge and donation made in the yeare 996, of the towne of Herrero, granted
by this king D. Garcia to the Monasterie of S. Emylian of Cogolla, mention is made of
D. Sancho and D. Garcia* his nephewes, who were sonnes to D. Ramir, his brother, whom they
called king of Arragon* it may be it was onely in title: he died in the life time of D. Sancho
their father, and by his death Gonsalo their other brother is said also to haue raigned in Arragon
with D. Vrraca, Queene mother to these three Princes, and not the children of D. Ramir,
the which is a stronger argument, that they were but titles, To which place of S. Emylian,
this king D. Garcia and D. Ximena his wife make another donation of the water which
comes from the valley of Alanson, to water their fields and orchards one day and a night in
the weeke; to which titles D. Vrraca is alwaies set: for it was alwaies a custome of the
Princes in Spaine, for honours sake, to name their mothers and wiues, in all letters of donation
and priuiledges which they graunt; for they soule (say they) and that of their father,
and they make this d^nation to S. Emylian, whom they call their Patron, as they had beene
taught. Without doubt their deuotion in those times to S. Emylian had beene verie great,
who was called on as an Aduocate and Patron by the Christians in Spaine, from Burgos
vnto the Ocean: of the which there are two Monasteries, the one called the higher, the
other the lower.
D. Garcia the trembling married D. Ximena, and yet there is great diuersitie among Authors
touching the name of this Ladie, by whom he had D. Sancho, who was king after him.
He recommended his education and bringing vp to D. Sancho, Abbot of Saint Saluator of
Leyre, who was afterwards Bishop of Pampelone. The qualities of this king are little
knowne, forwant of auncient records, whereof they commend one, the which is questionable,
whether it be a vertue or a vice, That he could neuer refuse any thing that was demaunded
of him: but they chiefely merit to be held liberall, when as they giue, with judgement,
measurably to men of merit, otherwise they are tearmed prodigall, ignorant, carelesse, and
contemners of the chiefest point of their charge,Rewards and punishments maintaine all Estates. which is, to distribute rewards and punishments
equally. There is no mention made of his warres and enterprises. He raigned, as they
esteeme, seuen yeares, and so he died in the thousand yeare of our Sauiour. His bodie, as
some hold, was buried at S. Iohn de la Pegna; others say, at S. Saluator at Leyre, which
place was more famous, and of greater authoritie.


D. Sancho, the fourth of that name, and thirteenth
King of Nauarre.
24 D. Sancho succeeded his father D. Garcia the trembling in his Estates, accounted the
thirteenth king of Nauarre; a vertuous and valiant Prince, and famous for his
great exploits; during whose raigne, the Historie, and especially the computation of times,
begins to be more plaine and certaine, than in the time of his predecessors.
25 In the yeare 1001 of our redemption,Moores. and the 384 of the Arabians Empire, and 287
of their entrie into Spaine, Zuleima being abandoned by the Castillans, he had recourse to
the king of Sarragosse and Carrace, with whose aid he recouered Cordoua, and made himselfe
king againe, Hizen being fled into Africke; one of whose captaines, called Hali Hatan,
holding Orichela,Hali 13 king of Cordoua. called Hali Gouernor of Ceuta, and caused him to passe with some forces
into Spaine, in hope to raigne there. These two did besiege and take Cordoua, and Zuleima
in it, whom Hali slue with his owne hands: but it was not long before Hali Hatan did rise against
Hali,Confusion and ciuile warres among the Moores. whom he troubled much for the space of two yeares, and after some battailes
woon and lost on either side, he caused him to be secretly slaine in a bath, in the towne of Iahen,
by some of his Eunuches, whom he had corrupted, in whose place, the noblemen and

knights of the Moores which were at Iahen, chose his brother Cacin, who kept at Seuile,
in the yeare 1003, and 386 of the Arbians raigne. Manie African Moores of Barbarie,
(some sent for, some voluntaries, to seeke their aduentures) passed dayly into Spaine, by
reason of these conspiracies and ciuile dissentions; of which, Cacin the new king had manie
which followed his partie, as his deceased brother had. Being come to Iahen, he caused
a diligent search to be made for those treacherous Eunuches which had slaine the king,
but they could find no more but two, whom he put to death, and then it behooued him
to defend himselfe: for Hali Hatan seeing that he could not raigne, procured him great
enemies, that is, Abderramen Almorrada, of the bloud royall of Aben Humey^, who gouerned
in Murcia, sending messagers with all kinds of persuasions, and other meanes, to
induce the pettie Arabian kings, which held Sarragosse, Valence, Tortosa, and other
townes and forts in Spaine, to joyne with him, to resist (said he) the Barbarian Moores
which came to inuade Spaine: wherefore Abderramen was created King and Miralmumin
by them, but hee neuer held the chiefe towne of Cordoua. Hauing raysed an armie
of all those of his faction, he besieged and tooke the towne of Iahen, cutting the Moores
in peeces, which held it against him, and from thence went to other places, which hee
seized on, and in a short time became Lord of a great countrey; the which Hali Hatan
and another captaine of his traine, called Almundar, Aben-Alsaie, did verie much enuie,
and as they had helped to rayse him to that height, so they sought all meanes possible to
pull him downe, and not onely to depriue him of his estates, but also of his life, saying,
That it was not reasonable any other than themselues should reape the fruits of their
labours, and the conquests gotten with the price of their blouds. For the effecting whereof
they filled the kings Court and campe with quarrels and discontents, among the commaunders
and captaines, watching some fit opportunitie to execute their malicious designe.
King Abderramen pursuing his good fortune, came to besiege Grenado, the which
at that time was reasonably great, and well peopled, and commanded by a pettie king, a
Moore,Enuie and trecherie among the Arabians. called Bedeci, Aben^ Abus. There these two conspirators, Hali Hatan and Almundar
(making shew to imploy themselues faithfully in any thing that might annoy the besieged)
had secret conference with some Moores of the towne, and layed a plot, That
they should make a sallie vpon Abderramens armie, the which they would fauour in such
sort, as most of his best men and hee himselfe should either bee taken or slaine; and hauing
instructed them where they should charge, and of the situation of the kings lodging
(which was vpon the side of a hill, called Senesta, two leagues from Grenado) they
held themselues readie, attending the alarme; the which being giuen verie hot, and at a
fit time to strike terrour, they joyned with the Grenadines, where they made a great
slaughter of Abderramens men, he himselfe being in like manner slaine, and the rest of the
armie dispersed and put to flight, abandoning their Engines of batterie, and all their baggage,
the which was spoyled, and carried into Grenado, with great joy. This treason
was practised by these two captaines through enuie, together with a distrust of king Abderramens
good successe; wherefore after this goodly exploit, they resolued to send part
of the bootie, with manie heads of the chiefe of the Moores, slaine in this surprise, to
king Cacin, in signe of triumph; the which was verie pleasing to this king, who was then
at Cordoua, and making vse of this good fortune, he went to field, to reduce vnder his
obedience manie townes and forts which had reuolted to king Abderramen, when as hee
was aduaunced to that dignitie; the which he did to manie; but he wanted force and
time to finish it: for hauing raigned scarce three yeares, he died in the yeare 1007. The
Moores of Barbarie, which had for a time followed the partie of the kings of Cordoua,
were then in great authoritie in the citie, and therefore had the meanes and credit to
chuse Hiaya, the sonne of Mahumet, for king: the which did much discontent the auncient
Moores borne in the countrey, who sought some good opportunitie to be rid of
these Berberuzes (as the Spaniards called them) by killing or chasing them out of the
towne, to the end that the gouernment thereof might returne into their hands, as before.
A fit occasion was offered: for the new king Hiaya, who before his election to be
king was resident at Malaga, hauing a desire to haue that towne at his deuotion, for
that it had not obeyed the precedent kings of Cordoua, since their troubles and seditions,

went forth of Cordoua, leading with him great troupes of souldiours, especially
of that race of Moores which came out of Barbarie. Comming to Malaga, he was receiued
without any contradiction: but whilest hee was busie there, the inhabitants of
Cordoua, who had intelligence with Buz of Grenado, drew certaine troupes, which hee
had sent, into their towne, being led by two of his captaines, Hayran and Mogid, by
whose helpe they cut the throats of aboue a thousand African Moores, who were left for
the gard of the citie.Hiaya 15 king of the Moores at Cordoua. At this bruite, king Hiayas lieutenant was so amazed, as he got
out of the towne, with all the ministers of justice, and fled to Malaga, to carrie these
troublesome newes to the king his master; who within few dayes was slaine by a Moore,
called Ismael,Abderramen 16 king at Cordoua. hauing raigned onely three moneths and some dayes. Abderramen the
fourth of that name was aduaunced in his place: he was king but a moneth and seuenteene
dayes, and we doe not read, whither he died, or were expelled his kingdome. After
him followed Mahumet,Mahumet 17 king at Cordoua. great Miralmumin of Cordoua, who raigned not long, for
that being rich in treasure, by his good husbandrie, before he came to be king, it was
a cause to shorten his life, by the trecherie of his household seruants, who conspired to
murther him for his treasure, wherefore they poysoned him, hauing held the kingdome a
yeare and foure moneths: He died in the yeare one thousand and nine, and of the Arabians
raigne three hundred ninetie two.Hizen 18 king at Cordoua. He left this place to Hizen the third of that name, who
liued long at Seuile, being desirous to raigne, the which he now obtained. In the meane
time a Moore, who called himselfe king of Ceuta, passing the strait, came to Malaga,
where he tooke the fort of the towne. He was called Esdriz, and brought with him a
great number of the Moores of Africke: with whom Buz, who tearmed himselfe king
of Grenado, joyned at Malaga, and called himselfe his vassall, doing him homage. Being
thus fortified with the Moores of Spaine, he came to Carmona, the which he tooke:
then passing on by Alcaladel Rio, he burnt the suburbes of Triana, and seized vpon Seuile.
Many other tyrants did rise in diuers places, so as all Spaine, vnder the Moores
jurisdiction, was full of seditions, and ciuill warres, and the estate of Cordoua was
spoyled by him that could get it: but the kings of Toledo made their profit more than
any other, who medling not with other mens quarrells, kept themselues quiet, and assured
with their owne limits. After the death of Obeidalla (as we haue said) Hyran raigned,
of the linage of Aben Humeia, who dying left the scepter to his sonne, called Hizen,
who raigned in the time of this other Hizen, king of Cordoua, and was the eight king
of Toledo.
King Hizen of Cordoua was of as small continuance as his late predecessors; for the
Moores his subjects expelled him, in hatred of the robberies and extortions committed
by his Alhabib. or Constable, who from a base place was aduaunced to that dignitie: so
hauing held the kingdome twentie moneths and some dayes, he gaue place to Almondirs
follie, in the yeare one thousand and eleuen. Almondir, who was of the linage of Aben
Humeya, put himselfe forward (being desirous to raigne) in this sedition and popular tumult,
and hauing gathered some of his friends and kinsfolkes together, he came vnto the
castle of the citie, entreating them to receiue him, seeing they would not haue king Hizen:
Whereupon being aduertised by some one well affected, that he offered himselfe in an
vnseasonable time, the people being in armes, and incensed against a king, wherefore hee
should doe wisely to retyre,The furious and nrestrained ambition of Almondir. and to keepe himselfe from murthering in this tumult: but
being mad with ambition, he persisted in his demaund, adding thereunto, that he did not
care, so as they created him king that day, if they slue him the next. Which words were
so odious vnto all that heard them, as without any further delay, or giuing him that fading
contentment to see himselfe king that day, they slew him vpon the place, presuming
by the words which he had vttered, that he would be an vnprofitable and bad king: such
was the reward of his furious desire to raigne. This being done, they did forbeare to kill
Hizen, and being resolued not to haue him for their king, they let him vnderstand, That
if he would saue his life, he should quit the fort, and retyre where he pleased: whereunto he
obeyed, and retyred himselfe, with some of his friends, into another strong house of his, joyning
vnto the citie, of a contrarie humor to Almondir: but the Moores of Cordoua not thinking
themselues secure, he being so neere them, and being resolued not to endure any more

kings of the linage of Aben Humeya, they besieged him in this house, tooke him, and imprisoned
him in Cordoua, from whence he escaped, and fled to Sarragosse, where he liued in
a priuate estate. Then a Moore of great power, called Ioar of Algazur, seeing the citie without
a king,Ioar 19 king at Cordoua. embracing this occasion, with the helpe of his friends which did affect him, tooke
vpon him the title and royall authoritie at Cordoua: but on the other side, one Hali Cacin, or
Aben Cacin,Hali Cacin ruling at Seuile. residing at Seuile, a man of a great house, and mightie, seized vpon the towne
of Seuile, where he did remaine with the Moores of his faction, and enjoyed the soueraigntie
fifteene yeares; yet taking no other title vpon him, but as Iudge and Gouernour; but he prepared
the way for his successours to make it a royall seat. Ioar raigned but two yeares, and
Mahumet his sonne succeeded him,Mahumet the 20, and last king at Cordoua. being the twentieth and last king of the Moores at Cordoua,
and in whom the majestie of the Miralmumins of Spaine (which had beene great) was
extinct: from the which grew so many pettie kings, as there was scarce any good towne in
Spaine but had a particular king, which made strict alliances among themselues for the preseruation
of their estates, and maintained themselues vntill the comming of the Almorauides,
Moores, which came out of Africke, as we will shew. This king Mahumet, desiring rather
to hold that little of the estate of Cordoua, which remained, than to seeke after that
which was drawne away, enjoyed it in peace thirteene yeares; the which fell out, according
to the common opinion, about the yeare 1027, and of the Arabians 415: So as the royall
seat of the Miralmumins of Spaine (accounting from Abderramen the first, who did begin it)
had continued in the citie of Cordoua 269 yeares. The Moores affaires in Spaine being
in this confusion, the Christians neglected this fit opportunitie, to recouer all Spaine, and
to root out the sect of Mahumet: but they had their infirmities in like manner. D. Sancho
king of Nauarre made some attempts, but as it seemes ill pursued, being not mentioned in
the Histories.
D. Alphonso king of Leon,Leon. made an enterprise against them that gouerned in Lusitania,
and beseeged the towne of Viseo, but as he went inconsiderately about it, to view the place,
being vnarmed, hee was shot with an arrow from the towne, whereof hee died soone after:
this was in the yeare 1006,An. 1006. as the Spanish Histories report: But the letters and, titles of
Chapters and Couents say, he liued vnto the yeare 1028. A little before his death, he had
receiued into his countrey the children of D. Bela of Nagera, a knight who as we haue said,
had beene chased out of Castille, by the Earle D. Fernand Gonsales: which were D. Roderigo,
D. Diego, and D. Inigo Bela, who would neuer be reconciled vnto D. Sancho Earle of Castille,
their Lord: wherefore hauing liued a wandring and vagabond life for a time among the
Moores, and elsewhere, in the end they came into Leon, whereas the king D. Alphonso receiued
them, honoured them, and gaue them lands and reuenues, in the quarter of Somocas.
This Prince was carefull to administer justice to his subjects;D. Alphonso 5 king of Leon, a louer of iustice. and therefore did reuiew and restore
the ancient lawes of the Gothes, and did correct and moderat them with new decrees
fit for the time, and all by the aduise of the generall estates, assembled at Ouiedo, in the yeare
1003. He repaired the ruines of the Citie of Leon, and there built a Church to Saint Iohn
Baptist, whither he caused the body of D. Bermond his father, and many others, to be brought,
and there interred. In his time liued Athilan, Bishop of Leon, and Florian, a great Preacher in
Gallicia, both held for Saints in Spaine. They write, that Florian meaning to trie if his Sermons
were pleasing to God, put burning coales into his mouth, and had no harme.
As for D. Sancho fourth king of Nauarre,Nauarre. he was surnamed the Great, chiefly for his great
dominions,D. Sancho Emperor of Spaine. and for his great exploits, both in peace and warre; by reason whereof he intitled
himselfe king of Spaine, the which the Gothes with all their greatnesse and power
durst not doe. He married D. Nugna, eldest daughter to D. Sancho Garcia, Earle of Castille;
yet the Histories of Arragon call her otherwise, and say the king had a former wife, which was,
D. Caya, Ladie of Ayuar, the which was rather a concubine, than a lawfull wife, of whom
D. Ramir,Genealogie of Nauarre. first king of Arragon was borne. By this Ladie D. Nugna, he did inherit the Earledome
of Castille, and by her had D. Garcia king of Nauarre, after him D. Fernand, first king
of Castille, and D. Gonsalo king of Sobrarbre, and Ribagorsa. He was either in person, or
sent to all the warres betwixt the Christians, and the Moores, whose estate was much shaken
in his time, by reason of the diuisions of that mutinous nation; and this king was more fortunate
abroad, than in his owne house.

The Histories which treat of his deedes, say, That being absent in some warre against the
Moores, his sonne D. Garcia demanded a goodly horse of his mother, out of the kings stable,
the which he loued aboue all the rest, and had straitly commanded his wife not to suffer any
one to ride him: yet shee desiring to please her eldest sonne, graunted him; but being afterwards
dissuaded by a knight, called, Pedro de Sese, or as some write Fernand of Ordognana,
master of the kings horse, shee would haue auoided it, considering the charge the king had
giuen her: whereat D. Garcia being too much incensed for a matter of no moment, began to
imagine that there was some dishonest familiaritie betwixt this Master of the Horse and his
mother; whither that he belieued it, or did maliciously inuent it, forgetting God, and all filiall
respect,Notable treason of a sonne against his mother. he resolued to accuse them of adulterie: and hauing conferred this designe with
his brother D. Fernand (who was of a better disposition) he would haue forced him to
serue as a witnesse, or assistant in this wickednesse, the which he refused, and did often dissuade
D. Garcia from so vile an enterprise, but it was in vaine. In the end D. Fernands youth was
vanquished by the importunitie, or rather feare of his elder brother promising not to reueale
the fraud and lye, which he had discouered vnto him. The king being returned to his castle
of Nagera,Queene of cpan of Adulter^e. this peruerse sonne D. Garcia failed not to accuse his mother: whereat the king
was wonderfully amazed, for that he had neuer seene any cause to suspect his wife of any dishonestie,
neither would he lightly belieue that which his sonne had said, but examining this
businesse carefully, he sought by all means to discouer the truth: yet he caused the Queene to
be put in prison in the castle of Nagera; then taking D. Fernand his second sonne apart, he examined
him vpon this fact, who answered the king doubtfully, the which increased his suspition
more than before: wherefore the king called an assemblie of noblemen, and of his Councell,
to whom he propounded this pitifull case, demanding their aduice. They answered
that the Queene must purge her selfe by contrary proofes, according vnto the Lawes, or according
to the custome which was then in vse, shee should finde a knight to defend her cause
by armes, else she must suffer the punishment due to such an offence, which was to be burnt.
The poore Ladie attending this sentence, made her continuall prayers vnto God, to make
her innocencie knowne, who heard her prayers: for after some daies, no man daring to present
himselfe to defend this princesse honor,The vertue of D. Ramir the bastard condemning the lawfull children of Nauarre. D. Ramir the kings bastard son offred himselfe to
enter combate for the Queene, against any that would maintaine the accusation which was
layed against her. As they prepared themselues to the combat, there was a religious man of
good fame, and much respected in Nauarre, who doubting of this fraude, or otherwise aduertised
by the prouidence of God, came vnto D. Garcia and D. Fernand the kings sons, whom
he persuaded with such liuelie reasons, as they were toucht in conscience, and began to apprehend
the foulenesse of their offence, to haue sought her death who was the cause of their being,
against all truth, and for a matter of so small moment; wherefore casting themselues at
this holy mans feet, they confest their fault, demanding pardon of God, and intreating him
to finde some meanes that this pursute might cease,Queene of Nauares innocenci^ iustified. the Queenes innocencie knowne, and
that they might be restored to the kings fauour. The religious man hauing comforted
them, went vnto the king, to whom he declared what he had done, and what he vnderstood
from his sonnes, intreating him to pardon their offence, whom youth and choler had thus
transported. The king being joyfull of the innocencie of his wife, deliuered her out of prison,
and meaning that the fauour which they pretended to recouer, should depend wholly of
their mother,Affection of a mother. he sent them vnto her: but she shewing her selfe a true mother, did forget the
cause she had to dislike her ill aduised sonnes, and pardoning them with a motherlie affection,
shee restored them to the kings fauour: In this action, D. Ramir shewed himselfe both vertuous
and valiant, wherein hee purchased the more honour, by this circumstance, That hee
being sonne of an other woman, would defend the reputation of his mother in law against
her owne children: in recompence whereof, the king D. Sancho, assigning portions for his
children in his life time, gaue after his death the Earledome of Arragon to D. Ramir with
the title of king. By this diuision of portions made by the king D. Sancho, and D. Nugna,
D. Fernand was also graced with a royall title, in the succession of Castille, which fell vnto
her by the violent death of her brother D. Garcia, as we will shew: Nauarre remayning
to D. Garcia the elder brother, and the ancient realme of Sobrarbre to D. Gonsalo; meaning

to honour all his children with the names and titles of Kings, which was the cause of great
diuisions among these brethren, which haply had ceased, if one of them had beene made
soueraigne King ouer the rest, the which had maintained the Christians estate in Spaine
better vnited, and of more force to repulse the Moores. The time of this action of adulterie
is vncertaine.
The king D. Sancho was a very deuout and religious Prince,Religious deeds of D. Sancho the great. after the manner of those times:
for besides the confirmation of gifts which he and his wife gaue to S. Emylian, of the towne of
Ventose (annexed to this place by D. Garcia his father and others) he made a vow, to giue vnto
the Coueat of S. Saluator of Leyre, the tenth of bread and wine, and the herbage of such
places as he should take from the Moores: and with this hope, in the yeare 1015, he raised an
armie to inuade the Infidels by the frontier of Funes: at which place of Funes he gaue to the
same Monasterie a field of Vines which he had of the inhabitants, for that he had slaine tenne
Moores in the time of peace, for the which they ought a thousand solz, for a fine, which were
so many crownes, or thereabouts, More, in Falses he gaue a possession, house, vine, and other
appurtenances: and in Nagera, the houses, vines, and fields of king Antrayo, but what he was,
we haue no certaine knowledge. These things he gaue to the Church of S. Saluator of Leyre.
It is not knowne what was the successe of D. Sanchoes warre against the Moores, but that by
conjecture it was good, for that in that time there is a confirmation made by him, of nobilitie,
and exemptions graunted by his predecessors to the inhabitants of Roncal. The zeale of
this religious Prince was such,Councels in Nauarre. as he called a Councell at S. Saluator de Leyre, in the yeare
1022, but the chiefe decree was, a confirmation of priuiledges graunted to this Monasterie
by his grandfather D. Sancho, and D. Vrraca his grandmother, and D. Garcia and D. Ximena his
father and mother; which confirmation was signed by the king and all his children. The yeare
after 1023,An. 1023. there was another Councell held in Pampelone, where the Bishoprick was transferred
to S. Saluator of Leyre, where it continued some time. There enquirie was made of
the auncient limits of the jurisdiction of the Bishopricke of Pampelone. This was the subject
of Councels in those dayes. Then was D. Sancho the elder (who had beene schoolemaster to
the king) Bishop of Pampelone, and Abbot of S. Saluator, but he could not see this alteration,
for that he died this yeare: but his successor carrying the same name, surnamed the younger,
saw it in the yeare 1026, being the seuenth Bishop of that Church, being vncertaine to
what Archbishop it was then subject. In our time it is to that of Sarragosse.
This yeare 1026 was borne that great captaine,Castille. a Castillan, called Roderigo Dias of Biuar,
who was afterwards called Cid. Ruy Dias, the Camper, of whom mention shall be made. In the
yeare 1028 they hold (and it is verified by titles and auncient records) That D. Sancho Garcia
Earle of Castille died,An. 1028. hauing ruled nine and thirtie yeares, and was buried in the Monasterie
of S. Saluator of Ogna, founded by him. He was an vnfortunate Prince in his house, by reason
of the miserable death of his mother; otherwise he was wise and valiant, and a great louer
of his nobilitie, to whom he gaue great priuiledges and exemptions, yea, he dispensed
with them from going to the warre without pay and entertainment, and that they should
not be taxed for any imposition which should be leuied vpon the publike. And as he was verie
deuour, after the manner of those times, he made manie reparations and orders, to make
the wayes more easie for them that went in pilgrimage to S. Iaques of Compostella: for in
the beginning,The auncient way from France to S. Iaques. the ordinarie and most vsuall way was by the Prouinces of Guipuscoa and Biscaye
to the mountaine countrey, then to the Asturies of Sentillana, then to Ouiedo, from
whence they entred into Gallicia; and since the way being mountainous, although it were
short, being left, by reason of the difficult and hard passages, they came from France by Nauarre
into Alaua, and then through the Asturies; a longer, but a farre more easie voyage
than the other: but the Earle D. Sancho caused a way to be made euen, from Nauarre by
Rioje and Bureua, to the citie of Burgos, the which is frequented at this day, to the great
ease of such as make this voyage to S. Iaques. They call this the French way. This Earle
gaue Quintanilla to the Monasterie of S. Emylian, and did many other works for the redemption
of his soule, as appeares by the letters and titles of that age.



D. Bermond, third of that name, 23.
King of Leon.
DON Bermond,(...) sonne to D. Alphonso succeeded his father in
the Realme of Leon, in the yeare 1028. beeing but a young
Prince at his first entry to the Crown,A religious king and louer of iustice. he began to follow the
religious steps of his father, causing churches, monasteries, and
other buildings which had bene ruined by the Arabians in the
former wars, to be repaired. And moreouer, was very carefull
to maintaine good orders among his subiects, and to do them
iustice, punishing the disordered with great seuerity. An argument
that he had good and vertuous men in his Court, and of his Councell, who honored
both themselues and their Prince, in the due execution of their charges, and discharging
of their consciences so as it followed, that all the subiects gouerned the^selues
by their kings example: yea the Noblemen and Knights of his Court. The beginning of
which raigne could not but be held most happie. Hee married with D. Theresa, second
daughter to D. Sancho, last earle of Castile, by whom he had one son, called D. Alphonso
by his grandfathers name, who died before his father.
27 By the same treatie of marriage with the yongest daughter of Castile, after the
decease of D. Sancho Earle of Castile, by the aduice of the country, there was a marriage
propounded, betwixt D. Garcia successor to the sayd earle, and D. Sancha sister to the K.
D. Bermond.D. Garcia 4. Earle of Casti^ Both parties being agreed, D. Garcia went to Leon, to consumate this mariage,
being accompanied by D. Sancho k. of Nauarre his brother-in-law, who had married
D. Nugna the eldest daughter of Castile. The Court being full of Noblemen and
Ladies to honor this marriage, which should be performed with state, and the Earle
D. Garcia hauing no other thoughts but to court his mistris; there came vnto him the 3
brethren of Bela aboue-mentioned, who were banished out of Castile, and fled into Leo^:
D. Roderigo, D. Diego, and D. Inigo, who making a shew to desire the Earles fauor, came
to kisse his hand, offering him all seruice and homage, as his naturall vassals, crauing pardon
for that was past: to whom D. Garcia being courteous, gaue good reception; and
presuming they had nothing hidden in their hearts, but what their countenances shewed,
and their tong vttered,D. Garcia Earle of castille murthered by the thr^ brethren of Bela. he assured himselfe of them, going without any guard, like a
priuate man that had no quarrell: so as these traitours found oportunitie to murther
him, in reuenge that the Earle his father had banished them out of Castile, and confiscated
their goods: so the innocent suffered for the offendor, if we may call it an offence
to do iustice vpon rebels. He that gaue him the first blow with his sword, was D. Ruys or
Roderigo his god-father. Such excesses did the Christians then commit. The murtherers
did then escape, but afterwards they fell into the hands of D. Sancho King of Nauarre,
who tooke a worthy reuenge. There was great heauinesse in Court for this wretched
murther: but D. Sancha lamented more than all the rest, to see her selfe a widow before
she was a wife: who seeing her spouse interred at S. Iohn Baptist in Leon, intreated them
that they would burne her aliue with him.Castile vnited to Nauarre. By the death of D. Garcia, the Earledome of
Castile fell to the k. of Nauarre D. Sancho, who had maried D. Nugna the eldest sister or
D. Garcia, and tooke peaceable possession thereof in the same yeare 1028.
28 After the death of D.Cattelogne. Raymond Borel Earle of Barcelone, which was in the yeare,
1017. D. Berenger his son gouerned this principality, as proprietarie, vnder the Soueraigntie
of France, being the sixt in number, and was surnamed Borel, as his father, but
of a contrary disposition to his father: for by his idlenes, he gaue entry to all vices into
his Court: war and all exercises of chiualrie were contemned by him, which bred him
great troubles. We find that this Earle had three sonnes, the first called D. Raymond Berenger
succeeded him: the second, D. Guillen or Guillaume Berenger, was Earle of
Manrese,Genealogie of Barcelone. and the third sonne, Don Sancho Berenger Prior of the Monasterie of

Saint Benoist of Bages: Who after the decease of D. Guillen the 2. brother, which died
without children, left his habit, and succeeded him in the Conty of Manrese, and died also
without children. In the yeare 1020. D. Bernard Brisefer, cousin to the Earle Berenger,
riding through Prouence, was drowned in the riuer of Rosne: And for that hee
was a braue Knight, the Moores hauing notice of his death, grew so hardie and couragious,
as they did ouer-runne the countrey of Cattelogne, entring by Cerdagne: but
they were repulsed and chased, by D. Geoffrey Earle of that place, brother to D. Bernard.
This D. Geoffrey was founder of the Monasterie of Saint Martin of Canigo, and
mention is made of fiue sonnes issued from him. D. Raymond Geoffrey, who was Earle
of Cerdagne and Besalu, after the father: D. Geoffrey Guinar, Archbishop of Narbon:
D. Berenger Geoffrey, Bishop of Girone: D. Guillen Geoffrey, Bishop of Vrgel: and the
last D. Geoffrey, Earle of Bergada: Hauing so goodly an issue, he dyed in the yere 1025.
and was interred at Saint Martin of Canigo, which hee had built. His eldest sonne and
heire in the Countie of Cerdagne, did little enioy it, for hee dyed two yeares after,
leauing two sonnes, D. Guillen Raymond Earle, and D. Henry.
The Moores by another Inuasion into the territories of Cattelogne, ruined the Monasterie
of Ripol; but by the care of D. Oliban, sonne to D. Oliban Cabrisa, they were
repulsed, and the Monasterie repayred and fortified by him, in the yeare 1035. in
which yeare the Earle D. Berenger Borel dyed, hauing gouerned fiue and thirty yeares
without any fame,Nauarre and Castile. beeing scarce forty yeares old, and was buried at Ripol.
After the death of D. Garcia Earle of Castille, and the perception of the succession
by D. Sancho the Great, king of nauarre, in the name of D. Nugna his wife, beeing
eldest sister to the deceased, the first woman which succeeded in Castille, there grew a
warre betwixt him and D. Bermond king of Leon, who had married the Earles other
sister, called D. Theresa: in the which the King of Leon lost the countrey which lyes
from the riuer of Cea, vnto the auncient limits of Castile: but by the mediation of
some Noblemen, and good Councellers, these two Princes were reconciled and concluded
a peace; by the which there was a marriage contracted betwixt D. Fernand, second
sonne to the king of Nauarre, and D. Sancha sister to the king D. Bermond, who
had beene promised to D. Garcia, Earle of Castile. By this Treatie the lands which the
King of Nauarre had taken from the King of Leon, should bee giuen to Fernand: and
it was sayd, that the Earledome of Castile assigned to him, should haue the title of a
Kingdome, when hee should beginne to enioy it. Thus they were good friends, and
maintained peace betwixt these two Estates of leon and Castile,An. 1033. Palence restored by the king of Nauarre. till after the death of
the King D. Sancho the Great: Who about the yeare 1033. restored the towne of Palence,
vppon an opinion which he had to haue beene miraculously cured, (hauing put
his arme out of ioynt, striking at a wild Boare) in the ruines of this towne, which was
sometimes destroyed by the Moores, and at a place where as Saint Antolins church
had beene. To this place he restored the auncient Episcopall seate, and gaue great gifts
vnto it. The Bishops of Palence, call themselues Earles of Pernia since that time. Hee
gaue much to other Monasteries, as it was the custome of those times: and that for the
deuotion he had to the Reliques of Ouiedo, he went thither as a pilgrim, but he was slain
by the way,Death of D. Sanchoxy king of Nauarre. as we haue sayd, and was buried at Ouiedo, and afterwards transported to Ogna,
in the yeare 1034.An. 1034. After his decease, his children tooke possession of the Realmes
assigned vnto them by their father and mother: D. Garcia of Nauarre, D. Fernand of
Castile, D. Goncalo of Sobrarbre and Ribagorca, and D. Ramir of Arragon.
Thus a great Estate (by reason whereof D. Sancho had called himselfe Emperour of
Spaine, and was surnamed the Great) was dismembred, to the great preiudice of
Christendome. Beeing dead, his brother in lawe D. Bermond, would not obserue the
conditions concluded by the Treatie of marriage betwixt his sister and D. Fernand
the new King of Castile, seeking to take from him the Land which did confine vppon
the Riuer of Cea, conquered and ouercome by. D. Sancho the Great, the which he afterwards
left vnto D. Fernand, and to his wife, his sister, in making of the marriage.
D. Fernand hearing that hee prepared and addressed himselfe to Armes, with an intent
and resolution to annoy and trouble him, hee also, on the contrarie, put himselfe in

defence,D. Bermond king of Leon, breakes the peace, is defeated and slaine beeing succoured by his brother D. Garcia King of Nauarre, with great
troupes of souldiers, the which he ^edde himselfe in person, to a place called Llantada.
The two armies encountred neere to the Riuer of Carrion, where there was a furious
battaile, with great slaughter of either side: But D. Bernond lost his life, beeing
runne thorough with a Lance; by whose death (for that hee had no lawfull children)
the succession of Leon and Ouiedo, fell to D. Fermand, husband to D.
Sancha, sister to the deceased. This was in the yeare 1037.
that the two Estates of Leon and Castile were
^nted.Vnion of (...) and Castile. D. Bermond was interred at Leon
with his wife D. Theresa, who
was dead before.
The end of the seuenth Booke.




@ THE EIGHTH BOOKE
of the Historie of Spaine.

The Contents.
1 D. Ferdinand, first king of Castile.
2 D. Raymond Berenger, 7. Earle of Barcelone.
3 D. Ramir, first king of Arragon.
4 D. Garcia, 14. king of Nauarre, the sixth of that name.
5 D. Sancho, fift of that name, and fifteenth king of Nauarre.
6 Diuision of the Estates of D. Fernand the first king of Castile, among his children, giuing
Castile to D. Sancho, to D. Alphonso that of Leon, and to D. Garcia, Galicia, with the
like title.
7 D. Sancho Ramires, king of Arragon, 2. and the inuasion of Nauarre by him, wherfore
he was numbred for the 16. king of Nauarre, and the sixth of that name.
8 Estate of the Arabians in the East, their diuisions and quarrels, from whence sprung 4
mightie Monarchies.
9 D. Alphonso the sixth, called the Braue, king of Castile, Leon, and Galicia, vniting
these three Estates.
10 Exploits of Cid Ruis Diaz, a valiant Captaine of Castile.
11 D. Raymond, eighth Earle of Barcelone.
12 Vsurpations of the King of Castile, vpon Nauarre.
13 Conquest of the cittie and kingdome of Toledo, from the Moores. Re-establishment of the
Archbishops seat and primacie of Spaine, and other things belonging to the dignitie of
that Cittie.
14 D. Raymond Arnoul, ninth Earle of Barcelone.
15 The royall Seate restored to Cordoua, by Ali-Aben^Axa a Moore, who vnited all the
Princes and Potentates of that Sect in Spaine, vnder the Empire of the Almorauides:
his rebellion and death.
16 Passage of Ioseph Aben-Tefin, Miralmumin, or king of Maroc in Spaine: reduction of
all the Moores of Spaine vnder one Empire.
17 Henry of Lorraine, or of Besancon, Earle of Linbourg, the stemme of the royall family
of Portugall.
18 Spaine furnished with French Prelates.
19 D. Pedro first of that name, 17. king of Nauarre, and third of Arragon.
20 Ali-Aben^Tefin-Miralmumin, or king of the Arabiens Almorauides.

@ This eighth Booke containes the beginning of the
Realmes of Castile and Arragon, erected by D. SANCHO
4. king of Nauarre, and the continuance of their Princes, and
other Potentates of Spaine, as followeth:

LEON. Kings.
24 D. Fernand 1.
D. Alphonso 6.


CASTILE. Kings.
1 The same 2.
2 D. Sancho 2.
3 The same 1.


NAVARRE. Kings.
14 D. Garcia 6.
15 D. Sancho 5.
16 D. Sancho Ramir 6.
17 D. Pedro the first 1.


ARRAGON. Kings.
1 D. Ramir the first 1.
The same 4.
The same 1.


CATTELOGNE. Kings.
7 D. Raymond Berenger.
8 D. Raymond.
9 D. Raymond Arnoul.


PORTVGAL. Earles.
1 D. Henry of Lorraine, or of Besancon, first
Earle vnder the Soueraigntie of Leon.



D. Fernand, 2. of that name, first
king of Castile, and 24.
of Leon.
1 D. Fernand had raigned 2.Castile. yeares in Castile, when as the quarrell grew betwixt
him, and D. Bermond king of Leon, whereof followed the defeate of Llantada,
and the death of the king D. Bermond: after which the two breethren, D. Garcia king of
Nauarre, and D. Fernand of Castille, led their victorious armie before the city of Leon,
where the remainders were that had escaped from the battaile. The Leonois would
haue made some resistance against D. Fernand heire to the Crowne: but fearing they
should not be able to hold out long, they receiued him: and beeing crowned in Saint
Mary de la Regle,1037. the Cathedral church of Leon, in the yeare 1037. he raigned in peace.
Thus these two Estates of Leon and Castile were vnited,Succession of the Estates of Castil. and Leon by wo^^^. about an hundred yeares after
they had beene diuided, in the time of D. Fernand Goncales: and they came into the masculine
line of the house of Nauarre, in D. Fernand, the second sonne, by the hereditarie
right of women: that is, Castile by his mother D. Nugna, and Leon, in the right of
his wife D. Sancha, for want of heires males of the direct line in these two houses. Before
he came to these great successions, during the life of the king D. Sancho his father,
he had had by his wife D. Sancha, presumptiue heire of Leon, one daughter called D.
Vrraca, then a sonne D. Sancho, and after him another daughter named D. Eluira, beeing
King of Castile, she bare him D. Alphonso, in the yeare, 1035. and for the last of
all their children D. Garcia: All which were well instructed and bred vp like kings children
according to their sexe.
The first royall act which D. Fernand did, was to dispose of Iustice, fortifying by his
authoritie the ancient lawes of the Goths, with some necessarie additions or reformations:
he was much renowned, not onely for that respect, but also for his Religion, and
valour in warre, whereof he shewed good proofe against the Moores, who inuaded
his dominions in the yeare 1038,VVhich is the country of Extremadura. by the frontiers of Gallicia, and the countrey which
is properly called Extremadura, the which lyes vpon the bankes of Durio, whence it
takes the name, not that which they thinke at this day lyes betwixt Tayo and Guadiana
where the good woad growes. D. Fernand did not onely repulse them, but also poursued
them vnto Merida and Badajos, then entring into the countrey, which is now called
Portugall, hee tooke from them the townes of Cea, Gana, Viseo, Lamego, the
castle of Saint Martin, Taranca, and in the end after a long and difficult seege, the city
of Coimbra, where his armie was in great distresse for victuals; whereof they were releeued
(as the Spanish Histories say) by certaine religious men of that countrie, who
had secretly gathered together (if it be credible) great store of victuals, wherewith they
did furnish the campe. The Spanish Authors write, that the king D. Fernand had (at
the taking of Viseo) gotten the Moore, which had slaine the king D. Alphonso his father
in law, whose eyes he caused to be put out, and both his hands, and one of his feet
to be cut off, wherein he rather shewed a base, then a generous disposition. In that war
he layed the bounds of his country beyond the riuer of Mondego,Reuenge (...) royal mind. which is in the middest
of Portugall: and leauing for Gouernour of Coimbra, (beeing the greatest towne
in all the countrey) a Knight called D. Sisenand: hee returned into his countrey, and
went to visit. Iaques Sopulcher, offering part of the spoiles which hee had taken in
the warre, as to the Patron and Protector of Spaine, according to the manner of the
Religion in his time. After which he continued eight yeares without any warres against
the Moores, who hauing dismembred their monarchie of Cordoua, which had so long
maintained the name and glorie of the Arabians in Spaine, to the great ruine of
the Christians, did now busie themselues to make pettie Royalties: whereof the
most famous in those times were Seuile and Toledo; that of Seuile extended his Iurisdictions
vnto the countrey called Algarbe, beyond Guadiana.

2 Other Moores neighbours to Cattelogne,Cattelogne. hauing entred the Contie of Barcelone,
in the time of D. Berenger Borel, were stayed by his son and successor D. Raimond
Berenger, whom they called the Elder, for that he had a sonne of the same name, who
succeeded him. This Earle was of a small stature; but in this little bodie there lodged a
great courage, vnlike therein vnto his father, hauing no delight but in action and arms.
By his iudgement and valour, the Moores were dispossessed of the Castell of Manresa,
of the Townes of Ceruera, Segarra, Tagarra, Verdun, Tous, Lacuenca of Odena,
and of many other places: and subiected some of the Moores vnto him, and made them
Tributaries. With this Warlike vertue, he was wise for the well gouerning of a
quiet estate, louing Iustice, beeing religious, honourable, and liberall to his Nobility,
the dignitie of which Estate he did much augment. Hee was twice married: his first
wife,Genealogie of cattelogne. called Radalmurs, brought him two sonnes, the one called D. Pedro Raymond, who
was much hated of his father, for some reasons which we will hereafter shew: The seconds
name was D. Berenger Raymond, who slue his brother; and for that hee was exceeding
proud, he lost his Estate. To his second wife he had D. Almodia, or Almadis, a
wise Ladie and vertuous, by whome he had D. Raymond Berenger, who was Earle after
him, surnamed (for that his haire was white and thicke) flaxen haire.


D. Ramir, first King of Arragon.
3. THe Arragonois their neighbours,Arragon. began at that time to haue Kings, the countrie
hauing that title giuen it, in fauour of D. Ramir, a Bastard of Nauarre, in
the yeare, 1304, the Countrey hauing continued with the title of an Earledome about
250. yeares, by which meanes it was diuided from Nauarre. This title of a King was
confirmed to D. Ramir, by Pope Benedict the ninth, and the Armes of these first Kings
of Arragon, weare a Crosse argent in a field azure. D. Ramir did soone after seaze (I
know not by what right) of the Realme of Sobrarbre, and Ribagorca, by the death of
D. Goncalo his brother,Sobrarbre and Ribagorsa vnited to the Crowne of Arragon. who had beene made King by the will of D. Sancho their father,
he beeing slaine passing the bridge of Montclus, by a houshold seruant of his, called
Raymonet, and left no children. This succession did more rightly belong to D. Garcia, the
lawfull sonne of D. Sancho, and brother by father and mother to D. Goncalo. Whatsoeuer
they say, that D. Ramir was a Prince indowed with great vertues, yet would hee
haue dispossessed his brother D. Garcia, who was at Rome, of the kingdome of Nauarre,
where their father died. For the effecting whereof, hee demaunded succours from the
Moores, which held Tudella, Saragosse, and Huefca, and beseeged the towne of Tafalla,
but D. Garcia arriuing at that instant, had meanes to make D. Ramir to raise his
siege with dishonour and losse. He had to wife D. Ermisende, daughter to the Earle of
Bigorre,Genealogie of Arragon. by whom he had D. Sancho Ramires, who was King of Arragon after him, D. Garcia,
Bishop of Iacca, D. Sancha Countesse of Tholousa, D. Theresa Countesse of
Prouence, wife to the Earle Guillen Bertrand, and one Bastard sonne, called D. Sancho,
Lord of Ayuar and Xauierre. The time of this Kings Raigne, or the maner of his death,
whether it were in warre, or by sicknesse, is doubtfull amongst Authors, the common
opinion is, that he died about the yeare 1063. being at the seege of the Castell of Grados,
or Iraos, of a wound which he receiued, beeing in armes against the Moores of the
Country: for that leauing the protection of Arragon, they had put themselues vnder
that of Castille, and that he is interrred at S. Iohn de la Pegna.



D. Garcia Sanches 6. of that name, and 14.
King of Nauarre*
4. AS for D. Gracia heire of the Realme of Nauarre,Nauarre, he came to the crowne as his
other brethren in the yeere 1034. the Queene D. Nugna his mother, yet lyuing:
he was surnamed Sanches of Nagera, for that he was bred vp there, and made his ordinary
residence there vntil hee died, and was buried there. The portions giuen by D. Sancho
the Great, their father, were very preiudicial vnto him, for that as the elder, the soueraignty
of all those Estates did belong vnto him, of all which D. Garcia had nothing
but the crowne of Nauarre, the country which is from Bureua and Ogna, running
from the country of Frias,The bounds of the realme of Nauarre vnder D. Garcia Sanches. conteyning seuen iurisdictions, in ancient time called
Castillia the old, and moreouer Alaua, Nagera and a part of Biscay. In the beginning
D. Garcia was in reasonable good termes with his brother D. Fernand King of Castille,
and did assist him as we haue sayd, in the warres he had against D. Bermond, to settle him
in the Realme of Leon: but afterward there grew diuisions betwixt them, as also betwixt
him and D. Ramir, so as during his life they were neuer reconciled. Hee was
married whilest hee was Infant of Nauarre, to a French Lady called Estiennette, of the
house of Foix, as the Spaniards say, yet is it doubtfull, for there is no mention in
those times of any Earles of Foix, it may bee shee was of the house of Carcassone, or
Beziers, from whence the Earles of Foix did afterwards descend. By this wife hee had
foure sonnes:Genealogie of Nauarre. D. Sancho Garcia, who was King after his father: D. Ramier Lord of Calaorra,
Torresilla, de los Cameros, Riuafresca, Lea, Villoria, Trebejan and others: D.
Fernand the third Lord of lubera, Lagienilla and other places* and D. Raymond the
fourth Lord of Murillo, Agon and Agoncillo, and foure daughters, D. Ermesilda or Ermisenda,
who was Lady of Villa Mediana and Matres: D. Ximena Lady of Corcerous
and Hornos. The third D. Mayor of Ianguas, and D. Vrraca, or according vnto some Oguenda,
Lady of Aluerite, Lardero and Mucrones, such was the issue of D. Garcia Sanches
of Nagera: During whose raigne the Spaniards set vp the inuention of the image of
the Virgin Mary of the royal Monastery, in the towne of Nagera; in honour of whom,
D. Garcia, and his wife D. Estaphana, or Estiennette caused the Conuent of the order of
Saint Benet to be built:Knights of the Lilly in Nauarre. and moreouer the King did institute the order of the knights
of the Lilly, for that in the same picture there was a pot of white Lillies, and would
haue the Knights carry vpon their cloakes, Lillies imbroidred with the needle. This was
the deuise of the Knights of the order of Nauarre, wherewith the Kings children, and
many Knights of Nauarre and strangers were honoured, the which continued in this
house of Nauarre.
The King D. Garcia did greatly honour his nobility, and did confirme in the yeere
1043. the preuiledges of the gentlemen in the Valley of Roncal, in testimony of their
perpetuall fidelity to the Kings of Nauarre their Princes, who had done him great seruices
against the Moores his neighbors. He tooke Calaorra from them, in the yeere
1044.An. 1044. a more fortunate warre, out of doubt, then that which hee had against D. Fernand
King of Castille his brother, a fatall man to all his kinsfolkes and allies. Enuy
which torments man, by reason of an others prosperity, bread a hatred in D. Garcia, against
his brother D. Fernand, the which was augmented by some dispute that was
betwixt them for the town of Nagera in Rioje,Quarrels betwixt the Kings of Castille and Nauarre. whereas D. Garcia kept his Court, and
the Lands of Bureua, which D. Fernand maintayned did belong vnto the crowne of
Castille. The first and most vnworthy effect, whereby this hatred was discouered, was
a treason plotted against D. Fernand in the towne of Nagera; for being come in brotherly
loue to visit D. Garcia,D. Garcias practise against his brother. who was sicke in bed, hee was aduertised that by his commandement
they ment to stay him, and in truth hee had beene put in prison if hee had
not escaped: this did so incense them one against an other, as falling to armes, it was
one of their deaths.
This treacherous part was long dissembled by D. Fernand, attending some oportunity

of reuenge, notwithstanding any excuse D. Garcia could make, seeing his designe
had failed. Thus the King of Nauarre liued in continuall hatred with his brethren. D.
Ramir, and D. Fernand, as hee had purchased by his bad disposition, the dislike of his
father and mother: a Prince in truth vnworthie to make warre against the Moores,
for the aduancement of the Christian religion: against whom (notwithstanding
that hee was in bad termes with his brethren) hee sent an army, and tooke from
them the towne of Funes, in the yeere of our Lord 1045. For the recouery of his
health, hee had sent messengers to all the famous Bishops and Abbots of Spaine, that
by their praiers to God hee might bee cured: with this deuotion hee caused himselfe
to bee carried to the Monastery of Saint Sauueur of Leyre, where hee did beleeue that
by the praiers of those religious men, his health was restored; in recompence whereof,
he gaue to that house the Conuent of Centurifontes, and many other things: all
this did nothing abate the spleene hee had against his brother D. Fernand, who would
not be surprized.
Being returned into his country,Castille. dissembling the wrong which had beene done him,
he made warre against the Moores, vpon the fronters of Castille, where he tooke the
townes of Goruas, Vado del Rey, Aquilera, Berlanga, and other places, passing vnto
Tarrassone and then hee returned by Medina Celi, ruining the forts, and watch-towers
which the Moores had built in those countries; the which he did with lesse difficulty, for
that the Moores estate was in great confusion, by reason of the seditions and tiranies
which were practised amongst them.An. 1047. They write that this Prince did also that yeere
(which was 1047) chase the Moores out of the mountaines, of Ora and Ouan. Sometime
after, continuing the warre against the Mahumetists, hee past the mountaines
with his army into the realme of Toledo, he spoiled the country about Talamanca and
Vzeda, whereas the riuer of Henares passeth to Alcala, and Guadalajara: he entred the
territory of Madrid, and made such a general spoile of townes and people, as the King
of Toledo, a Moore called Aly Maymon, was aduised to pacifie him by presents, yea to
promise him tribute: the which hee did, sending home D. Fernand rich with gold and
siluer, and of all other spoiles, into his countries of Leon and Castille.
This King Aly Maymon was the ninth of those which had rained at Toledo of the
royall race of Aben Humeya,Moores. sonne to King Hizen, and grand-child to Hayran. Hee had
one sonne amongst others, carrying his grand-fathers name Hizen, and one daughter
called Casilda, who was a Christian, as you shall heare. At that time there dwelt many
Musarabes in Toledo, who^ God left not vnfurnished of Pastors, among the which Archiques
the Arch-deacon is famous,Arts florished among the Arabians in Spaine. who incouraged the Christians of that city, and
instructed them in the grounds of their faith: arts and liberal sciences were in like manner
maintained and honored among the Arabians, and in those daies their liued many
learned men of that nation, whereof the most renouned were Haly Albuacem, and Aly
Aben Ragel, very learned in Astrology. The occasion which drew the Princesse Calside
to the Christian religion, is thus related by the authors of the Spanish History. She fel
(say they) very sicke of a bloudy flix, for whose recouery her father had in vaine imployed
the skill of all the Arabian Phisitians, and others that were expert in that faculty:
but in the end shee had a reuelation, that if shee did wash her selfe in the waters of
Saint Vincents Lake, which is in the territory of Bureua, nere vnto Biruiesca, she should
be cured:Cas^de a Princesse of the Moores baptized. the which shee presently declared to the King her father, who was very well
pleased: and hauing written to the King D. Fernand, hee sent this Virgin well attended
vnto him, and presently set many Christian slaues, at liberty, vpon this occasion D. Fernand
entertained her with great honor, and caused her to bee furnished with al things nenessary.
Being bathed in those waters she recouered her health, wherevpon the Spaniards
say, she would returne no more to Toledo, but caused her selfe to be baptized and
built an Oratory with a little chamber vpon the Lake, where shee made her aboad, and
there spent the remainder of her daies, in praiers and other religious exercises, and was
there buried after her decease.
But the same author said, that being at Toleda, before she came into Castille she was
full of charity and compassion to Christian captiues, to whom she gaue great almes,

which was a signe that there were in her some good seeds of better instruction, the
which by the recouery of her health was confirmed. There was also an other Prince
of the Moores called Alay Maymon (not he which was King of Toledo) against whom
D. Garcia King of Nauarre had a sharpe incounter, at Ricorbasesca, where the Moore
was vanquished and slaine.
These Christian Kings,Nauarre. ambitious and treacherous one against an other, not sparing
their owne bloud, thought to expiate all their offences, in building of Churches, and
indowing them with great reuenues, in enuy one of an other, with this opinion, D. Garcia
gaue many guifts, and granted many preuiledges to the Church of Saint Mary the
Royal of Nage^a,Donations to Churches. which hee had caused to be built, for his funerall: declaring that these
guifts were for the health of his soule, of his fathers, of the Queene his wiues, and of
his children, with the approbation of the chiefe noblemen of his Realme: which donations
and preuiledges, hee ment should continue vnto the end of the world, vpon
a penaltie, to him that should breake them, of a thousand tallents, to bee applied
to the Monasterie. In these termes they are exprest in the letters which
are found in the sayd Monasterie, dated in the yeere of our Lord 1052. and seene by
Garibay.
By the like perswasion,Casti^le. D. Fernand King of Castille built the Church of Saint Isidore
in the city of Leon. And to make that place of more authority, hee resolued to get
his body, which hee thought was yet in the city of Seuile, where he had beene Bishop,
for this cause hee proclaimed warre,Exploits of D. Fernand and the Moores. against Almuncamus, called by others Benabet, Aben
Amet, who at that time was King there, wasting and spoyling his country, on this
side the riuer of Guadiana, towards Portugal, where hee tooke the towne of Montmaior,
and pursuing his enemy, he forst him to the like conditions, as hee had done Aly
Maymon, King of Toledo, and besides hee made him to deliuer Saint Ifidores bodie, or
some-thing in steed thereof, the which was receiued by D. Auito Bishop of Leon, and
D. Ordogno Bishop of Astorga, which relicke hee caused to bee carried to Leon. This
King D. Fernand at the sute of his subiects of the Kingdome of Leon, caused the towne
of Zamora to bee new built, which had remayned a heape of stones, since the raigne
of D. Ramir the third.1054. D. Garcia King of Nauarre did in like manner build the towne of
Peralta,Detention of D. Garcia King of Nauarre in Castille. and other workes. And to returne to the hatred which continued betwixt these
two brethren, it burst forth in the yeere 1054. so as the King D. Fernand beeing falne
sicke at Burgos, he requited D. Garcia in the like manner: for D. Garcia being come vnto
him, to visit him, and to take from him all suspition that hee had attempted against
him, he was seazed on and caried prisoner vnto Cea.
D. Garcia,Nauarre. wrought in such sort with good words and money, as his gard suffred him
to escape, and so being full of wrath and indignation, he returned into Nauarre, where
hee leuied a mighty army of his subiects, of Gascons and of Moores, allies or mercenaries,
the which he led by the mountaines of Oca, vnto Atapuerca within foure leagues
of Burgos:VVarres betwixt Nauarre and Castille. whereof the King D. Fernand being aduertised, he had raysed great troupes
in Castille, Leon and Asturia to resist him. Yet before they came to ioyne in battaile,
hee did sollicit the King D. Garcia, by many messengers to retire, intreating him to forget
all things past, and that from thenceforth hee would remaine his good brother and
friend: but D. Garcia was so incensed, as he would not giue eare to any good counsell,
wherefore both armies aduancing, there was a furious battaile, in the which there was
much Christian bloud spilt: but D. Garcia was so vnfortunate as he was incountred in
the charge, by two Knights of Nauarre, who being discontented with him, had retired to
D. Fernands army; these two ranne vpon him and slue him; wherevpon the Nauarrois
army was soone put to route, and defeated. The King D. Fernand did greeue at
D. Garcias death, and deliuered his bodie to his people to bury it, leauing to pursue any
but the Moores,Death of D. Garcia Sanches King of Nauarre. who were come to this warre. Such was the end of D. Garcia
King of Nauarre, in the yeere 1054. hauing raigned twenty yeeres. His bodie was
interred at Saint Mary the royal in Nagera. Hee intitled himselfe King of Pampelone,
Nagera, Alaua, Oca, Bureua, of Castille the Old, and of Biscay, where intruth he held
most part of the country.

In witnesse whereof there are letters found, conteyning, that in the yeere 1053. D.
Nugno Sanches Earle of Durango, and D. Leguncia his wife, indowed a church of Saint
Augustine, the which is now called Saint Augustine of Echauarri, nere vnto the place
whereas long after the towne of Helorrio was built, which letters were confirmed by
the King D. Garcia, as raigning in that country.
After this victory the King D. Fernand seized vpon all Castille the Old,Castille. of the territory
of Bureua, of Mont Oca, and of part of Rioje, vnto the waters of the floud Oja,
which fall from the mountaine of Eucimi,Vsurpations of the King of Castille vpon Nauarre. where now stands Saint Dominique de la
Calcada, and fals into Ebro at the towne Haro. In confirmation of the Monkes good
husbandry, mention is made, of acontrouersie betwixt the deceased King D. Garcia
King of Nauarre and Saint Dominique, called of Silos, who was a religious man, borne
at Cagnas, in Rioje, and of a sheapherd became a Monke; hee was bred vp in the Monastery
of Saint Emylian of Cogolla, where hee tooke the habit of the order of Saint
Benet, and liued there so religiously as he was made Abbot: but for that he was a stout
protector of the rights of the Abbay, and of their exemptions, he fell in disgrace with
the King, who expelled him out of all his dominions: the which hee aftewardes
repented.
This good father went into Castille, where D. Fernand receiued him courteously,
and gaue him commission for the restoring of the Monastery of Saint Sebastian of Silos,
in the valley of Toblatello, the which had beene destroied by the Moores. In
those times there beganne to bee great fame of the valour of D. Roderigo Diaz,D. Roderigo Diaz of Biuar a valiant Kn^ght. called
by the Arabians, Cid Ruis Diaz, against whom he made long and sharpe warres, beeing
a new knight desirous of honour, and ready for all vertuous exercises. After that
D. Fernand had subiected vnder his obedience, the territories of Rioje and Mont Oca,
which had beene held by the Kings of Nauarre, the Moores made many roades thether,
being their neighbours, and did daylie carry away great spoiles, whereof they
were often stript by Cid Ruis Diaz; and amongst others mention is made of a route
which he gaue them vpon Mont Oca, where he tooke fiue of their commanders or petty
Kings, the which hee afterwards deliuered vpon ransome, and promise of a yeerely
tribute. This Cid Ruis had a quarrel with D. Gomes Lord of Gormes, the which had
beene conquered by D. Fernand from the Moores, few yeeres before, so as entring into
Combate, D. Gomes was slaine; hee lest one daughter called D. Ximena Gomes, who
made great and continual complaints for the death of her father: but soone after shee
her selfe intreated the King, to make a marriage betwixt her and Cid, the which he did,
and so this Lady was comforted. Hee purchased this name of Cid, which in the Arabian
tongue signifies Lord, in the towne of Zamore, when as the messengers of these
fiue petty Kings, aboue mentioned, bringing the tribute contracted with them, presented
in the presence of the King D. Ferdnand,Cid a title giuen to Roderigo Diaz. they called him Cid Ruis Diaz: wherefore
the King would haue this braue Knight carry this title still, who by his right name
was called Roderigo Diaz de Biuar.
The towne of Calaorra beeing taken by the Moores, and recouered againe by the
King D. Ferdnand, there grew some controuersie betwixt him and D. Ramir King of Arragon,
for that place; for the deciding whereof either should bring a knight to the
combate, vpon condition that the victor should purchase the right to his party. For D.
Fernand Cid Ruis Diaz was armed, and for the King of Arragon came a knight called
Martin Gomez,Race of cid Ruis Diaz. the author (as they say) of the house and family of Luna in Arragon;
Who beeing vanquished and slaine vpon the place, Calaorre remained in the iurisdiction
of Castille. The race of this knight D. Roderigo Diaz, descended of Flauin,
whom others call Layn Caluo, Iudge of Castille, sonne in law to Nugno Nugnes Rasura,
who had by his daughter D. Eluira Nugnes Bella, or Theresa Bella, as some say, foure
sonnes, Fernand, Bermond, Layn and Diego, surnamed Laynes. Of Fernand the eldest
was borne, Layn Fernandes, of him Nugno Laynes, who begat Diego Laynes, father to
Cid Ruis Diaz: whose mother was called D. Theresa Nugnes, daughter to D. Roderigo,
Aluares Earle and Gouernor of the Asturies, by others called D. Nugna Aluares, d'
Amaya, Of Cid Ruis, and of D. Ximena Gomes aboue named was borne D. Diego

Rodrigues, who died in his fathers life time, in the warres against the Moores. And
moreouer they had two daughters D. Eluira, and D. Sol, whereof mention shalbe made
in the relation of the affaires of Castille and Nauarre.


D. Sancho Garcia the fifth of that name, and the
fifteenth King of Nauarre.
5. D. Sancho Garcia,Nauarre. succeeded D. Garcia Sanches his father in the realme of Nauarre,
who could not stoppe the course of D. Fernands conquests, hauing after
the battaile of Atapuerca, taken from him a good part of the country which his
father enioyed: wherefore he made a league with his vncle D. Ramir King of Arragon,
against D. Fernand King of Castille. By this alliance the Spanish authors say, that these
Kings gaue diuers townes and forts in pawne one to an other, and that the King of
Nauarre did quit to him of Arragon, and to his for euer, the townes of Sanguessa,
Lerda and Ondues. This King had to wife a Ladie called D. Plaisance, by
whom hee had children, but there is no certaine mention made of them. Hee
was of little valour, and therefore D. Fernand of Castille his vncle, had meanes
to restraine him in his Realme of Nauarre, at his pleasure, were it either right or
wrong.
In the meane time the King D. Fernand,Castille. to purge and expiat these outrages, gaue
bountifully to the Cathedral churches, colledges, parishes and monasteries of his
realme, and to others without it; for they say hee gaue euery yeere to the Abbay of
Clugny,The almes deeds of the King of Castille. a thousand peeces of gold, out his treasury and infinite almes deeds to the
poore in particular. The tribute which hee demaunded of the King of Toledo, was
denied him a little before his death: but hee went in person against him, forced him
to acknowledge him for his Lord, and to doe him homage, and in like manner the
other Moores, who after his example had rebelled: and they hold that hee also led
his army along the riuer of Ebro, by the confines of Cattelogne to Valence, where
hauing taken great spoiles from the Moores, which raigned in those Marches, hee
returned victorious into his country. His residence was for the most part at Leon,
for certaine reasons.
And although that homebred examples did warne him to keepe his Estates
vnited in one bodie, to haue the more power and authority, to withstand the attempts
of all enemies, yet hee was resolued to assigne his children their portions in
his life time: To D. Sancho hee appointed the realme of Castille, vnto the riuer of
Pisuerga,D. Fernand (...) towards Leon; and towards Nauarre limited by the riuer of Ebro, as hee
had augmented it on that side, with the preiudice of his Nephew D. Sancho Garcia: To
D. Alphonso his second sonne, he assigned the Kingdome of Leon in the Asturies, and
Tramsiera, vnto the riuer Deua, which passeth by Ouiedo: and moreouer hee gaue
him part of Campos, and the towne of Astorga, and other lands in Galicia, with the
towne of Zebrero: To D. Garcia the youngest the realme of Galicia withall that hee
had conquered in Portugall. Hee did also indowe his two daughters, assigning to
D. Vrraca the eldest the city of Zamora, and to D. Eluira the yongest, the city of Toro:
but this diuision was not allowed, nor kept by his sonne D. Sancho, after his death,
the which many say, was in the yeere of our Lord 1059.
A remarkable yeere by the credit which was giuen to the Cardinals of Rome,An. 1059. by
the dilligence of Pope Nicholas the second, a Sauoyard borne, who hauing called a
councell at Saint Iean de Latran in Rome, prouided that from thence forth the Pope
should not be chosen but by the suffrages of the Cardinalls,(...) grounding this decree vpon
the corruptions, troubles and seditions, which grew ordinarily vpon the election of
Popes; holding it lesse dangerous to haue these indirect courses practised by few, then
by the whole Clergy, or the people of Rome. This Decree is inserted in the three and
twenty distinction, and begins. In nomine domini etc.

The writers of the Spanish History are not very certaine of the time of D. Fernands
death; for those which seeme most exact, prolong his life vnto the yeere of our Lord
1067. The place where he died is also very doubtfull: but all agree that he was interred
at Saint Isidore of Leon, dying so full of contrition and repentance for his sinnes, as
they hold his body for a holy relike, in the Kings chappel in that church. By this computation
he should haue raigned two and thirty yeeres in Castille, and thirty or thereabouts
in Leon. Wee finde no other thing touching the affaires of this King with forraine
Princes, but only a contention betwixt his Ambassadors, and those of the Emperor
Henry, at the councell of Florence, vnder Victor the second, the Emperor pretending
that the Kings of Spaine should acknowledge his Maiesty and doe him homage as
to their souergaine: but this question was decided by the councell, where it was sayd,
that seeing the Kings of Spaine had defended and conquered their Realmes by armes,
without any aide from the Emperors, they were free and exempt from al acknowledgment
or subiection to the Empire:The Kings of Spaine doe not acknowledge the Empire. whereof wee may read the glosse, vpon the Chap.
Adrianus Papa, Distinc. 63. the like preuiledge haue the Kings of France, the State of
Venice, the Kings of England, and some others.
D. Raymond Berenger the elder, Earle of Barcelone, a wise and valiant Knight, of
whom we haue made mention,Cattelogne. defended his country by his armes and wisdome, and
inlarged his limits to the preiudice of the Moores, by the fauour of the other Christian
Potentates of Spaine, which maee warre against them, and the diuisions which were among
these Arabian Mahumetists. At that time was Seneshall in Cattelogne (which
was a dignity equal to that of the Constable or Mareshals in France) one called Raymond
Myron. In his time D. Guillen the fat was Earle of Besalu, sonne to Bernard Brisefer,
who dying in the yeere 1052. D. Bernard Guillen his second sonne succeeded him: at
the same time was Earle of Cerdagne, D Guillen Raymond, son to. Cont Raymond Geoffry,
who held it long, and had two sonnes, D. Guillen Iordain, who was Earle after him,
and D. Bernard Guillen, who was also Earle of Cerdagne: and to make cleere the alliances
of this house of Cattelogne, we finde that D. Almodis, wife to Count Raymond Berenger,
was issued from the house of the Earles of Carcassone, beeing strongly allied, especially
with the Lords of Bearne and Narbone, and the Earles of Tolouse, Bigorre
and other great houses of France. From the same house of Carcassone, was issued
Emengarde, married to the Vicont of Besiers, both which in the yeere of our Lord
1068. yeelded vnto Raymond Berenger Earle of Barcelone, all the interest and right
which they might pretend vnto the Earldomes of Carcassone, Tolouse, Cominges,
Rodes and Minerue: by meanes whereof, this house of Barcelone, had great Siegneuries,
and pretensions in France, and from that time did enioy the towne of Carcassone^
about which time the towne of Perpignan was built.


D. Sancho Fernandes the second of that name,
and the second King of Castille.
6.Castille. IN the yeere of our redemption 1067.An. 1067. the realmes of Castille, Leon and Galicia,
were diuided betwixt the children of D. Ferdnand deceased, and Castille fell to
D. Sancho Fernandes, surnamed the valiant. Leon to Alphonso Fernandes the second,
whom they called the Braue: and Galicia to D. Garcia, with that which hee had conquered
in Portugal. Adding vnto these D. Sancho Garcia, who held the Kingdome of
Nauarre, and D. Sancho Ramires, raigning in Arragon, wee finde that at one instant
there were raigning in Spaine, fiue grand-children to D. Sancho the Great, King of Nauarre.
The Kings of Nauarre and Arragon last named, made a league against D. Sancho
King of Castille, but their quarrels and exploits are obscure and vncertaine, at the
least they did him no great harme. Whilest that D. Sancha, the mother of D. Fernands
three children liued, they continued in reasonable good termes, for shee remained at
Leon her owne inheritance, so as Sancho durst not attempt any thing against D.

Alphonso, to whom it was assigned, shee beeing dead, which was the second yeere of
D. Sancho Fernandes King of Castille, they sought all occasions to spoile one an other.
D Garcia King of Galicia began first, taking from his sister D. Vrraca, Lady of Zamoraja
part of her territorie, the which hee vsurped. D. Sancho King of Castille, who demanded
no better subiect, imbraced his sisters quarrel, and for her cause resolued to
make warre in Galicia; but the Noblemen and Knights of his councel, were not of opinion,
that hee should goe to armes,VVarre betwixt the three brethren sonnes to D. Fernand, King of Castille. for a matter which might bee reconciled by
some milder course. Amongst those which did contradict the Kings ambitious desire,
were D. Garcia de Cabra, and Cid Ruis Diaz, saying, that if, contrary to their aduice,
hee were resolued to inuade Galicia, hee should first prouide to bee in good termes
with D. Alphonso King of Leon, that hee might haue free passage for his army through
his country, and to conduct his victuals and munition from Castille into Galicia. To
this end the two Kings had two enteruewes at Sahagun, where in the beginning D.
Alphonso seemed vntractable: yet in the end hee yeelded to giue his brother. D. Sancho
passage, and whatsoeuer hee demaunded: wherefore in the yeere 1071. warre was begunne
against the King D. Garcia who had recourse vnto his brother. D. Alphonso of
Leon, to bee aided by him; but hee excused himselfe, saying that hee would remaine
indifferent,D. Garcia King of Galicia dispossest. a^d not deale, for the one nor the other: so as D. Sancho entring Galicia
with great forces, after many incounters hee became master thereof, dispossest his brother
of all his country, and tooke him prisoner. So the raigne of this King ended the
fourth yeere after his comming to it: yet some authors say, that this was done, after
D. Sancho had dispossest his brother D. Alphonso of the Kingdome of Leon, and forced
him to become a Monke, and to take vpon him the habit of Saint Benet: the which
they report after this manner: D. Sancho beeing discontented with the diuision of portions
which D. Fernand had made betwixt him and his brethren, thinking that they had
done him wrong to take from him the soueraignty of these Kingdomes, being the eldest.
As soone as D. Sancha, their mother was dead, hee set vpon his brother D. Alphonso
King of Leon, and at his first entry wonne a battaile at a place called Plantaca:
but the Leonois rallied againe together, they gaue an other battaile to D. Sancho, and
defeated him vpon the riuer of Carrion neere to Gulpejora, whereas the King D. Alphonso
commanded that they should not pursue the Castillans.
Then was Cid Ruis Diaz, in D. Sanchos army, as his vassall, who excusing this losse
with good reasons, and comforting his King, hee reuiued his courage: so as hauing
gathered his troupes together,D. Alphonso King of Leon, dispossest by his brother. he came and charged the Leonois the morning following,
beeing heauy with sleepe, hauing made good cheere for their victory gotten the
day before, and not doubting any enemy, putting them all in disorder, and to a shamefull
flight, hauing slaine and taken many; then hee pursued this aduantage in such
manner, as hee besieged the King D. Alphonso in Saint Maries Church of Carrion,
where he thought to saue himselfe, and carried him away prisoner to Burgos.
A while after at the sute and instance of D. Vrraca, sister to these Kings, and of
D. Pedro Ansures, hee was set at liberty vpon condition: that hee should goe into
the Monasterie of Sahagun, and take vpon him the habit of Saint Benet: but
hee staied not long there, beeing forced to enter into it: for by the aduice of the
same D. Pedro Ansures,Hospitality of King Alm^non a Moore, hee left Sahagun, and went to Toledo, to King Almen^n
or Almeon, a Moore, who receiued him verie courteously, and intreated
him honourably, whilest hee remained with him, hauing taking an oth of fidelitie
of him.
Hee lodged him in a faire great house, neere vnto his Palace, which they imagine
was in that place where as now the Monasterie of religious women of the conception
doth stand, to the end that hee might there enioy the company of the Christian
Musarabes, which dwelt in that city.
Thether came three Knights, sent from his sister Vrraca, to keepe him company.
D. Pedro, D. Goncal and D. Fernand Ansures, brethren, of the country of Leon,
who brought with them many other Christians, the which were entertained by
the King Almenon: During this exile D. Alphonso gaue himselfe to hunting and

country sports: and taking great delight in a certaine place of the territory of Toledo,
where there were the ruines of old buildings, the King D. Almenon to gratefie him,
gaue him leaue to build them vp againe, and to plant it with Christians, the which is
at this day called Brihuega, yet D. Alphonso grew to bee suspected of the Moores,
who feared that hee sought meanes to seize vpon the citie of Toledo, wherevpon
Almenon was perswaded to kill him, notwithstanding hee would not violate the
lawes of Hospitality, although hee were a Mahumetiste, but was content onely to
take a new oth of him.
Whilest that the King D. Alphonso past his time thus in exile, D. Sancho his brother,
made himselfe maister of the citie, and of all the Kingdome of Leon, where hee caused
himselfe to bee crowned King. Hee beeing thus dispossest, they say hee went against
D. Garcia King of Galicia, to intreat him after the same manner. The diuision
which was then in Galicia, betwixt the King and a great part of his Nobility,
made the enterprise more easie; for D. Garcia beeing growne a tyrant, spoyling and intreating
his subiects vnworthely, hee gouerned himselfe after the appetit of a slaue
more then was fit. This woman (who some say, was a slaue infranchised) put the
Nobilitie and gentrie, in fauour or disgrace with the King (most commonly by
false reportes) as shee pleased, which was the cause of many inconueniences: So
as in the end growing insupportable, certaine knights slue her in the Kings presence.
Vpon this occasion the Nobilitie was diuided, and the Realme full of troubles and
factions, some following the Kings party who would reuenge this murther, and others
s^pporting the murtherers. The affaires beeing in this Estate, the King D. Sancho entered
Galicia with a mighty army, against whom D. Garcia finding himselfe too
weake,D. Garcia King of Galicia made a prey to his enemy, by reason of his tyranies. hee abandoned his country, and had recourse vnto the Moores, demaunding
aide of them for the recouery thereof, promising to make them sharers of that which
hee should get from D. Sancho his brother: but the Moores answered him wisely, that
hee who had not the heart to defend his owne, should not bee able to inuade an other:
yet the Moore beeing liberall and courteous, gaue him rich presents, and sent
him backe, refuzing to ingage himselfe in that action. D. Garcia hauing gathered some
men together, but no sufficient to effect any matter of importance, doubtfull what
course to take, hee fell to spoile his owne country, and making his retreat into Portugal,
where hee had recouered some places, hee did mightily anoy D. Sanchos garrisons,
but it continued not long: for D. Sancho hauing raised an army, came against D.
Garcia, fought with him, defeated him, and tooke him prisoner, neere vnto Saint Iren,
and sent him to the castle of Lune, with a good gard, from whence hee departed not
vntill his death, the which happened in the time of D. Alphonso his Nephew about the
yeere of our Lord 1081. who commanded hee should bee buried with irons on his
feete, at Leon, in the Church of Saint Isidore: by this meanes the King D. Sancho remained
Lord and Maister of all Galicia, and other lands of that partage. By this it
appeeres there is difference in the time, and in the meanes of their dispossessing. All
this did not satisfie D. Sanchos ambition, for hee would in like manner strippe his sisters,
D. Vrraca and D. Eluira, of the lands and places which they held, by their fathers will,
and laied siege to the towne of Zamore.
The inhabitants much affectedto their Princesse, doing their indeauors for the defending
of her rights, had with her consent chosen for their captaine a knight, called
D. Arias Goncales who had nourished her, vnder whose conduct they made
many gallant sallies vpon the besiegers, with losse of either side. Whilest that D.
Sancho was busie at this vaine attempt, a desperat knight of Castille, called Vellides
Ataulphe, or Delphos, went out of the city with a resolution to kill the King, and found
such an opportunity, as hee strooke him dead with a boarspeare, without any let, and
then retired himselfe to the place from whence hee came,D. Sanchos ambition stayed by the iudgment of God. notwithstanding that hee
was pursued by Cid Ruis Diaz and others. Thus the valour and conquests of D. Sancho
Fernandes King of Castille (which could not bee restrained by two great Kings)
were made vaine, when as hee would attempt against a woman: an argument of the

vanity of humaine enterprises, and that there is a greater power which controules
them.An. 1073. This death happened in the yeere of our Lord 1073. hauing raigned in Castille
about sixe yeeres and nino monthes: by reason whereof the army disbanded, euery
one returning to his home, except the Castillans, who would needes continue
the siege before Zamora for a time. The Kings body was carried to the Monastery of
Saint Saluador of Ogna. The inscription which is in that Monastery shewes that hee
died fiue yeeres later, but there is an error, for that Garibay affirmes, that hee had seene
ancient writings, witnessing that D. Alphonso his brother raigned then in Castille.
If the Castillan brethren were at discord,Nauarre. The Brothers of Nauarre at discord. they of Nauarre had as little charity amongst
them: for betwixt D. Sancho Garcia, and D. Raymond, there was enuy and secreat
hatred, the which burst out in time: for D. Raymond holding some strong places,
and some in his brothers gouernment, and hauing by his bounty drawne many vnto
him, who were discontented with the present Estate of the realme, he rebelled, meaning
to defend these places hee held: but the King D. Sancho, and the Nobility of Nauarre
did easily expell him. But there fell out a new trouble for the Nauarrois, to demaund
reason of the Kings of Castille, who detained from him the territory of Bureua, Castille
the old, and other places.
D. Raymond beeing thus expelled, had no recourse to any Christian Princes his
neighbours,D. Sancho King of Nauar slaine. who (as hee doubted) would detest his attempts, but hee fled vnto the
Moores, the enemies of our faith, and making warre with them against his brother,
there was a battaile giuen neere to Rueda, or Penalen, in the which D. Sancho was slaine:
this was about the yeere of our Lord 1076.An. 1076. hauing raigned two and twenty yeeres: he
had by his wife D. Plaisance, amongst other children, D. Ramir Sanches, and two D. Garcias:
D. Ramir being very young, vpon the newes of his fathers death, put himselfe vnder
the protection of D. Sancho Ramires, King of Arragon, whom also the Noblemen
and Knights of Nauarre called to raigne ouer them, by reason of the minority of their
King to oppose him against the enterprises of the bad. D. Raymond, who pursued his
deseigne to make himselfe King of Nauarre, and had already seized vpon Pampelone,
and vsurped the title of King there, but hee was vertuously repulst, so as beeing deceiued
of his ambitious hopes, not knowing what to resolue, hee retired to the King
of Sarrogosse, a Moore, where hee past his banished life, and by the bounty of this Pagan,
enioyed certaine Lands and places,D. Raymond of Nauarre retiers to the Moores. which descended afterwards to a Neece of his
called Marquise, wife to Aznar Lopes, a Knight, who made a donation of Saint Maria
Maior, to the Collegiall Church of Sarragosse, in the time of D. Alphonso King of
Nauarre, called the Warrior: the two Garcias bretheren, sonnes to the deceased King
of Nauarre, fled into Castille, to the King D. Alphonso, the mightiest Prince at that time
in Spaine.


D. Sancho Ramires the second King of Arragon,
and chosen sixteenth King of Nauarre.
7. D. Sancho Ramires had raigned some yeeres in Arragon, when as hee was called
to the crowne of Nauarre.Arragon and N^uarre vnited. Hee had married a Lady, daughter to the Earle
of Vrgel, called D. Felicia, by whom he had three sonnes. D. Pedro who succeeded in his
Kingdomes. D. Alphonso who raigned after his brother, and D. Ramir, a religious man
in the Monastery of Saint Ponce of Tomeres, neere to Besiers, and afterwards King by
the decease of his brother D. Alphonso,G^nealogie of Arragon and Nauarre. who left no children. He had also one bastard,
called D. Garcia who was bishop of Iacca. In this Prince the two realms of Nauarre and
Arragon were vnited, 42. yeeres after the separation thereof: he was war-like and politique,
and withall very zelous in the Romaine religion: for hee changed the ceremonies
of the Gothes, which the Christians vsed, and brought in those of the Romish
church, it may be by the councel held at Iacca, vnder this King, when as the Bishoprike

of Arragon was first established there: to inrich which seat, besides the tithes, there
were certaine portions appointed out of the conquest; which they should get from
the Moores of Sarragosse and Tudele: and in steed of the ciuill Lawes of the Gothes,
hee brought in the common law of the Empire into his iurisdiction. There is a volume
extant of particular lawes, giuen by this King to them of Iacca, which is inserted
amongst the customes of Nauarre at this daie: but the chiefe acts of religion done by
him, and other Princes in his time, were to indow churches; for the Monasteries, Colledges
and Bishoprickes of Spaine, haue thousands of preuiledges, donations and exemptions
granted vnto them.
There is mention made of a councell assembled in the towne of Parcelone at the
pursute of D. Raymond Berenger,Cattelogne. the elder, and at the request of D. Almodia his wife,
whereas Cardinal Hugnes, Legatto Pope Alexander the second, or Gregory the seuenth
did praecede, for the certaine time is not set down, but it is only said, that it was celebrated
about the yeere 1071.Acouncel at Barcelone. there it was decreed that Clergy men should liue chastly,
for that (as the History saies) many of them were married, according to the introduction
of King Vitiza the Goth: and after the example of the Arragonois, the seruice of
the Musarabes was left, and the Romaine of Saint Gregory receiued in Cattalogne.
In the same councel they treated of secular affaires, as of the gouernment of the country
of Cattelogne, of the Earles house, of the Estate of the Nobles, of their names and
titles, distinguished by this Earle, into Viconts, Barons and Vauasseurs: and such like.
During the assembly of this councel D. Pedro Raymond,The Countesse Almodie of Barcelone poysoned by her sonne in law. eldest sonne vnto the Earle D.
Raymond Berenger, poisoned D. Almodia his mother in law, fearing that shee should
labour to depriue him of his fathers succession to aduance her owne children: wherevpon
hee was iustly disinherited: thus the wicked reaped what hee feared. In the same
country died D. Armingol Earle of Vrgel, in the yeere of our Lord 1075. to whom
his sonne succeeded, carrying the same name: and the yeere following 1076. died the
Earle D. Raymond Berenger, the elder, hauing gouerned in the county of Barcellone
longer then any of his Predecessors, that is one and fortie yeeres. Hee diuided his
Earledome betwixt his two sonnes, D. Raymond Berenger, and D. Berenger Raymond, to
the great hindrance of the commonweale, giuing moreouer vnto D. Raymond Berenger
the Earldome of Carcassone. By this Earle D. Raymond the customary lawes
were ordained, taken out of the volume of the old Gothique lawes, amended and reformed.
8.Arabians. The diuisions of the Moores in Spaine, aboue mentioned, doe admonish vs to
speake some thing of the turbulent Estate of the Arabians in the East, and in like manner
of them of Maroc, which was the cause of a great alteration in Spaine. Returning
then to the Caliphe Maruan,Seditio^s, reuoltes and vsurpations among the Arabian Princes. who was in armes against Salin, the sonne of Asmulin,
who had seized vpon the Regions of Persia and Syria: wee say that by the defeat of
Maruan, and his death, Egipt was also conquered by Salin: so as all that which the
Arabians held in the East, did obey Asmulin and Cataban his companion and
councellor.
They beeing dead, Abubalan surnamed Muamat, was Caliphe of Persia and Syria,
and Salin the sonne of Asmulin kept Egypt to himselfe, and gaue the beginning to a
soueraigne seat in that country, the which hee established at Caire, causing himselfe
to bee called Caliphe. Against Abubalan, did rise many enemies in Syria and Arabia,
of the faction of Maruan, whom they did beleeue was yet liuing, so as there
died great numbers of that nation, in diuers incounters.
After the death of Abubalan, his brother Abdala succeeded in the Easterne Empire
of Sarrazins or Arabians, but an other of the same name aspiring to that dignity, slue
him, and held the throne about the yeere 756. at which time there were great troups of
Turkes beganne to disperse themselues ouer all Armenia, the which did ouerrunne
and spoile the Sarrazins country, who incountred them in diuers sharpe and bloudie
battailes. After this Abdala, who raigned about some twentie yeeres, his
sonne Madi Amadi was Caliphe, who held the Royall seate nine yeeres, and Moyse his
sonne succeeded him, who liued but two yeeres, and left the place and dignitie

to Aaron Caliphe, who they write was very iust and charitable to Christians, and had
sought the friendship of Charles the Great, King of France, of Alphonso the Chast raigning
in Spaine, and of other Christian Princes of his time, to whom hee sent Ambassadors
and presents, and they to him.
Hauing raigned three and twenty yeers, he left, after his death, the dignity of Caliphe
in question betwixt his two children, Muamat and Abdala, who after great effusion
of bloud, agreed to raigne with equall title and authority. Muamat transported the
seat of his Empire to Bagadat, a towne built by him, neere vnto old Babylon, and
would reside no more at Damas. At that time the Empire of the Arrabians and
Sarrazins was diuided into foure great Potentats,Foure great Potentats of Mahumets sect in Asia and Affrike. wherof that of the East and of Bagadat,
retained the title of Caliphe, which signifies King or ruler. That of Egipt called
himselfe Sultan, which is as much to say, as Emperour. At Cairon, a great and mighty
towne, built within the country of Affricke, in the time of Oxmen, some fiue and
twenty leagues distant from Tunis, raigned an other Caliphe, and at Maroc (which Estate
was come to them of the family of Aben Alabeci) raigned a Miralmumin, from
which great Potentats did afterwards grow, the Kingdomes of Fez, Alger, Tunes and
others. After Mahumad raigned Imprael, who left the Empire of the East to his
sonne Mamum, who held it with great reputation: but after him the Sarrazins power
began to decline in the East, by their continuall seditions and ciuill dissentions, whereby
the Turkes had meanes to settle a Monarchie, the which beganne about the yeere
of Christ one thousand, being called by Mahumet Prince or Gouernor of Persia, who
made warre against the Caliphe of Bagadat, in which they serued him: but falling afterwards
to quarrel with him, they defeated him, and seized vpon Persia, where they did
choose for their first King, their General Tangrolipix, and sence partly by force, and
and partly by an accord, they dele so with the Sarrazins, as their power declyning, the
name and Empire of the Turkes hath continued to firme and mighty, vnto our daies.
The Miralmumins of Maroc, being farre from these tempests of the East, maintained
their dignity in their race and nation, but not without the like furies and inraged appetites
of rule; so as hauing beene held many yeeres by them of the linage of Aben
Alabeci, they were set vpon and subdued by an other race of Princes Moores, called
Almorauides, whereof Ioseph Aben-Tefin was the chiefe, who made himselfe Monarke
in Affrike, ouer all the Kings and Potentats which did raigne there, about the yeere
1068. and extended his power into Spaine, as we will shew.


D. Alphonso the sixth of that name, the third
King of Castille, and fiue and twentith
of Leon.
9. D. Sancho Fernandes,Castille and Leon. King of Castille, being slaine as we haue sayd, by the treason
of Vellides Dolphos, or Ataulphe: D. Vrraca did presently aduertise her brother
D. Alphonso, who remained at Toledo vnder the protection of King Almenon. This
Moore hauing many spies amongst the Christians, had already intelligence of the
murther, and obseruing the actions of D. Alphonso, hee was resolued to stay him, if hee
should offer to depart without his priuity and leaue. D. Alphonso was wonderfully
perswaded by D. Pedro d' Ansures (who walking about the towne had by chance met
the messenger which brought him the newes of the death of the King his brother) to
depart as secretly as he could, fearing some trechery in the Moorish King, but D. Alphonso
did otherwise, wherein he wrought wisely for himselfe, for the doubted that the
King Almenon hauing aduice of what had past, did watch him at the passage: wherefore
comming freely vnto him, hee read D. Vrracas letters in his presence, demanding
his aduice, leaue and aide, to goe and take possession of the Realme of Castille. King
Almenon was much pleased, in that hee did not distrust him, imbrased him verie

louingly,G^neros^ (...) and b^unt of King Al^enon to D. Alp^onso 6. King of Cas^il^ and Leon. reioyced with him at the change of his estate, suffered him to depart at his
pleasure, and furnished him with money and other things necessary to honour his
voiage, and to assure his affaires, telling him freely what his intent was, to stay him prisoner
if hee had shewed himselfe so ingrate, as to distrust him who had honored him,
and entertained him so louingly during his exile: and before his departure hee caused
him to renue the oth, neuer to bee contrary to him, nor to his sonne Hizen. Whilest
that D. Alphonso prepared himselfe to come into Castille, to enioy his new Kingdome,
the siege of Zamora continued: for the Knights of Castille and the Prelats, hauing
performed the funerals of the deceased King, in the Monastery of Ogna, were
returned before the city, vnder the conduct of D. Diego Ordognes, Earle of Lara, beeing
much incenst, that the murtherer of the King had saued himself within their walles:
wherefore they were resolued to batter it all they could.
They write that D. Diego Ordognes defied the citie, according to the Lawes of
duels or combats, amongst the which it was decreed, that any knight that would defie
a chiefe ^owne,The law of defying a towne. was bound to fight against fiue knights, one after an other, changing
euery time his armes and horse, and taking (if hee pleased) bread dipped thrice in
wine or water: wherefore D. Diego submitting himselfe to the rigour of this Lawe,
offered to fight against fiue knights, whereof hee slue three, the which were sonnes to
D. Arias Concales:Combat of one Knight against (...). D. Pedro, D. Diego and D. Roderigo Arias; and that then the Iudges
appointed, made the combate to cease, not declaring who was victor, notwithstanding
that the Earle D. Ordognes, offered to end it, and to fight against those two which
remained; some say, that D. Roderigo beeing wounded to the death, strooke at his aduersarie
with all his force, thinking to part him in two, but the sword falling vpon the
horse-necke cut the reines, and hurt him verie soore, wherewith the ho^se beeing
mooued, carried the knight out of the lists, the which was not lawfull for him that
would haue the honour of the combate. Heerevpon the King D. Alphonso came
to the campe before Zamora, where hee was receiued without any contradiction
for King of Castille, Leon, the Asturies and Galicia, and of those Lands which the
King D. Fern^nd his father had taken from the crowne of Nauarre. They say that the
Castillans, before they would acknowledge him for their King, would haue him purge
himselfe by oth,Anci^nt an^ relgious (...) to purge themselues by o^^ that hee was not acquainted, nor consenting vnto the death
of D. Sancho his brother: which oth was required of him by Cid Ruis Diaz, onely, amongst
all the Castillans, in the churches of Saint Gadee of Burgos, a place appointed
for that businesse.
This manner of purging themselues by oth, of grieuous crimes imposed, but not
prooued, was vsuall in Spaine in those times, with great ceremonies, and religious
terror in many churches and places consecrated, where there were great assemblies
of people of all sorts, whereof did follow many horrible Iudgements of God, of those
that were periured, the contempt of Religion, how impure soeuer, being detestable and
abominable before God. The King D. Alphonso was about thirtie yeeres old, when he
beganne to raigne, and was surnamed the Braue, for that he was valiant, and did effect
great enterprises.
Wee finde that hee married sixe wiues,Genea^og^e of (...) and Leon. and had the companie of two friends, nobly
descended, by whom hee had many children. The first of his wiues was called
(...) a Spaniard: The second was D. Constance: The third D. Maria, daughter
to the King of Seuille, called Almuncamuz or Benabet, Aben Amet, a Moore: whom
hee married after that hee had taken the citie of Toledo, and was before called Caida
or Zaida, of whom was borne the Infant D. Sancho, whom the Moores slue in the
war. Of D. Constance was borne D. Vrraca, heire to the King her father: the which was
twice married, once to Count Raymond of the house of Bourgongne, and of the bloud
royall of France: brother to Guy Archibishop of Vienne, and afterwards Pope, called
Cal^xtus, from whom issued D. Sancho, and D. Alphonso Raymond, who was King of Castille.
And for her second husband shee married D. Alphonso, King of Nauarre and
Arragon: The fourth wife of D. Alphonso the Braue, was D. Bertha of Tuscane: The
fifth D. Isabella, a Spaniard, of whom was borne D. Sancha, wife to D. Roderigo,

and D. Eluira maried to Roger first King of Naples and Sicilie. And the sixth and last
wife was D. Beatrix, a French woman: Besides all these lawfull wiues hee had the companie
of D. Ximena Nugnes de Gusman, by whom he had two daughters: the first wherof
D. Eluira was married to an Earle of Tholousa and S. Giles, called Raymond, who had
by her three sonnes, D. Bertrand, D. Willyam, and D. Alphonso Iordain, who were all
Earles of Tholousa.Heury of Lorraine the st^m of the house of Portug^l. The second called D. Theresa, who had to husband D. Henry, of
the Bloud of the Princes of Lorraine, borne at Besancon, the stemme of the Kings of
Portugall. For of this marriage issued D. Alphonso Henriquez, first king of Portugal.
These three Knights, Raymond of Tholousa, Raymond of Bourgongne, and Henry of
Lorraine, did serue the King D. Alphonso the Braue, happily and valiantly in his warres
against the Moores: in requitall whereof, hee gaue them Estates, honours, and his
daughters in marriage. Wee find that he had another friend also of a Noble House,
whose name is buried in forgetfulnesse. Of all this generation and allyance there shalbe
often mention made in the discourse of this Historie.Disposition of D. Alphonso King of Castile and Leon. This king D. Alphonso was a worthie
Prince, vertuous, a louer of iustice, and of his people, religious and zealous to the
Sea of Rome, after the manner of his ancestors, so as he was most esteemed of all the
Christian Princes of his time.
He shewed himselfe a friend and thankefull to king Almenon of Toledo the Moore,Moores.
whose countrey was inuaded by them that held the towne of Cordoua: for hee ledde a
great armie to his ayde: yet this Moore seeing what great forces D. Alphonso had with
him, and seeing him lodged at Olias, two leagues from the Towne, grew iealous that
he would breake the league, but he shewed by the effects that he was of a noble and generous
disposition: for with him he pursued them of Cordoua, and plagued them in
such sort, as for a long time they would not aduenture to make warre against Toledo.
9 The Moores of Seuille and Cordoua, Tributaries to the king of Castile, by a
Treatie made with the king D. Fernand, did protract the time to send the tribute.
Whereupon the king D. Alphonso sent D. Roderigo Diaz, called Cid, who being come
into Andalousia, found all in armes and combustion: the Mores of Grenado, and their
turbulent king Almundafar,Christian (...) in pry with the Moores. hauing begun warre against Almuncamuz, King of Seuille,
with the helpe and fauour of some Christians, whereof Fortun Sanches, whome they
held to be sonne-in-law to D. Garcia king of Nauarre, and D. Lopes Sanches his brother,
with D. Garcia Ordognes, and a knight of Castile, whose name was D. Diego Perez,
were the chiefe: to whom Cid sent to let them vnderstand, that Almuncamuz king of
Seuile was vassall to his king, and therfore intreated them to forbeare, and not to presse
him by armes, but they did not regard it: wherefore Cid imbraced the quarrell in such
sort, as with the troupes he had brought out of Castile, and the Moores which hee had
found fit to carrie armes, he gaue a great and bloudie defeate to the Granqdins, and
their allyes, and tooke D. Garcia Ordogno, D. Lopes Sanches, and D. Diego Parez, aboue-mentioned
prisoners, whom notwithstanding he deliuered within three dayes after vpon
this consideration: the king of Seuile hauing much honored and thanked Cid Ruis
Diaz:Exploits of Cid Ruis Diaz in Andalou^ia he payed him what he ought vnto the king of Castile, quit him the whole prey,
and moreouer presented him with great gifts. Here did Cid purchase the name of Ca^peador.
But for that all the Moores, which ought tribute in Andalousia, had not payed,
the king D. Alphonso went in person to force them, leauing Cid in Castile sicke: In the
meane time the Moores of Medina Zelin, or Celi, began to ouer run the lands of Saint
Stephen of Gormas, where they did much harme; against whom Cid, who was somwhat
recouered, assembled the forces of Castile, and chased them out of the confines: and as
he was of a great courage, and an irreconciliable enemie to the Moores, not respecting
which of them he annoyed, hee past on, and entred the countrie neere vnto Toledo,
where he put all to fire and sword, and led away aboue 7000. prisoners of all sexes and
ages. This action did so discontent the king D. Alphonso, by reason of the league he had
with king A^menon,Excesse of Cid Rui^ Daz, and h^^an (...) out of Castile. as without respect of this knights valour, nor the great seruices
which he had done vnto the crowne of Castile, thrust on moreouer by the counsell of
some which enuied the others vertue, and did aggrauate his offence, gaue him commandement
to depart his countrie within few dayes: Wherupon Cid departed, hauing

left his wife and children at Saint Peter of Cardegna: but he was followed by aboue
300. horse, and a great number of foot, who loued him in particular: and with this
troupe began to make violent warres against the Moores. He entred their countrie by
Atienca, and wonne Castreion by an ambush which hee layd for the Moores, whilest
that Aluaro Ian^s Minaya his cousin, did ouer-runne the countrie vnto Alcala of Henares,
from whence he returned to Castrejon with great spoiles. And for that Castrejon
was vpon the frontiers of king D. Alphonso, and for some other respects, Cid abandoned
it, and went vnto Hariza, Cetiua, and Alcocer, and striking great terror in all the
countrey of Calatajub, Teruil and Tierar, hee surprised Alcocer in Arragon.
At that time the towne of Valencia did belong to the king of Toledo, and was gouerned
for king Almenon by a More, called Abubacar, to whom the Inhabitants of Calatajub,
and the countrey thereabouts, made their daily complaints of the wrongs and
lostes they receiued by Cid, demanding ayde from him: whereupon Abubacar sent them
two Captaines, called Faris and Galue with good troupes; but that could not defend
them: for Cid ioyning with them, defeated them, and put them to a shamefull flight,
carrying great spoyles to Alcocer, which was his retreate; from whence he sent to king
D. Alphonso, by his cousin D. Aluaro Iancs Minaya, thirty horses, with as many swordes
tyed to the saddles. This did somewhat pacifie the King, who did willingly see Aluaro
lanes, but for all this he did not call Cid from banishment: yet he suffered all men freely
to go to the warres with Cid against the Moores, except Toledo. Cid desirous to
make warre, and wanting meanes, hee tooke money vpon the castle of Alcocer, and
crossing to Xalon and Monreal, he stayed there some dayes.
11 About this time D. Raymond Ber^nger the elder,Barcelore. An. 1076. Earle of Barcelone, being deceased,
his sonne D. Raymond called Flaxen-head, succeeded him, in the yeare 1076.
When as neere to Cattelogne, D. Armengol, Earle of Vrgel, wonne from the Mores,
Sanahuya, Guizona, Balager, and other places of that countrie.
The same yeare dyed Almuneamuz king of Seuile,Moores. leauing his Realme to his sonne
of the same name, who raigned also at Cordoua, and in a manner ouer all Andalusia:
so the discord betwixt these Arabians made Cordoua (which had beene lately Princesse
ouer other citties) to be subiect and slaue to Seuile. Cid hauing taken some good order
for his affaires, and assembled good troupes of souldiers, hee began to torment the
Mores of the streight of Sarragosse, and pressed them in such sort, as Almundafar king
of Sarragosse, made a treatie with him greatly to his honor, and recciued him into his
cittie, by whose meanes he drew many Christian Knights, which did willingly receiue
pay of these Moores, when they were in armes one against another, that they might
helpe to defeate them.(...) Thither D. Aluaro Ianes came vnto him with a good number of
souldiers, beeing desirous to march vnder the command of so valiant a Captaine as
Cid was; who vnderstanding of the good reception which the king had made vnto D.
Aluaro, and how he had receiued his presents, was wonderfull glad. This yeare died Almenon
king of Toledo; for whose quarrell Cid had beene banished out of Castile: A
Prince who had gouerned the kingdome long, and with whom the king D. Alphonso
entertayned true and firme friendship whilest he liued, and with his sonne and successor
Hizen,An. 1078. who raigned onely one yeare, and died in the yeare, 1078. after whom a brother
of his called Hiaya Alcadurbile, obtained the Crowne of Toledo: a Prince of a bad
disposition and cruell, numbred the 11. king of that cittie, and the last of the Arabians
or Moores.
12 During these things,Castile. the king D. Alphonso (discontented, that the Nauarrois had
called D. Sancho Ramires, king of Arragon to raigne ouer them, rather then him, who
had a better title,Vsurpa^ions of D Alp^on^o King (...) vpon the rea^m of Nauarre. beeing cousin germaine to the king D. Sancho Garcia deceased, by the
lawfull line, whereas the king of Arragon descended from a bastard:) seized vpon the
towne of Nagera, and of all that iurisdiction, which was in the Prouince of Rioje, of
which he made Gouernor D. Garcia de Cabra, called Crespo de Granon, and intitled himselfe
king of Nagera. The people of Guipuscoa, Biscay, and Alaua, who were neighbors
vnto it, hearing of this exploit, and considering the greatnesse of D. Alphonso, they
thought good to leane vnto him, and to leaue the kings of Nauarre, who were of lesse

power: thus his Iurisdiction increased, so as hee commanded from the towne of Saint
Iaques, vnto Calaorra. In this felicity he began to restore and re-people many townes
of his countrie, destroyed in former warres, as Salamanca, Auila, Legouia, Medina
del campo, Olmedo, Coca and C^ellar.
D. Sancho Ramires king of Arragon,Nauarre and Arragon. hauing no good title to the Realme of Nauarre,
for that D. Ramir Sanches, sonne to the deceased king was yet liuing: and by the same
reason the king D. Alphonso hauing no good reason to pretend it, they agreed together,
to the preiudice of the pupill:The Kings of Castile and Arragon spoile the (...) of Nauarre of his Kingdome. by which accord Pampelone, with all the appurtenances
(except Nagera and the other countrie where of D. Alphonso was seazed) remained
to the king of Arragon, but vpon condition, that he should acknowledge himself
vassall in that respect to the king of Castile. This king had made warre against the
Moores, whilest he was king of Arragon onely, and before he had obtained the kingdome
of Nauarre, he had chased them out of the mountaines of Arragon, Sobrarbr^
and Ribagorca, and moreouer had made warre against Abderramen King of Huesca,
and taken the towne of Barbastro, at which seege Armingo Earle of Vrgel his father in
law dyed. Hauing made his profit of the Realme of Nauarre, and in good termes with
D. Alphonso,Conques^s of the king of Arragon vpon the Moores. he continued his enterprises and conquests against that sect, and tooke
from them the castell of Mugnones about Secastilla in Ribagorca: then hee seazed of
Cobin and Pitilla, and had a great and cruell battaile neere vnto Sarragoffa, and tooke
from them Bolea, a place of great strength: to supply the charges of which warre, this
king was sometimes forced to vse the reuenues of the Clergie, his treasure beeing not
able to furnish so great a charge: but the bishops of his countrie, who affected nothing
more then to inrich their order and estate,King made to do pennarce by the Bishops of his country. opposed themselues against him, and afflicted
him in such sort, as putting him in a vaine feare, that he was damned for this cause,
they made him do pennance, and to confesse publikely in the church of Roda, before
S. Vincents altar, in the presence, and at the poursute of D. Raymond Dalmace, Bishop
of that place, and D. Garcia the kings owne brother, Bishop of Iacca, that he had grieuously
offended. Thus these good fathers insulted ouer their Soueraigne. This fell out
about the yeare, 1083:An. 1083. at which time D. Ramir sonne to D. Sancho Garcia, moued with
great deuotion, gaue a new, and confirmed that which he had giuen to the monasterie
of Saint Mary of Nagera, which were the places of Torresilla, Cameros, Treuexan, Ribafresca,
Lea, Villoria, and S. Pelagius of Cerezo, S. Peter of Torresilla, Saint Mary of
Veraca, and other places and churches, making the Monkes and Abbot of that place
where he is interred, his heires generall. The King D. Sancho Ramires did in the yeare
1083. winne the castell of Graos, the which he presented to the Monasterie of Saint
Victorian, to free himselfe of a certaine vow made by D. Ramir his father, and also for a
satisfaction to the Clergie:Princes of Spa^ne bet^ay their (...) Christians. but some write that soone after hee receiued a great ouerthrow
about Roda, where they say, that the king D. Alphonso carrying a secret spleene,
for that the King of Arragon did enioy the Realme of Nauarre, gaue secret ayde and
fauour to the Moores, and was the cause of this defeate of Christians.
Almundafar King of Sarragossa beeing dead,Moores. he had left two sonnes, Zuleima who
was king of Sarragossa, and Aben Alfay in Denia, who being at dissention, fel to armes:
either of them drawing Christian Noblemen and Knights to his partie. Cid Ruis Diaz
was for Zuleima. D. Pedro of Arragon eldest sonne to the king D. Sancho Ramires, and
Count Raymond of Barcelone fauoured Aben Alphare.Valour and bountie of (...) Being in armes, and ouer-running
the countrie, Cid comming from Huesca and Montaban, incountred the troupes
of the Earle of Barcelone, with the king of Denia, whome he defeated, taking Count
Raymond prisoner, who was soone after freely set at libertie by Cid, yet the Earle of Barcelone
ioyned againe with the king of Denia, who came to beseege the castell of Almenar,
whilest that Cid was at the seege of Escarpe: but he comming vpon them which
were before Almenar, he put them againe to route, and returned victor to Sarragossa;
after which he spoiled the countries of Mancon, Onda, and Burriana, notwithstanding
that the Arragonois sought to hinder him, beeing their allies. On the other side, a More;
of Andalusia, called Almofalas, tooke from Adofir, another Moore, the castell of Grados,
for the recouerie whereof, the king D. Alphonso went to armes, and besee^, ed

Grados: but beeing prest vpon other affaires, he returned into his countrie, and called
Cid from banishment, granting at his request, vnto the Knights and Gentlemen of Castile,
which should be banished for any misdemeanors, in stead of nine dayes respi^e appointed
them to depart the countrie, that they should haue thirty. Cid continuing the
seege of Grados, tooke it by famine, and sent Almophalas prisoner to the king of Castile,
whom he punished, for that by treason, and against the lawes of the peace, hee
had subtilly surprized his neighbours house. From thence Cid returned to Sarragossa,
and not able to liue without making warre, he led an armie into Arragon, in the company
of king Zuleima, where they wasted the countrie, and carried away great spoiles,
and bending towards the territorie of Denia, they did as much as they had done in Arragon,
and moreouer Cid began to build a fort in the territorie of Morella, called Alcala;
to hinder which fortification Aben-Alfaye demanded succors from the king of Arragon,
who came with a great army: but the king of Arragon lost a battell, and according
to the opinion of fome, was himselfe taken there: but the Histories of Arragon
do not confesse it. After which exploites Cid Ruis Diaz returned into Castile, where as
D. Alphonso the king receiued him gratiously,Cid Ruis Diaz returnes into Castile. and gaue him Birbiesca, Berlanga, A^zejon,
and other places, and employed him in the conquest of Toledo, which hee went to
beseege soone after, for some reasons which follow.
13 King Hizien beeing dead,Castile and Moores. within th^ yeare that hee began to raigne, (a good
Prince, who had sincerely intertained the allyance and league contracted by his father
Almenon, with the king D. Alphonso) Hiaja Alcadurbile came to raigne at Toledo, a trecherous,
cruell and vicious man, so as he was equally hated of the Moores and Musarabes,
who cryed out for aide to the king of Castile, and other kings, against this barbarous
tyrant: beeing forced thereunto by his basnesse, and for that they did see themselues
abandoned of the Captaines and Noblemen, which had serued his father and
brother: for beeing exceedingly giuen to lust, he shut himselfe vp in his pallace with
his concubines, where he had no other thoughts, but to glut his filthie and dishonest
pleasures. Wherefore Abubacar Gouernor of Valencia rebelled, and kept the gouernement
for himselfe. The Moores sollicited the king of Badajos, to take vpon him to dispossesse
Hiaja,Rebellions of Toledo draw the king of Castile to beseege the citty. and the Christian Musarabes made the like offer to D. Alphonso king of
Castile. The king of Badajos meaning to preuent him, entred first into Toledo, in despight
of king Hiaja, whilest that the armie of Castile was preparing: which D. Alphonso
vnderstanding, he was incensed, and entring in hostill manner into the territorie of Toledo,
he spoyled the countrie: which made the king of Badajos (for that hee would not
remaine betwixt two enemies) to leaue Hiaja in his kingdome, and to returne home.
D. Alphonso left not for all this to pursue this good occasion, but went to beseege Toledo,
not streightly, but spoyling the country, and cutting off their victuals, thereby to
force the Inhabitants to yeeld through famin; the which it seemes he had resolued with
himselfe long before, to execute when time should serue. D. Alphonso's armie holding
the fields in this manner about Toledo, Aben-Alfaye king of Denia, came suddenly vppon
him, yet ioyning his forces together as speedily as he could, there was a battell
fought about Consuegra, where the Moore was defeated, and forced to retire into the
castell of Consuegra.Moores twise def^ated. In this battaile D. Roderigues de Biuar, sonne to Cid, was slaine:
whose bodie was buried at S. Peter of Cardegna.
Aben-Alfaye desirous to reuenge this losse, leuied all the Moores he could, and inuaded
the Christians countrie, passing the mountaines towards Medina del campo,
where they were againe incountred and defeated by Aluaro Ianes de Mimaya, cousin to
Cid, whilest that the King D. Alphonso did ouer-runne the territories of Toledo,
whereas Hiaja Alcadurbile the King kept himselfe strong, continuing notwithstanding
in his filthie and dishonest life, and in his cruelties, whereby he made himselfe odious
to all his subiects, as well of his sect, as Christians Musarabes; so as they told him plainly,
that if he tooke no order for the necessities which prest them, they would prouide
for themselues. This mad-man made no account of all these things: wherefore the Musarabes
did solicit D. Alphonso, more then before, to approach neere the Towne, and to
beseege it close.

This seege seemed exceeding difficult, as well for the greatnesse of the cittie, which
was better peopled then any one in Spaine, as also for the naturall strength of the situation,
and the rampars and fortifications, made about it by art. So as to attempt a thing
of so great labour and such consequence, D. Alphonso drew out of his countries all that
were fit to beare armies, and not content therewith, he had the forces of all his other
neighbour-friends, and allies of Spaine, namely, of D. Sancho Ramires, king of Nauarre
and Arragon,D. Sancho king of Arragon at the se^ge of Toledo as vassall to him of Castile. who was there as his vassall, for the Realme of Nauarre, and besides
there came vnto him many Noblemen of France, Germany, and Italy, mooued
with religion, and hoping to winne Paradise, in helping to subdue so great a fort, held
by the Mahumetists in Spaine.
Thus this great citty was beseeged and battered with all violence, according to the
manner of those times, on the side of Vega: there were seene many valiant exploites
of armes on either side; the Moores making diuers furious sallyes vpon the Christians,
seconded oftentimes by troupes of strange Moores which arriued on the sudden, and
greatly employed themselues for the preseruation of that cittie, knowing that the losse
thereof would be the ruine of the Moores estate in Spain. On the other side the Christians
of diuers nations there assembled, mooued with diuers passions; some with religion,
some with desire to winne honor, some with an inueterate hatred against the
Moores, but most part fighting resolutely for spoyle, forgetting nothing which art,
iudgement, and valour do giue to resolute men. Opinions are diuers touching the
length of this seege, it is most certaine that the spoyling of all that countrie continued
some yeares, which the Christian armies did continually ouer-runne, hindring the tillage,
and cutting off the victuals which came from other places: but being once streight
ly beseeged,Toledo yeelded to king D. Alphonso the 6. the warre continued not many weekes: for the beseeged wanting victualles,
and pressed with hunger, without hope of any succors, by reason of the great forces
which did beseege them, they yeelded vnto the King D. Alphonso, vpon these conditions:
1 That he should repaire the ruines of the castell,The conditions ports and bridges of the cittie,
with the Kings gardens which are vpon the riuer of Tayo, and neare vnto the cittie.
2 That king Hiaya Alcadurbile might retire freely into the citty of Valencia, or
where he pleased, and that king D. Alphonso should aide him to recouer it: and that hee
might conduct with him what number of Moores he pleased.
3 The Moores which would remaine in Toledo, should be maintained in the same
priuiledges, exemptions and liberties, that they were vnder their Kings Moores, and
not be charged with taxes and impositions, more then of custome.
4 That the great Mesquite of the cittie of Toledo, which at this present is the principall
church, should remaine for the sayd Moores.
These conditions granted and sworne by the king D. Alphonso, hee entred the cittie
in great triumph, the 25. of May, 1083.An. 1083. the tenth yeare of his raigne, which they accounted
1121. of the Aera of Caesar, and of the foundation of the sayd cittie, as some
will haue it, 1673.
The taking of this great and mightie cittie,Antiquity of Toledo. did generally amaze all the petty Kings
of the Moores in Spaine, and did so animate the Christians, as they had euer after
great aduantages. Their ambitious discord was the cause of their declining, hauing estranged
them from the Miralmumins of Africke, and then banded them among themselues.
So that as many townes and forts as were held by the Moores, so many pettie
Kings were there of them in Spaine. At this time their estate had the greatest checke,
that euer it had since they entred: and it did not onely augment the lands and Seigneuries
of the king D. Alphonso, but it also wonne him great honor and reputation, as well
is Spaine, as with all other nations, Christians, and Mahumetists. Here the Spanish
authors faile not to relate an apparition of Saint Isidore,Apparition of S. Isidore. vnto D. Cebrian Bishop of
Leon, saying, That the king beeing tyred with the tediousnesse and difficultie of this
seege, and almost out of hope to take the cittie: this bishop was aduertised, that within
fifteene dayes, the king D. Alphonso should enter a conqueror, as it fell out: notwithstanding
the same authors find it strange, how the king (beeing assured by this reuelation)

would grant those articles aboue-mentioned to the Moores, especially to leaue
the great Mosquee for the exercise of their superstition. By the conquest of this great
cittie,Townes yelded to D. Alphonso. there came into the King of Castiles power, without any resistance; the townes
of Magueda, Escalona, Illescas, Canales, Olmos, Talauera, Coria Consuegra, Mora,
Buytrago, Hita, Medina Celi, Atienca, Berlanga, Guadalajara; and by this meanes
were also assured the townes of Salamanca, Auila, Segobia, Osma, Sepulueda, Coca,
Cuellar, Roa and Olmedo, the cittie of Toledo seruing as a rampar and fort, to all that
lies betwixt it, Atienca, and Medina Celi, and by consequence to Palenca, Coria, and
citty Roderigues: so as all that was within that circuit began to bee repaired and re-edified,
the inhabitants beeing freed from their great feare of the Moores.
The first worke which the king D. Alphonso did after the taking of Toledo,Gouernor put into Toledo. was to repayre
the castell, forts, and bridges, giuing the gouernement thereof to Cid Ruis Diaz,
with a garrison of a thousand Gentlemen Castillans. The house and family of them of
Toledo, which is famous in Spaine, is deriued from a Grecian knight, called Peter Paleologue,
who came to serue D. Alphonso, at the seege of this city:Family of Toledo in Castill. Primacie restored to Toledo. but there are apparent
arguments, that the name of the family of Toledo is more ancient: for there is a
^ombe to be seene in the royall Monasterie of Ogna, of a knight called D. Gutiere Rode.
rigues of Toledo, who had beene Chamberlaine to D. Sancho Earle of Castile, who
died in the yeare 990. of this D. Peter, they say, issued a sonne called D. Illian Peres, of
him D. Peter Illian; of D. Peter, D. Esteuan Illian, whose image is to be seene on horsbacke
in the church of that cittie. Don Esteuan begat Don I^an Esteuanez, from whom
issued Don Goncalo Iaime of Toledo, who lyes buried in Saint Romaines church, built
in the highest part of the cittie, by D. Esteuan Illian. D. Vrraca, the King D. Alphonsos
sister beeing deceased this yeare 1083. Zamora whereof she was Ladie, was re-united
to the crowne of Castile.
As king D. Alphonso, desired nothing more, then to order things belonging to religion,Riches of the church of Toledo.
and the seruice of God: in a great assembly of Noblemen and Prelates, made to
that end, restored the Primacie and Archiepiscopall seate of Spaine, to the church
of Toledo, as it had beene in the time of the Kings of the Gothes: and there was chosen
for Archbishop, a reuerent religious man, of the Order of S. Bennet called Friar Bernard,
a French-man borne, who had beene sent some yeares before into Spaine, by Hugo
Abbot of Clugny, at the request of D. Alphonso, for the reformation of the Monasterie
of Sahagun, which at that time was the chiefe of all the Monasteries of Spaine:
this Friar Bernard was found so sufficient for his learning and integritie of life, as he was
held worthy to be preferred before all the Bishops and Abbots of the countrie, to the
primacie of Spaine; which sea beginning by this King D. Alphonso, was so inriched by
all the kings and chiefe Noble-men of Spaine, as besides the primacie and head Chancerie
of Castile which it hath gotten, we may now say, that next vnto the Pope, hee is
the richest Prelate in Christendome.Debate for the primacie of Spaine. Since that time the church of Toledo hath beene
in great credit and authoritie among all those of Europe, and is serued with an incredible
number of Clerkes: for besides the Archbishop, 14. dignities, 40. Chanoins with
Prebends, and 50. Portionists, and other extraordinarie Chanoins, there are so many
Priests, Chaplaines, Clerkes, Chantres, and other Officers that haue fee, as they exceed
600. b^eing very rich moreouer in Iewels and plate. The first Arch-bishop of Toledo
is called Eugen^us the Martyr; from whom to Frian Bartholomew Carranca of Miranda,
who was in our time, they number 76. The Archbishops of Tarragone and Braga,
contend with him of Toledo for the primacie, neither will the Archbishops of S. Iaqu^s
and Sarragossa, acknowledge him for primate; which quarrell I leaue vnto the^ selues.
To returne to our Historie,Moores. after that king Hiaja Alcadurbile had lost Toledo, he went
into the territorie of Valencia, the which was held by Abubacar, terming himselfe king
of that place, being but Conernor some yeares before, vnder the kings of Toledo. This
Abubacar was discreet and wise, and had gouerned that towne vp^ightly many yeares:
who to assure his vsurped estate, had giuen his daughter in mariage to Amet Aben-Hut
king of Sarragossa, successor to Zuleima. About the taking of Toledo or soone after, he
died, leauing two of his sons for successors; who fell to so great discord, and by reason of

them, the people, as Abo^ca Aben-Lope Captaine of the fort, fore-seeing the ruine of
these two young Princes, and fearing that these diuisions would make them fall into the
hands of the kings of Castile, was readie to abandon the place, and to retire to Moruiedro,
and other lands in that quarter,Seditions and trecheries among the Moores of Spaine. which were his: but beeing better aduised by a Secretarie
a Moore, called Mahomad Aben-Hay, hee stayed still to see what would bee the
end of these factions of Valencia: some were of opinion rather then to yeeld vnto their
adue^saries, to giue themselues vnto the king of Sarragossa; others to him that had
beene king of Toledo, to whose father Almenon had beene subiect. These troubles
made work for Hiaja Alcadurbile, who lost neither time nor oportunitie, but came before
Valencia with such Mores as he could keep together, with whom soone after those
ioyned which king D. Alphonso sent him, according to the treatie, vnder the conduct
of Alua^o Ianes Minaya. Being thus camped, and rather solliciting the towne by good
words and promises, then attempting it by armes, in the end they were receiued, and
King Hiaja acknowledged for their lawfull Prince, to whom Aboec Aben-Lope, the
captaine of the Fort, yeelded vp the keyes, and purchasing by that present the Kings fauour,
and assured his estate and life for king Hiaja hated him, for that he had beene alwaies
of the faction of Abubacar his rebell: notwithstanding knowing him to bee wise,
and a man of good seruice, hauing also performed so good an office, as to yeeld him vp
the fort, he receiued him into grace, and honored him, leauing him in the same charge.
At the same time Hamet Aben Hut, king of Sarragossa died, to whom succeeded Ioseph
Aben-Hut. King Hiaja liued in such continuall distrust, as he would neuer giue leaue to
Aluaro Ianes Minaya and his souldiers to returne home into Castile: for the intertaining
wherof, this king was forced to ouer-charge his subiects with insupportable taxations.
There was a Captaine of the Moores in the towne of Xatiua, called Aben Macor,
who would not present himselfe before King Hiaja, being notwithstanding in all other
things obedient vnto him, but the king not satisfied therewith, would haue him: wherfore
he led an army of Moores and Castillans before Xatiua, and battered it in vaine:
for besides that the beseeged defended themselues valiantly, they called vnto their succours
the king of Denia their neighbor, who seazed vpon the place, and kept it in despite
of king Hiaja, who was forced to retire, hauing lost, by ouer-pressing it, that which
he might haue enioyed with a litle patience.
Whilst that D. Alphonso disposed of the affairs of his new conquest,Nauarre and Ariagon. and that the Mores
more diuided then euer, not able to discerne the miseries which pursued them, continued
their spoiles; and to stir vp new trobles among themselues, D. Sancho Ramires king
of Nauarre and Arragon, being loth to liue idle, and to let slip such good occasions to
inlarge his dominions, and to aduance the Christians power in Spaine. Hee won a battll
of the Moores, nere vnto a place called Pietra Pisada, took from them the towne of
Arguedas, and defeated them in another battell neere to Tudele; and fought with them
the third time about Morella; which incounters fell out happily for the Christians, in
the yeare 1084.An. 1084. And the yere after, seing that he had made great conquests in the champion
countrie, he gaue to his eldest son the realm of Sobrarbre and Ribagorcca, with the
title of King, and a while after the Queene D. Felicia died, who was intetred at S. Iean
de la Pegna.
The estate of Barcelone,Barcelone. after the death of Cont Raymond Berenger the elder, was in
great combustion by the emulation of his two sons D. Berenger Raymond, and D. Raymond
Berenger, called Flaxen head, wherof the eldest held a part of the country of Cattelogne:
but D. Raymond Berenger the yonger commanded the greatest part. So as the
Moores were not molested in their estates by them; but D. Raymond Berenger followed
the partie of the Morish king of Denia, against him of Sarragossa, who enuied the others
estate, as we haue sayd. Yet some hold opinion, that it was D. Raymond Berenger
the elder, their father, who carried armes against the K. of Sarragossa: and that on the
other side, D. Raymond Flaxen head, was his friend and ally. Only. Armingol Earle of Vrgel,
did vertuously make war against the Mores, vppon the frontiers of Cattelogne. D.
Raymond Flaxen head had married a most vertuous Lady, called D. Almodia, daughter
to Robert Guichard duke of Pouillia, by whom hee had D. Raymond Arnould which succeeded
him.

The Spanish Authors shew a great argument of this Ladies holinesse and religion,
for that in her husbands life time, she built the Monasterie of Valde Mary, of the Order
of Saint Benet, in the Vicountie of Cabrera, and another of Saint Daniel, of the same
Order neare vnto Girone, where she professed her selfe, and liued a Nunne, after the
decease of the king,Parricide betwixt the Princes of Cattelogne. her husband: in whose life time, some people of the County of
Cerdagne, reuiued the Arrian heresie; for the preuention where of D. Guillen Iordain,
Earle of that place, was much troubled. The ambition of raigne was such betwixt the
two Earles of Barcelone, as the eldest slue the youngest by treason, watching him as he
went from Ostarlit to Girone: this D. Raymond Flaxen head, hauing raigned onely six
yeares; a religious, mild, courteous, and bountifull Prince, and of a goodly presence,
and therefore lamented of all men. This fratricide seeking to dissemble his treason, did
weep much before the world, but he could not so well disguise his offence, but the truth
was knowne.
Wherefore the Cattelans reiected him, and in the yeare 1082. chose Don
Raymond Arnoould, the son of the deceased, for their Earle, chasing away D. Berenger
Raymond, who thinking by trecherie to take away another mans, lost his own patrimonie:
and beeing poore and dishonored, and moreouer, by a iust iudgement of God, hauing
lost his speech, he died in Ierusalem, whither he went in pilgrimage. During the
infancie of this young Count Raymond Alnoould, some tyrants of Prouence and Languedoc
did inuade the territories of Carcassone, giuing the Earle of Barcelone to vnderstand,
that they wold hold it in fee of him, and do him homage, and restore it vnto him,
when hee should come of age. This Earle Raymond Arnould was a great personage,
as wee shall heare hereafter.
Returning to Toledo,Castile. after that the king D. Alphonso had giuen order for all things
that were necessarie for the gard of that cittie, he returned to Leon. leauing Cid Ru^z
Diaz for Gouernor: and for the ecclesiasticall and ciuill gouernement, Queene Constance
his wife, falsely called by some Beatrix, with the Archbishop D. Bernard and others:
during the kings absence, this Prelate beeing very zealous in his religion, and
discontented that the Moores remaining in Toledo, did enioy the Mosquee maior, a
rare and stately building, among all them of Spaine, layed a plot with the Queene to
depriue them of it, and without any respect to the promise and oath made by the king,
he seazed theron, and forbad the Moores the vse and entrie into this temple, the which
he did consecrate the Cathedrall church the fifth of October, 1086.An. 1086. All this was done
suddenly, and without the kings priuitie: the Queene and Archbishop knowing well,
that it would much displease him, but their hope was, that what had beene done would
not be easily vndone, by reason of the respect the king carried to Prelates, and to the
Christian religion, for the honouring whereof they had vndertaken it, the which succeeded
according to their conceits: for the king beeing returned, and seing that of force
they would make him periured, being somewhat discontented with the Queene and
D. Bernard, in the end he was pacified with such perswasions, that it was an vnworthie
thing, that in an Archiepiscopall cittie, and the first in dignitie in Spaine, that infidels
should enioy the greatest and most stately Temple, there to exercise their impieties
and blasphemies, to the great dishonour of the king, and the name of Christians: and
the griefe of pastors and holy Ministers of the Church. Wherefore it was expedient he
should aduow the fact; the which was not done rashly, but with great zeale, and by diuine
inspiration. Herunto, they say, were added the supplications of the Moores, That
it would please the king to suffer things as they were, and not to discontent the people:
and that for their parts they would willingly exercise their religion in a place of lesse
shew. For the Moores spake an Alfagui of their lawe, whose image is to bee seene cut
in stone, in the great chappell of that church.
The seruice called Gothique of Isidorian,Cothique seruice changed in Spaine. for that Isidorus had brought it in, and afterwards
called Musarabic, for the Christians liuing among the Moores had maintained
it, was in vse, vntill that time as well at Toledo, as in Castile and Leon: but the
King Don Alphonso desiring to shew himselfe in all things an affectionate sonne to the
Romish sea, would haue it changed, and in stead thereof the Gregorian Seruice

receiued, so called of the author Gregory; for which effect hee caused a Bull to be sent
from the Pope then raigning, commanding that the seruice of Rome should be from
thence foorth celebrated in all the Churches of Spaine, as they did in France, by reason
whereof,The Metrapolitane of Langu^doc vnder the Primate of Toledo. it is called by some Spaniards, Gallican. This done, the Archbishop new chosen,
went to Rome, where he entred, when as Vrban the 2. entred this Popedome, and
there tooke his oath, receiued and Archbishops cloake, and was confirmed Primate of
Spaine; and not onely of Spaine, but of Gotique France, as the limits of the Primacie
of Toledo had beene in the time of the king of the Gothes: in witnesse whereof the
Spaniards write, that (to ^hew his rights and prerogatiues) at his returne from Rome,
he called a Councell at Tholousa, where the Archbishop of Narbone did assist, with
other bishops of those countries,Councell at Tholousa. suffragans, and subiect to the Iurisdiction of the Prelates
of Toledo.
During his absence, Richard Abbot of Saint Victor of Marseilles, was Legate in
Spaine (being sent some yeares before by Gregory the 7. Predecessour to Vrban the 2.)
who tooke great paines to bring in the new Gregorian or Romish seruice, and to abolish
the Musarabic: for which consideration, and to put in execution that which had
beene decreed, the Arch-bishop Bernard, at his returne called a nationall Councell at
Toledo, whereas the Clergie, Knights, and people of Toledo, Castile, Leon, Asturia,
Galicia, and Portugall were assembled, or their Deputies in great numbers. D. Bernard
presiding the King beeing present, there grew great controuersies among them,
the Spaniards refusing to leaue their ancient manner, to receiue a new seruice, so as
not able to be satisfied by any allegations and reasons,Controutrsies for Ecclesiasticall matters decided by armes. they came to a furious and brutish
manner of triall, by combate, which was much vsed in those times: there were two
knights brought to field, the one for the king, and others who desired alteration of the
serui^e, the other for the knights and commons, which would keepe the Musarabic: for
these came Iean Ruiz, of the family of Matanza, who vanquished him which fought for
the Romane seruice, whose name is vnknown. Yet the importunitie of the King, queen,
Archbishop,Triall by fire in C^ergie matters. and others of that partie was such, as the businesse was referred to another
kind of triall, which was by fire: wherefore hauing brought two bookes, the one containing
the seruice after the Romane vse; the other, the ancient and Musarbic, they
were both cast into a great fire; whereof the Romane booke leapt presently out (as they
say) and the other lay still, and was nothing burnt.
Wherefore they did coniecture, that either of them was pleasing vnto God:
and for this cause it was ordained, That they should retaine the ancient manner of
seruice in sixe parishes of Toledo, and that in the great Cathedral church and others
the new Gregorian seruice was brought in, and likewise in all the rest of Don Alphonso's
Kingdome, the which was granted more by force, to please the king, and to
obey the Pope, (who confirmed and allowed it,) then for any good will. Yet the Musarabic
Office continued long after, in many Monasteries of Spaine: and in the same
great church of Toledo, euen at this day they sing Masse all after the Musarabic, euery
day in a Chappell called Corpus Domini.
The sixe Parishes of that Cittie, where as this seruice was maintained, had beene
held by the Christians Musarabes, whilest that the Moores did raigne there, which are
Saint Iust, Saint Luke, Saint Antolin, Saint Marke, Saint Eulalia, and Saint Sebastian.
That the Musarabic seruice aunciently vsed were that which they hold at this day, and
that it was not reformed and corrected, I will not doubt: for in matters of Religion, it
is most certaine, that all things haue beene fitted to the time, and to the dispositions of
those which liued from age to age, especially in that which concerned the eccle^iasticall
discipline. The day of the reception of this Romish seruice, is quoted by the Spaniards
the one and twentith of May, in the yeare 1091, at the third hower.
Matters concerning Religion beeing ordered at Toledo,Toledo called the Imperiall city. Don Alphonso gaue many
honourable titles, dignities, and priuiledges to the Cittie, to their great aduantage.
For first of all by reason of his conquest intitling himselfe Emperour of Spaine,
hee would haue Toledo called and denominated the Imperiall and Monarchicke city,
a name which hath remained and continued vnto this day. And to giue the Christians

occasion to come and dwell there, (for the greatest part of the inhabitants were Mores)
he granted rights and priuiledges to the cittizens, as follow, beeing drawne out of the
letters which are in their Registers.
1 First, he ordained for a priuiledge to that ctttie,Priuiledges g^^ted to the c^tty of Toledo. that all controuersies amongst
the citizens should be iudged there, according to the lawes and ordonances written in
the booke called Of Iudges, appointing a Councell of sixe of the most sufficient men
amongst them, to assist the Iudge: all which together should take knowledge of the
peoples causes, exempting the Castilians, who might decline from that seate, and desire
to be sent before their ordinarie Iudges. According to which booke of Iudges, all
the inhabitants of Toledo, and that iurisdiction should be iudged in matters of crime:
expresly exempting the wiues and children of offenders, (not culpable) from the pains,
and fines due for all offences, namely, for high treason, or practises against the citty.
2 That the inhabitants of Toledo might appeale from all other Iudges, and demand
to be sent to the Iustice of Toledo, declaring all decrees against it to be voide.
3 That the Inhabitants of Toledo should not be apprehended, not put in prison for
murther, vnlesse it were wilful, if they put in caution, or that the truth were apparent: and
whereas they could not giue caution, they should not be put in any other prison, then
the Dalfada.
4 All controuersies betwixt Christians and Iewes, or Moores, should be decided by
the Christian lawes, and before a Christian Iudge.
5 Exemptions, granted vnto Church-men seruing God, of the tenth peny in all
their inheritances.
6 Exemption of all taxes granted to souldiers, and to all such as had beene prisoners
amongst the Moores.
7 All inhabitants of Toledo, as well Christians as Musarabes, should equally enioy
all royall grants.
8 The widowes of soldiers deceased, shold enioy the honors, and priuiledges of their
husbands, and the children of their fathers, yea the sons shold haue their arms and horses.
9 The laborers and trimmers of vines should pay vnto the king for all tribute and
seruice, the tenth peny, or portion of their corne and wine, and not bound to any other
charges either in peace or war, except it were to succor the city of Toledo, beeing assailed
by foes, in which case they should be bound to assist it with all their meanes.
10 The like exemptions were granted to the inhabitants of Toledo, for all lands,
which they should hold in any other iurisdiction of the kings of Castile.
11 Liberty granted to the inhabitants of the said citty, to build milles vpon the riuer
of Tajo, against their lands and possessions, and to sell them, exchange them, and
otherwise dispose of them at their pleasures.
12 No Iew nor Moore should haue commandement ouer Christians in the citty
of Toledo.
13 That the citty of Toledo might neuer be alienated from the Crowne, nor giuen
vpon any title whatsouer, to man, woman, or child.
14 No man, that had not his ordinarie residence in the sayd citty, might enioy any
inheritance within the wals thereof; which inhabitants might enter into their lands and
possessions, from whence they had beene chased by the Moores, in such townes and
places as should be recouered from them.
15 The common treasure of the city should be employed, especially, in the building
and reparations of the wals, and the fortifications thereof.
These were the priuiledges granted by the king D. Alphonso the 6. to the city of Toledo,
the which were afterwards confirmed by D. Alphonso the 9. an 101 yeares after: so
as by meanes therof, it was in a short time peopled with Christians, which came thither
from all parts of Spaine, and other countries: and the kings of Spaine haue bin alwaies
very carefull to honor this city. D. Alphonso leauing the city of Toledo in this estate, in
the gard of Cid Ruis Diaz,Gotique chara^^ers abolished in Spaine. he went to Leon, with the Archbish. D. Bernard, where there
was a councell called, in the presence of Reguier the Popes Nuntio; where among other
things it was decreed, that the Scribes and Notaries should no more vse the

ancie^t Gothique characters, inuented (as they say) by Vlfilas their Bishop, otherwise called
Toledains: but those letters which are now vsed in Castile, were at that time not
put in practise. About that time died D. Theresa, the kings sister, wife to the Earle D.
Garcia de Cabra,Marriage of D. Alphonso the 6. king of Castile with a Moore. and soone after Queene Beatrix the 2. wife of D. Alphonso beeing deceased,
he took to wife a Princesse Moore, daughter to Almuncamuz Aben-Amet, ^^ing
of Seuile, called Caida, or Zaida, the which was christened and called Mary. He receiued
for her dourie the townes of Cuenca, Huete, Ocagna, Vcles, Mora, Volera, Consuegra,
Alarcos, Caracuel and other places. By her the king had one son, named D. Sancho, who
died before the father, and the mother liued not long after him.
This alliance caused great familiarity betwixt the king D. Alphonso,Arabians. and the Mores, both
in Spaine and Affrick; the which notwithstanding turned to the Moores ruine, and especially
of his father-in-law Almuncamuz Aben-Amet, K. of Seuile: for to do him a pleasure,
and to satisfie his ambition, and desire to be soueraign Lord ouer all the Moores in
Spaine, King D. Alphonso, who was in great credit with all the Princes and Potentates
that were neighbours to Aben Tefin, who was of the house and family of the Almorau^des;
to ayde and assist his father-in-law in this enterprise, and to send him succours of
Moores and Africans, the which he obtained to the preiudice of them both, as we shall
heare. But it is fit to vnderstand, firsty what these Almorauides were: Wherefore leauing
a little the affaires of Spaine, we will returne to that which we haue handled of the succession
of Mahumet.Mahumets sucacssion. The which (as we haue sayd) being fallen to two of his daughters
Fatima and Zeineb; of Fatima descended the house and family of Aben Alaben; and of
Zeineb, that of Aben Humeja. These two races were in perpetuall dissention for the Soueraigntie
of the Arabians, both in Asia, Affricke, and Europe, whereupon grew many
alterations: so as in the end the Arabians of Affricke being diuided from them of Asia,
the Crowne of Affrick continued in the race of Aben Albecy, for the space of 310. yeres:
but as this nation was neuer faithfull within it selfe, and could not subsi^t without tumult
and treasons: about the year 1068. there rose vp a noble family among them, called
the Almorauides, or Lumptunas, which descended not from Mahumet; the which took
the scepter from the race of Aben Alabecy, and seazed vpon the soueraigntie, and regall
power ouer the Moores in Affricke: 450. yeares after that Mahumet had made himselfe
Lord and Emperour ouer that nation. The first of this race which was chosen and declared
king, and great Miralmumin, was Abu Texifen, to whom Ioseph Aben Tefin aboue-named
his sonne succeeded, who forced the others to quit the Scepter, and transferred
it into his family, where it continued 79. yeares: the second yeare of his raigne,
Ambassadors came vnto him from king D. Alphonso, for the cause aboue-mentioned: so
as within three yeares after,Moores of Affricke drawne into Spaine by D. Alphonso, the 6. king of Castile and Leon. all the Moores of Spaine were vnited to them of Affricke,
as they had beene long before. Ioseph Aben Texifien the Miralmumin, considering,
that if he sent forces into Spaine, it must needes increase the Moores estate and reputation:
he sent a Captaine of great esteeme, called Ali Aben-Axa, his Alguazil maior, or
Lieutenant in the countrie of Maroe, who with a great power of men of this race of the
Almorauides, and other Africans, came and handed in Andalousia, and ioyned with the
king of Seuile: but they stayed not long together; for being growne into some controuersie,
it drew them into sedition and armes: so as their forces being diuided, and ioyning
in battaile in the open field, Almuncam^z Aben-Amet king of Seuille, lost his life;
and this new-come Moore not onely seazed vpon his lands and Segneuties without any
difficulty, but also made all the other Moores of Spain subiect vnto him, saying, that
they had rather keep the Arabians Camels, then the Swine of the Christian Spa^iards.
Ali Aben-Axa was so fortunate in his proceedings,Moores in Spaine vnited vnder Ali Aben-Axa. as he grew exeeding proud, not respecting
his king any more but rebelling openly against him, hee serled the royall seate
at Cordoua, and caused himself to be called Mira^mumin of Spaine: by means whereof
all the treaties of peace which had bin contracted betwixt the Moores and Christians
of Spaine, were then broken: and moreouer, this new king of the Moores, thought to
recouer the countries which had bin held by the Moores, namely those, which D. Alphonso
had had in dow^y with Q. Caida his last wife: so as the king D. Alphonso thinking
to enioy an assured peace, hee found himselfe sodenly ingaged in great and dangerous

warres: for Ali entring into the Realme of Toledo, he spoyled the countrie at his pleasure,
hauing gotten two great victories, and put two mightie armies of D. Alphonsos
to bloudie routes: so as the lands of D. Caidas dowrie, with others, came into his power;
the which was the more easie to effect, for that they were in a maner all inhabited
by Moores. Yet in a third expedition, whereas D. Alphonso went in person with all the
flower of his kingdomes, the conquerors furie was stayed, so as he was forced for feare
(seeing this great preparation made against him) to keepe himselfe within Cordoua,
and to abandon his countrie to the spoile, not daring to defend it, and in the end came
to a composition and treaty of peace with D. Alphonso, by the which he made himselfe
his vassall and tributarie, giuing him rich presents, and great sums of mony, wherewith
the King and his armie beeing inriched, they returned victoriously into Castile. From
thence king D. Alphonso hauing gotten new courage, led his armie to subdue Sarragossa,
and did so presse it, as the Inhabitants did offer to hold it in fee of him, and to do
him homage, the which he refused, demanding the city; but whilest he was busie at this
enterprise, behold there arriues in Spaine a great cloude of African Moores, which
strucke a greater terror in Spaine then had beene in many ages. It was Ioseph Aben Tefin
the Miralmumin, who incensed at the trecherie of Ali, was come out of Africke
with a greater armie of Moores, then had bin seene in long time, to take reuenge of his
trecherie.
16 The presence of this king stayed the seege of Sarragossa,Ioseph Aben Tefin king of Meroc, subdues all the Moores in Staine vnder his Empire brake the accord made
betwixt Alphonso and Ali, and was the cause of many great alterations. Hee beseeged
and forced Ali in the city of Seuile, and as a traytour, cut off his head: he seazed vppon
Cordo^a, in the which was a sonne of Abencamus, and in a short time hee brought all
Andalousia vnder his obedience, and in a manner all the Noblemen and townes which
the Moores held in Spaine: he drew vnto his seruice some Earles and Noblemen Christians,An. 1089.
with many souldiers; whome gaine, or their disordered passions, commanded
more then religion. One of these Earles was called. D. Ordognes de Lara: So the Mores
of Spaine ioyned with them of Africke, vnder one Miralmumin in the yeare, 1089. hauing
beene diuided 334. yeares, they of Affricke beeing subiect to the race of Aben-Al^becy,
vnto this king, and these of Spaine obeying the family of Aben Hum ^ja from Abderramen
the first. This king stayed some time in Spaine, to dispose of his new conquests,
not respecting any more the friendship of king D. Alphonso, who first had inuited
him to come into Spaine, and then he returned into Affricke, where hee had setled
his imperiall seate at Maroc or Marrox. Then began there a difficult war betwixt these
two Potentates in Spaine^ by reason whereof King D. Alphonso sought the friendship
and succors of other Christian Princes: vpon which occasion there came many ^aliant
Knights into Spaine, to winne honor by armes, and mooued also with zeale of religien;
among the which were three Princes, where of mention hath beene made in the beginning
of this raigne: that is, Raymond son to William, brother to the Earle of Bourgongne:
Henry of Lorraine or of Besancon, and his vnkle or cousin Raymond of Tholousa,
and of S. Giles: with these and other braue souldiers, as well Spaniards, as of other
nations, D. Alphonso made head against this Arabian king: so as he stopt his course, and
ouer-run his country newly conquered, taking great spoiles, and carrying away many
prisoners, without any opposition.
17 At that time D. Alphonso (for the good seruices hee had receiued from these
three personages,Portugall. and to bind them the more to defend the Christians estate in Spaine)
gaue them his daughters in marriage: to Henry of Lorraine, whom some call Earle of
Limbourg, D. Theresa his bastard, to whom bearing a priuate affection, hee gaue the
countrie of Portugall,Henry of Lorraine first erle of Portugal. which he had conquered from the Moores, with the hereditarie
title of an Earle, for him and his heires lawfully begotten, and withall making him a
promise to adde vnto his Seigneuries whatsoeuer he should conquer from the Moores
in those parts,Portugal held in fee of the Crown of Leon with the same right of hereditarie succession. These goodly gifts did the
king D. Alphonso bestow vppon D. Henry, vpon condition, that they should acknowledge
the kings of Leon for their Soueraigne Lords, and hold them in fee of them, do
them homage, and present themselues at the kings court at Leon, whensoeuer they

should call there vassals, and serue them against their enemies: Moreouer they should
furnish three hundred horse, with some other duties. This was the beginning of the
Siegneury of Portugal, and of the royall posterity of the possessors of that country. To
Raymond Earle of Tolouse and Saint Gyles, King D. Alphonso gaue D. Eluira an other
of his bastards, and to Cont Raymond of Bourgongne D. Vrraca his lawfull daughter,
with the Gouernment of Galicia, and the title of an Earl, which was the ordinary title of
great dignities in Spaine, in those times.
D. Sancho Ramires,Nauarre and Arragon. King of Nauarre and Arragon, did all hee could to anoy the
Moores, vpon his borders: from whom hee tooke about the yeere of our Lord 1089.
the towne of Montcon, yet with great difficulty, by reason of the fort, and the obstinate
defence of the garrison, The same yeere the preuiledges of Nobility, with all exemptions,
were confirmed to them of the valley of Roncal, as a testimony that they had
beene alwaies valiant and faithfull to their Kings.
In the yeere 1091. hee forced Abderramen the Moore, King of Huesca, to pay him
tribut:An. 1091. he sent succors to his cousin D. Alphonso of Castille, in the warre which hee
made vpon the marches of Toledo; and hauing a deseigne to besiege Sarragossa in
time, hee beganne a fort neere to the riuer of Ebro, fiue leagues from Sarragosse, the
which he called Castellar;F^rt of Castillar buill. he wonne afterwards from the Moores, Olalla, Almenara
and Naual, and he peopled Luna; from whence is descended the family of Luna: and
to coope vp the King of Huesca, hee fortefied the castles of Marcuello, Loarre and
Alguecar, vpon the Marches of Sobrarbre, and subiected all that is betwixt it and
Montarragon, within a league of Huesca: wherefore King Abderramen seeing himselfe
restrained daily more and more, hee had recourse vnto D. Alphonso King of Castille,
offring to pay him a greater tribute, then he did to him of Nauarre, if hee would
take him into his protection: whereunto D. Alphonso gaue eare, beeing glad to make
himselfe great by what meanes soeuer, of such power is ambition in the hearts of men,
who sparing not the King D. Sancho his cousin, he had wrested from him the Siegneury
of Guipulcoa, which had euer beene vnited to the crowne of Nauarre, and had made
Earle and Gouernor, in his name, D. Lopes Dias of Haro, Lord of Biscay. This manner
of proceeding did much displease D. Sancho Ramires, who for this cause hauing
sent some troupes of soldiers, to the fronters of Alaua, to entertaine the Castillans, he
went to the siege of Huesca, being resolued to take it at what price soeuer: hee was accompanied
by his sonnes D. Pedro, King of Sobrarbre, and D. Alphonso, with the forces
of Nauatre and Arragon: but as he proceeded in this seege, with to great vehemency,
it happened that going to vew the weakest places, with his captaines, he was shot with
a Moorish arrow vnder the arme hole, as he lifted vp his arme,D. Sancho Ramires King of Arragon slaine at the si^ge of H^esca. to shew some one that
was neere him, a place where he thought fit to make his battery. The blow was mortall,
the which D. Sancho feeling he retired to his tent, dissembling his paine as much as
hee could: being there, hee caused D. Pedro and D. Alphonso his children to sweare, not
to depart from the siege, vntill they had taken the towne, and soone after hee died, as
they drew the arrowe out of the wound. Hee was a valiant Prince, and had happely
inlarged his dominions by conquests against the Moores, but his neighbors Christians
were not very faithfull, euen D. Alphonso* King of Castille. Hee loued iustice and
Gouernment: the towne of Estella was begunne by him, the which at this day is one
of the three cities of Nauarre, and the second in dignity. He affected religion much,
according to the practise of that age, for besides many donations made by him to
churches and monasteries, and the re-edyfying of them that were ruined, hee made D.
Ramir his youngest sonne a religious man of the order of Saint Benet, in the monastery
of Saint Ponce of Tomerres. D. Pedro his eldest sonne succeeded him, in the realme of
Nauarre and Arragon, in the yeere of our Lord 1094. about this time many monasteries
of France, obtained exemption from the iurisdiction of Bishops, the Monkes beting
desirous to enioy greater liberty, and their Abbors to adorne themselues with crosses
and miters like Bishops.
About that time D. Therefa,An. 1094. Portugal. eountesse of Portugal, had a sonne by Henry of Lorraine,
or of Besancon at a place called Guymaranes his name was D. Alphonso, as the

King his grand-father by the mothers side, and by surname Henriques, who was first
King of Portugal, and that stemme of all the Kings which haue held that Kingdome vnto
this day, whose birth is strangly written by the Spanish authors, saying that hee had
his feete ioyned together behinde, the which were set at liberty the fift yeere of his
age, by, the praiers and vowes of his parents: in remembrance whereof, Cont
Henry and his wife finished a church, begunne long before at Carquere, neere vnto
the riuer of Duero, dedicated vnto the Virgin Mary, the which at this day is a receptacle
for lesuites, within two leagues of Lamego. The first lands which lie betwixt Duero
and Minio, Porto, Braga and Guymaranes, and then Coimbra, Visco and Lamego,
with the iurisdiction of Vera. It is to be presumed that he was a wise and valiant Knight,
and of a great house, seeing that D. Alphonso gaue him his daughter in marriage, with
so great a dowry, and that hee did so confidently commit vnto him the fronter of his
realmes on that side. There is nothing written certaine of his father and mother, but
that being of the house of the Dukes of Lorraine, and Nephew to the Earls of Tolouse,
we may hold him to be descended from the house of France, and moreouer nobly allied
to the families of Germany. Besides the Prince D. Alphonso Henriques, hee had two
daughters by D. Theresa his wife: D. Theresa Henriques, who was married to D. Fernand
Paez, of Transtamara, and D. Sancha Henriques, who maried D. Fernand Mendes.
To returne to the King D. Alphonso,Moores. and to this new warre which he had against the
forces of Affrike, beeing ioyned vnto the Moores of Spaine, the which hee himselfe had
drawne vpon him, D. Roderigo Diaz de Binar, called Cid, hauing the gard of Toledo, and
of al that fronter, finding himselfe, somewhat eased, by the departure of King Ioseph Aben-Tefin,
who was returned into Affrike, he propounded to attempt Sarragosse, from
the seege whereof D. Alphonso had beene diuerted, by the comming of the Moores Almoranides.
He chose a fit occasion, for the Sarragossans and their King Ioseph Aben-Hut,
being terrified with the forts which the King of Nauarre had built about them,Cid Ruis Dliax receiued into Sarragosse as Protector. by the
which they did see themselues daily restrained and anoied, they did willingly receiue Cid,
as their protector. King Aben-Hut was an enemy to the King of Valencia, and so was
the King of Denia, either of them seeking to seize vpon his Estate: but Cid carried himselfe
so wisely, as hee preserued the realm for King Hiaja, who was a friend to the King
of Castille his Lord, hee repulst the King of Denia, and forced the Earle of Parcelone
(who at the perswasion of the King of Sarragosse, had beseeged Valence) to retire; notwithstanding
the Earl hauing receiued great somes of money from the King of Denia,
to support him against Cid, continuing to forrage and spoile the country of Valence,
he was vanquished by Cid in an incou^ter, to whom afterwards he became a great friend,
as we wil shew: and the happinesse of this captaine was such, as the King of Denia beeing
dead at the same time, his son and successor, did so honour his vertue and wisdome, as
he made himselfe his vassal, and was so beloued of him, as hauing reconciled him with
King Hiaja, he wrought so; as he conuersed familiary with him, and in so great fauor, as
he gouerned both the King and the Estate of Valence, as if himself had bin Lord. Aben-Hut
King of Sarragosse died also about that time, leauing one son called Almizaron,
heire of his Kingdome, at whose aduancement, the Estate beeing somewhat troubled,
Cid was intreated to come to Sarragosse, the which he did. In the meane time there fell
out great garboiles in the Court of Valence, by the enuy and emulation of two Moores
whereof the one was a captaine vnder Cid, called Aben-Alfaras, and the other a certaine
prouost called Aben-laf. This Prouost was so transported with hatred, as hee called the
Almoraui^^s, and by their means made himself Master of the town, forcing King Hiaja to
flie, whom he pursued, hauing intelligence that hee had carried away many rich Iewels,
tooke him, and flue him miserably, giuing him a vilde and vnworthy sepulcher. Such was
the end of Hiaja King of Valence, who had raigned the last of the Moores at Toledo. Aben
laf hauing by this means gotten so goodly an estate, kept a great ga^d about him,
as such doe commonly as will rule by ^^rany, beeing in the meane time vnder the soueraignty
of the Almorauides: but he did not long enioy the fruits of his wickednesse, for
Cid being aduertised of this base treason, parted from Sarragosse, with such forces as he
had, and came before Valence, to see if the hatred of the tyrant would moue the inhabitants
to reuolt.

There came many Noblemen Mootes of the country thether to him, among which
were Aboeca, Abeni-Lopes, and Aben Racin, who ioyned with him, mooued thereunto by
his vertue and valour: then was the city fiercely assaulted, so as the inhabitants, and their
commander Aben Iaf, receiuing no succors from the Almorauides, as they attended,
beeing vnwilling to giue eare to the secret practises of the King of Sarragosse, who
perswaded them vnder hand to giue themselues vnto him, the which was well knowne
to Cid, whose vigilancy was great, they were forced to yeeld, vpon condition, that the
garrison of Almorauides should bee thrust out, and that Aben Iaf should hold the
towne of Valencia of Cid, and should pay him tribute: yet could not the Valentians
agree well with Aben Iaf, the murtherer of their King, but raysing daylie new troubles
and seditions against him, hee fortefied himselfe in a great quarter of the towne, and
callad Cid, giuing him entrance on that side. Whereat the Valentians beeing much
mooued they fell to open rebellion, and intrenching on their side, they put themselues
vertuously in defence, and called backe the Almorauides to their succors; but the city
beeing beseeged of all sides by Cids army, and all the passages stopped, they could not
enter into the towne, but returned without fighting: wherefore the beseeged were forced
to subiect themselues vnder the obedience of Aben Iaf: who shewing himselfe
trecherous, and breaking his promise with Cid, hee gaue him occasion soone after to
teturne to Valencia,Valence taken by Cid Ruis Diaz. and to subdue it for himselfe, the which hee did by a seege of ten
monthes, reducing the towne, and the inhabitants to such extremity, for want of victuals,
and by continual assaults, as they yeelded to his mercy, hauing all the places and
forts already in his deuotion. Beeing maister of the city, hee put Aben Iaf to death by
iustice, and sent a way the Moores which were suspect vnto him, the which soone after
brought a great army of Almorauides out of Andalousia, and other countries which
they held in Spaine, against Cid, and his new conquests: but hee repulst them valiantly,
and so setled himselfe, as during his life, it returned out vnder the Moores subiection:
these things were effected by Cid Ruis Diaz of Biuar, after the returne into Affrike
of King Ioseph Aben Tefin, the chiefe of the family of the Almorauides Arabians.
About the yeere of our Lord 1096.An. 1096. beganne that famous expedition of Christian
Princes to the holy Land,Expedition in^^ Syr^a, or the Holy Warre. decreed by Pope Vrbain the second, at the councell of Clermont;
in the which there went infinit numbers out of France, England, Italy and Germany,
vnder the conduct of diuers Princes and Noblemen. Few made this voyage
out of Spaine, by reason of the warres, which they had against the Affrican Moores,
by whom they were greatly anoyed: Onely D. Raymond Earle of Tolouse and Saint
Gyles, ioyned in these Leuant warres leading with him some small number of Spanish
Knights, and was followed by D. Eluira his wife, who was brought in bed, in the
East countries of a sonne, who was baptized in the water of Iordain, and for
that cause was named Alphonso Iordain. D. Bernard Archbishop of Toledo, beeing
desirous to goe, was crost, and went into the East, recommending his charge
to certaine regular Chanoins of Saint Augustine, who after his departure chose an
other Archbishop, whereof D. Bernard aduertised, beeing not yet gone out of Spaine,
hee returned sodainely, and passing by the Monastery of Sahagun, he tooke with him
certaine Monkes, with the which he went to Toledo, where hee punished the Chapter
for their inconstancy, deposed the new Archbishop, and placed the Monkes of the Order
of Saint Benet in his church, the which continued there many yeeres.
This done, beeing desirous to see the world, hee continued his course and came to
Rome, to receiue the Holy fathers blessing, meaning to proceed in his voiage; but
they say the Pope would not suffer him, but fent him backe into Spaine, knowing him
to be fit for the affaires of the Romish Catholike church^ so D. Bernara returned, beeing
absolued of his vow.
He past through France,Prelats of the French nation giuen to the Churches in Spain^. from whence hee carried with him many men of fame, amongst
others one named Girard, borne at Moysi, whom hee made Chantre of his
church, afterwards he was Archbishop of Braga, and canonized for a Saint: one Peter
borne in Berry, whom he made Arch-deacon, and was afterwards Bishop of Osma, put
also in the numbers of Saints: Bernard of Agen the second Chantre, and after Bishop

of Siguenca and in the end Bishop of Saint Iaques: Peter also of Agen, second Arch-deacon
of Toledo, and since bishop of Segobia: Raymond of Agen, who succeeded in
the Bishoprike of Ofina, and in the end to the same D. Bernard in his dignity of Toledo:
an other Peter who was Bishop of Palence, and Ierosme of Perigueux, whom hee
made Bishop of Valencia, arriuing in that city soone after that D. Roderigo Diaz de Bi^ar
had conquered it; to whom he was an assistant to order clergy matters. Hee carried
with him also one Bernard, who was bishop of Zamora: and besides a Limosin
called Bourdin, who was Arch-deacon of Toledo, and afterwards Bishop of Coimbra,
and successiuely Arch-bishop of Braga: but this Bourdin became a Iudas to the church
of Rome, and would haue made himselfe Pope, against Calixtus the second, which caused
a great scisme.
All this seed the Archbishop of Toledo brought out of France into Spaine, at his
returne from Rome, and furnished Spaine with these Prelats, in recompence of the vow
which he did not performe to goe to the holy war: and moreouer he re-built churches
and other apparent places in the towne of Tarragone, with the money which was prepared
for his voiage, and there established, Berenger Archbishop, hauing beene Bishop
of Vi^d Ausone, leauing the temporalty of that towne to Raymond Arnould Earle of
Barcelone.
This Prince was left young at the death of his father,Barcelone. who had beene cruelly murthered
by his owne brother, desirous to rule alone in Cattelogne. He was much troubled
with diuisions and factions betwixt the Noblemen of the country, and was spoiled
of Carcassone and other Lands which he had in France, by tirants, as it happens often
during the minority of the Prince or Lord. His mother the Contesse Almodia, a widow,
gaue ouer^al gouernment, and professed herselfe a Nunne in the conuent of Saint
Daniel of Girone: so as hee remained in the hands of Armingol Earle of V^gel, the
Earle of Cerdagne, and some other of his bloud, who beeing imploied against the
Moores, got for themfelues, and did not much attend the good of their pupil, yet did
he grow both in vertue and valour. Cont Armingol died in the yeere of our Lord
1092. and D. Guillen Iordain of Cerdagne, went to the warre; of Syria with Godefrey of
Bouillon, where beeing dead and soone after his brother D. Bernard Guillen his successor,
leauing no heires of their bodie, the Earle D. Raymond Arnould, as neerest allied
did inherit the Earled^me,God the Trotector of pupils. whom God did so fauour, as the Barnard of Aton who had
vsurped Ca^cassone, was growne so hatefull to them of the country, as they chased
him away, and deliuered the towne to D. Raymond Arnould their naturall Lord. So he
not onely recouered that which they had taken from him, but also augmented his Estates
and Siegneuries with the towne of Tarragone, and the county of Cordagne. We
haue sayd before, that he was in a certaine incounter against Cid Ruis Diaz, during the
warres betwixt Valencia and Denia, and that hee was repulsed and vanquished by hi^:
but became afterwards good friends, after that Cid had taken Valencia about the yeere
of our Lord 1096.
To returne to which conquest,Castille. we will say that Cid did presently send to King D. Alphonso
his Lord, a hundred goodly horses richly furnished, with other great presents,
who being in Palenza, receiued them with great contentment. He sent other presents
to D. Ximena his wife, whom with his two daughters, D. Eluira, and D. Sol, he caused to
come to Valencia with the leaue of King D. Alphonso. The Almorauides of Affrike
staied not long before they past the seas, to defend their new conquest in Spaine, and
came into the country of Valencia with a great power, but they were repulsed by Cid
with great losse and dishonour; of the spoiles of which victories Cid sent two hundred
horses vnto his King, richly furnished, and at euery saddle did hang a sword of great
value. The King D. Alphonso was at that time at Vailledolit in Castille, who receiued
this present gratiously:Marriage of the daughters of Cid Ruis Diae. There beganne the treaty of marriage for the daughters of
Cid, with D. Diego and D. Fernand Goncales, sonnes to D. Goncala Lord of Cartion, for
the effecting whereof, the King, Cid and the parties came to Requegna, whether the
King brought the two young Noblemen, to whom Cid promised his daughters; and
afterwards the marriages were celebrated at Valencia with great pompe. But in the

end of this feast there happened an accident, which did much trouble these two houses,
so inconstant and short are humaine pleasures, and the councels and iudgements of
God inscrutable. There was a Lyon bred vp in Cids house, the which by the negligence
of the Gouernor, or otherwise, getting loose, came into the hall, where there
was a great assembly of Noblemen and Ladies, with the married coples, and strooke a
great terror among them, where as aboue all others the two Goncales, newly married
shewed themselues faint, hearted cowards, whereat they were ashamed, seeing themselues
lesse esteemed both by their father in law, and by the other knights there present.Cowardlinesse of Cids sonnes in law.
From that time they conceiued a mortal hatred against Cid, thinking that this Lyon
had ^eene let loose by his commandment, to try them and feare them, so as they resolued
to be reuenged vpon the first occasion. This was no vaine argument of their basenesse,
seeing a Lyon vpon the sodaine (although that an vnexpected accident, might amaze
the most hardy, being an ordinary thing in nature to be moued at sodaine things)
for soone after they gaue a more ample testimony of their want of courage, in a battaile
against the Moores, who were come against Valencia, where they carried themselues
basely, yet by the wisdome and valour of Cid these Infidels were vanquished. After
al this, these two base Knights would carry their wiues home to their houses, but hauing
their hearts full of poison, and fearing they should not be able to hurt their father
in law, they reuenged themselues in humainly vpon their innocent wiues, and intreated
them so il before they came to Carrion, as they left them for dead vpon the way, at a
place called Robledos de Corpes, neere to Berlanga, where these poore Ladies beeing
cherished by the good people of the country, they had meanes to aduertise Cid their
father of their misery* The messenger whom they sent, was incountred by Cids men,
going to the King D. Alphonso with foure score horses, and other rich presents, of the
spoiles of the last victory obtained against the Moores. Complaint was made by them
vnto the King, of this villanous act committed by the sonnes of the Lord of Carrion against
their wiues: wherevpon the King assembled the Noblemen and Knights of the
country of Toledo, and kept a court (whereas Cid appeered, hauing retired his daughters
to Valencia) and Iudges were appointed to doe right vnto the parties,Reparation of ^imes by combate. vpon so
great a controuersie, among the which D. Raymond of Bourgongne, the Kings sonne in
law was one: Their sentence was that their question should bee decided by armes, betwixt
Knights chosen of either part: such was the Iustice in those daies among Nobles,
a custome which is not lost amongst Christians at this day. The campe where they
should fight was chosen in the towne of Carrion, whereas there appered Pedro Bermudes,
Martin Antolines and Nugno Gustos, Knights for Cid, who vanquished, the two
sonnes of Carrion, with their vncle a partifa of their villany, called Suero Goncales who
were proclaimed infamous and traitors, and degraded of al honor and title of nobility.
These two Ladies were afterwards happely married into the house of Nauarre, that is
D. Eluira to D. Ramires, sonne to the King D. Sancho Garcia; and D. Sol, to the sonne of
D. Pedro, then raigning in Nauarre and Arragon, called also D. Pedro, who died before
his father. After these last marriages, Cid growne old, did nothing that was memorable.
He setled the Estate of Valencia as well as he could, with the aide of the Princes of Nauarre
and Arragon his allyes. And the better to assure it, he chased away diuers families
of the Moores, which were suspected vnto him. A captaine of the Moores, who
was also a Doctor of the law of Mahumet,Alfara^i a great Doctor of the Mahumetists b^ptized. called Alfaraxi, a great friend to Cid, tooke
vpon him the Christian religion, being held a man of great valour and Iudgement. The
authors place the death of Cid Ruis Dias of Biuar in the yeere 1098. the towne of Valencia
beeing anoyed by the Moores, which held their campe about it: yet notwithstanding
they say that the widow acco^panied with D. Ierosme the Bishop, went out of
the towne, conducting her husbands body, to bury it at Saint Pedro de Cerdegna, where
it was laied:Death of Cid Ruis of Biuar. the Monkes of that place at this day shew many iewells and other things
which they say had beene giuen by that great captaine to their Monastery. After his
death, the Christians which were at Valencia fearing they should not bee able to resist
the forces of the Moores Almorauides, abandoned the towne, which came into the
In^idels power againe, and so continued 140. yeeres.



D. Pedro the first of that name, the seuenteenth
King of Nauarre, and the third of Arragon.
19. IN the meane time by the decease of D. Sancho Ramires,Nauarre and Arragon. the crowne of Nauarre
and Arragon was come to D. Pedro the first of that name in the yeere 1094. who
had raigned nine yeeres in Sobrarbre and Ribagorca. At his comming hee swore to
maintaine the lawes and preuiledges of the country, and intitled himselfe King of Pampelone
and Arragon. He continued the ^eege of Huesca, the which was long and difficult,
by reason of the strength of the place, and the resistance of the Inhabitants, assisted
by Almocaben King of Sarragosse and other Moores, and also by some Christians, of
which number were D. Garcia Earle of Cabra, and D. Goncales, vassals to the King of
Castille.A great defeat of Moores, and the taking of Hues^^. These beeing come to succor Huesca with a mighty army, in the yeere 1096.
thinking to raise the seege, had a battane in the fields called Alcoraz, with the Nauarrois
and Ar^agonois, who wonne it, killing aboue 30000. Moores, the rest were wholy
put to rout and flight, so as the towne despayring of al succors, yeelded to D. Pedro King
of Nauarre and Arragon. Here they forge the ancient armes of Arragon, vpon a vision
which the Spanish writers say had appeered to many Arragonois during the combat:
that is, Saint George on horse-backe with a shield of steele and a crosse gueules,
fighting for the Christians: and that after the defeat there were foure heads of the
chiefe Princes of the Moores found:The armes of Arragon. wherevpon they say that D. Pedro the King tooke
for the armes of Arragon a crosse gueuls in a field argent, betwixt foure Moores
heads of the same collour.
In this battaile of Alcoraz, were renouned for their vertue and prowesse, Gaston Bi^l,
the stemme of the family of Cornels, Federic Atrocillo, Lopes Ferencio de Luna, Gomes de
Luna, Fortun Maza, Simon Aznar Oteicia, and Sancho Pegna, Knights of Arragon. Huesca
being taken, the great Mosquee was presently dedicated for a Cathedral church, and
the Episcopal Sea of Iacca was transsated thether, as it had beene in times past. There
were Christians Musarabes found within the towne, who had liued there during the
Moores Empire, alwaies in liberty of their religion, saying their seruice in Saint Peters
church. The King D. Pedro indowed this Cathedrall church of Huesca with great reuenues,
and inuited by great preuiledges men to come from al parts to inhabit it.
This D. Pedro during the life time of D. Sancho his father, was married to an Italian
Lady, called by some Bertha, by others Ygnes, so as it is vncertaine whether hee had one
wife,G^ncalogy of Nauarre. to whom these names are attributed, or that he were twice married. Hee had by
his wife one sonne called also D. Pedro, and a daughter, named D. Isabel, both
which died before the father. The Infant D. Pedro was married to D. Sol, the second
daughter of Cid Ruis Diaz. As for D. Eluira the other daughter of Cid,
shee had by her husband D. Ramir Sanches, sonne to the King D. Sancho Garcia, one
sonne called D. Garcia Ramires, who was Lord of Corrada, and one daughter D. Eluira
Ramires, the which was married in Castille, to D. Rodrigo Gomes, sonne to D. Gomes
Earle of Candespina and Gormas. By these alliances, the house of Nauarre and Arragon
beeing fauorable to Cid Ruis Diaz, who held Valencia, he had often aide and support
against the Moores, both of men and money, from the Princes thereof. After the
taking of Huesca, the King D. Pedro put in garrison there D. Fortun Garces de Biel, D.
Ferris de Licana and D. Pedro de Vergas, hee tooke a strong castle nere to Bolea, called
Calafanzo, and he with the other Christian Princes had done greater exploits, if there
had beene more faith and better correspondency amongst them, yea more zeale, and
good religion, but euery one seeking to make his house great, and to that end crossing
one an other, the Moores power increased, by the vnion which they had made of
Spaine and Affrike.
It was at that time when as the warres in the East were most hot, and that all the
Princes, Noblemen and Gentlemen which bare armes in France, Germany, Italy and
England, yea and in Spaine, burned with desire to goe this voyage. Forgetting their

countries, affaires, and families, to ingage themselues in this enterprise. So as it is
no wonder, if the Moores Estate beeing in a manner troden vnder foote in the West,
by their seditions and factions, hauing found support of the Myralmumins of Affrike,
at such time when as euery man did runne to the conquest of the East, were restored
by the Almorauides.
At this time the secular Lords or Lay men,Tithes granted tolay men. fitted themselues with the reuenues of the
church and with titles throughout all Europe; Pope Vrbain hauing granted his Bulles
to Christian Princes and Potentats, according vnto those of Pope Gregory the 7. giuen
at Saint Iean de Latran, in the yeere 1073. who did not grant it but vnto Kings, in those
Lands where they should build churches: But Pope Vrbain granted it to all Kings,
Princes, Noblemen and gentlemen, not onely in places of their foundations, but in all
other places, yea in those countries which they should conquer from the Moores;
whereof the Noble houses of Spaine, as well as in other places, haue made their profit,
yea in high Nauarre and Biscay. All these permisions and faculties; to enioy (as they
cal them) the spirituall goods of the church, the Pope granted to incourage men to
make warre against the Infidels, not so much for to make them desirous to become
Christians, as to stay them, and repulse them, fearing they should come and trouble the
commodities of the Romane church, which were great in those daies, and since.
D. Alphonso the Braue,Castille. Emperor of Spaine, as hee is intitled, in the instrumental letters,
giuing about that time faculty to the Abbot Fortun to build a towne about the
Monastery of Saint Dominike of Silos,Beginning of the towne of Saint Dominike of Silos. for the great wonders which Christ did vnto the
Christians, which implored the aide of this Saint: such be the words of the letters cited
by Garibay, in the yeere 1095. This towne in our time is come into the possession of the
Duke of Frias, Constable of Castille. The same King re-edefied nere vnto Toledo, and
to the castle of Saint Seruant, the monastery of Saint Seruant, and Saint Germain, of the
order of Saint Benet, which had bin a house belonging to the same order, and indowed it
with great reuenues. The name of the Bishop of S. Iames, called vntil that time Irienses,
was changed, and they were called of Compostella, by Buls from Pope Vrbain the 2.
The first Bishop which caried this title,Bishop of Saint Iaques exempt from all subiection but of the Pope. was Dalmichius, a religious man of the order of
Clugny: it was also granted to that church that from thence-forth they should bee no
more vnder the Archbishop of Braga, as that of Iria had bin, but should immediatly acknowledge
the holy Apostolike Sea of Rome. The Episcopal seat of Oca, was changed
by the same Pope Vrbain to Bourgos,Bourgos made a Bish^prike. the chiefe city of Castille, with the same preuiledge
and exemption, not to acknowledge any but the Sea of Rome immediatly: yet
some say it had bin done long before, and that it was only a confirmation which Pope
Vrbain the 2. made. D. Pedro King of Nauar, did for his part giue bountifully vnto churches.
The writers of the Spanish history make mention of a holy man called Lesmes, a
Frenchman borne, dwelling at Bourgos, but they make no particular relation of his
Holinesse.Nauarre. The country of Nauarre being spoiled by grashopers and caterpillers, the
Nauarrois had recourse to the holy father at Rome, bewayling their calamities, and intreating
him to be a means to pacefie the wrath of God. The Pope by the aduice of the
Consistory of Cardinals, sent the Bishop of Ostia, called Gregory, who let them vnderstand
that it was for their sins, the which it may bee D. Pedro de Roda, bishop of Pampelone,
and their other pastors had not told them, or else could not perswade them, that it
was the cause of their affliction. This Bishop of Ostia was beleeued, and therefore after
some amendment amongst the people of Nauarre, this scourge of gras-hoppers and
caterpillers ceased. Herevpon this Gregory of Ostia was held a Saint by them, and is at
this day the patron and protector of Vignes and fruites,Gregory Bishop of Ostia, made the Prot^ctor of v^gnes and fruits in Spaine. against caterpillers, and other
such vermine, in Spaine. Saint Dominike, called de la Calcada, was his disciple, who
liued long in the country neere vnto Nauarre, foure leagues from Nagera, receiuing
strang pilgrimes which came from diuers partes of Europe to visit the sepulcher of
Saint Iames. This Saint Gregory died afterwards at Logrogno, and is buried at Beruesa
in Nauarre, where (as the history saies) the Christians which recommended themselues
vnto him, are cured of many infirmities. In the same season 1098. was instituted the order
of Cisteaux in the Diocese of Chalon in Bourgongne, by one named Robert.

This order was augmented since by Saint Bernard, who entring into it about the two
and twentith yeere of his age, did so well, as in lesse then 36. yeeres, hee erected 16. Abbaies
of his Order. These were the exercises of religion in those daies, to the which
the great deuotion of Princes and people, did mooue all Kingdomes, States, Prouinces,
Townes and in a manner all priuate families.
In the yeere 1100.Castille. died D. Raymond of Bourgongne, Earle of Galicia, sonne in law
to King D. Alphonso the Braue,An. 1100. leauing one sonne by D. Vrraca his wife, called D. Alphonso
Raymond, who was bred vp by the Earle D. Pedro Traua, and came afterwards to
raigne in Castille and Leon.
20.Moores The same yeere their died at Maroc, Ioseph Aben-Tefin, or Texifien, Miralmumin,
or Emperor of the Arabians in Affrike and Spaine, hauing raigned 32. yeeres; to whom
Ali Aben-Tefin, his son succeeded. This new King Ali, desirous to win honor by armes
past, soon after his comming to the crowne, into Spaine, with a great power of Almorauides
Affricans, and hauing made some stay in Andalusia, to ioyne the Moores of
Spaine vnto his army, hee entred the territory of Toledo, where the King D. Alphonso
made then his residence, being old and ful of infirmities, and therefore vnfit to make head
against this Barbarian, who was yong and full of ambition to inlarge the country conquered
by his father, yet hauing called his Nobility together in time, if they had beene
well led, he commanded D. Sancho his sonne to fall forth against this army of Moores,
being a Prince of a great courage and too desirous to fight, beeing accompanied by D.
Garcia de Cabra, and other Earles and Noblemen of Castille, who hauing incountred
the enemy nere vnto Voles,Christians defeated by the Moores and D. Sarch^ heire of Castille st^ine, they gaue them battaile, but they were defeated, and put all
to rout. The Infant D. Sancho, the Earle D. Garcia, and other great personages were
slaine vpon the place, so as the Moores had meanes to ouer-run and spoile the country
at their pleasures: they tooke many places and forts, which the King could not preuent,
nor make any resistance; who was exceeding heauy and sorrowfull for the losse
of this battaile, but especially for the death of his sonne and onely heire. Hee did much
blame many captaines which had escaped that day, for that they had so rashly ioyned
in battaile; but this was no meanes to cure the disease. This route was the more
vnseasonable, for that his sonne in law Raymond of Tolouse and Saint Gyles, a valiant
Commander in the warre, by whom hee might haue beene much eased was then
absent in Syria, where hee died a while after leauing three sonnes, Bertrand, William
and Alphonso Iordain, which were all Earles of Tolouse^, although with great difficulties
and troubles. The heat and furie of these Arabian Almorauides, was cooled and
staied by some other good successe of the Nauarrois, Arragonois, and Cattelans, against
the Moores their neighbours, which gaue the Castillans some time to breath,
and to recouer new forces.
D. Pedro King of Nauarre after the taking of Huesca, had made continuall warres against
the Infidels which lay neere vnto him,Nauarre. and had taken Pertusa from them. After
which he went to beseege the city of Barbastro,An. 1101. which after a long contestation of either
side, was yeelded, with the castle of Vililla, and other forts of that country in the
yeere 1101. He presently restored the Episcopal Sea to that city, as it had beene, wherof
D. Ponce was Bishop, who was of Rode.
On the other side the Earle of Barcelone,Barcelone, growne both in courage and possessions,
hauing with him the Earle of Vrgel his cousin, made an enterprise vpon the Island
of Majorca, which was held by the Moores. Being assisted by some gallies of Pisa and
Genoua, they past their army into the Island, and beganne to batter the forts, and to affault
the Moores which inhabited it.Ma^orca taken by the cattelans. D. Armingol Earle of Vrgel was ^laine there in a
sally, leauing a son of his owne name to be his successor, yet Cid Raymond did batter and
assault the city of Majorca with such fury, as it was taken in the yeere 1102. and for that
hee had newes that the Moores, to diuert the conquest of those Islands were come to
beseege Barcelone, hee returned into Cattelogne, leauing the Island to the Geneuois,
to reduce the rest vnder the power of the Christians,Infamous c^net^^snesse of the Geneuois. but mooued (as the Cattelans say)
with a trecherous and villanous couetousnesse, they sold both the town and the whole Island
to the Moores, for a sum of money, wheerof, they say, grew the irreconciliable

harred betwixt the Cattelans and Geneuois. The Moores which had beseeged Barcelona,
were force did abandon it with shame and great losse of their men. Some authors
of the Spanish History write, that this Earle D. Raymond Arnonld, went into Germany
in a disguised habit,^rouence giuen to the house of Barce^ lo^e by the Emperor or Henry the fifth. and did fight a combat for the Empresse Mathilds, wife to Henry
accused of adultery, and that hauing vanquished her accuser, and deliuered the
Lady, hee returned to Barcelona, without discouering himselfe: yet this fact beeing
knowne and verified, the Emperor rewarded him with the county of Prouence, which
did then belong to the Empire. About that time, which was in the yeere 1102. died in
Castille the wife of Cid Rui^ (...),Castille. daughterm D. Gomes, Earle of Gormas, who was
buried with her husband, at Saint Peter of Cardegna, neere vnto Burgos. The King of
Castille in the meane time made head against the Moores without hazarding of
much, so as after great spoiles of either side, that realme had some rest.
The affaires standing vpon these termes,Portugal. D. Henry Earle of Portugal, son in law to
the King D. Alphonso, had a desire to go^ into the Leuant, to see the Land where our
Sauiour and so many Holy Prophets and Apostels had liued, and thrust on also with an
emulation of the fame of his ^ousin or vncle D. Raymond of Tolouse and Saint Gyles,
and of somany* Noble men and Barons of France and Germany, which had run to that
warre. He parted in the yeere 1103. hauing with the helpe and aduice of D. Bernard
Archbishop of Toledo, restored the cities of Coimbra, Braga, Viseo, Lamego and Porto,
to their Episcopal Seas, of which townes Coimbra was the chiefe for the temporal,
and for the spirituall Braga was made Metropolitaine; as it had beene in the
Gothes time. His way was by German and Hongary, with many other Noblemen
of France and Germany, whose voyage was long and painful. There is nothing spoken
of him, but that he returned with many relikes, and among others an arme of Saint
L^ke the Euangilist, as they did beleeue: whereof Alexis Comnen Emperor of Constantinople
(a secret enemy to the Westerne Princes, and to all their enterprises, and who
mocked at all their deuotions) made him a worthy present; which relike Cont Henry
carried into Portugal, and placed it with great reuerence in the chiefe church at Braga.
It was at such time as the Knights of the Temple of Ierusalem were first instituted,Knigh's of the Temp^^ at Ierusalem. by
one Hugues de Paganis, and Ieoffrey of Saint Adelman, hauing vowed to keepe the waies
safe from the port of laffa (in old time called Ioppa) vnto the Temple: to whom and to
their companions (which soone increased to a good number) was a place assigned for
their dwelling nere the Temple, whereof they tooke the name of Templers; afterwards
mingling Knight-hood with Monacal rules, they instituted an order, the which
which confirmed by the Pope; they tooke vpon them a white habit, with a red crosse,
and in succession of time got so great possessions throughout all Christendome, as
Kings and Popes themselues did enuy them: so as vnder the collour of many crimes,
whether true or false,Temple^t the beginning (...) el the M. (...) orders in christandom. they were condemned and to rooted out at the councell of Vienne,
by Pope Clement the fifth, their order hauing continued 200. yeeres. Whose spoiles
were diuided betwixt the Pope, King Philip of France, the Hospitaliers of Saint Iohn
of Ierusalem and others. These Templers were the beginning of al the millitary orders,
which haue beene since made in Christendome.
Returning to D. Alphonso King of Castille his subjects seeing,Castille. him without any heires
male, by the death of D. Sancho, and that he was now old and broken, they tooke councell
to perswad him to marry the Countesse D. Vrraca, widow to Raymond Earle of Bourgonge
to D. Gomes Earle of Campdespina, the greatest Nobleman next vnto the
King in Castille, for the effecting whereof, the Noblemen of Castille assembled at Magan,
a Bourough of Toledo, or according vnto others at Masquereque: the difficulty
was that knowing the King to bee of a high and great spirit, there was not any one that
durst presume to deliuer the message; wherefore they resolued to giue this charge
to a physition which was a Iewe, called Cidello, who was very familiar with the
King, the which (beeing a rash man) hee accepted, to his owne ruine: for hauing
found a fit opportunitie as hee thought,A iust punishment of a r^sh men. to speake vnto the King of this marriage,
hee had no sooner touched that subiect, but he was repulsed with bitter words, and
chased out of the Court, with charge neuer to returne againe vpon paine of death,

yet this made the King to thinke, that it was fit to marry his daughter, and therefore hee
made choise of D. Alphonso Infant of Nauarre and Arragon brother to the King D. Pedro
for his sonne in law, the which hee did by the aduice of D. Bernard Archbishop of
Toledo,D. V^raca la^re of Castille and Leon married to D. Alphonso of Nauarre. which marriage was accomplished according vnto some, in the life time of the
King D. Pedro, others say it was after his decease, D. Alphonso hauing already succeeded
him to the crowne of Nauarre and Arragon, in the yeere 1104. for that the King D. Pedros
sonne, of the same name, was dead without children, and D. Isabel his daughter was
also dead a virgin.An. 1104. This King D. Pedro and his children were buried at. Iean de la Pegna,
the last of the Kings which were interred there. He had raigned in Nauarre and Arragon
ten yeeres and three monthes.
As for King D. Alphonso, he liued vnto the yeere 1108. being afflicted with great infirmities,Death of D. Alphonso the sixth King of Castille.
with the which he languished to the age of 73. whereof hee raigned foure
and thirty yeeres and eight monthes, after the decease of his brother D. Sancho, his body
is interred in the Monastery of Sahagun, D. Alphonso his son in law succeeded him,
in the right of D. Vrraca (the only lawfull daughter of the deceased) in all his realmes of
Castille, Leon, Toledo and other Siegneuries. A little before his death, one Moyse a
Iew, very learned in the tongues, in Philosophy and the holy Scriptures was baptized,
and the King D. Alphonso was his god father,Conuersion of Moys^a Iew. wherefore hee was called Pedro Alphonso.
His conuersion was profitable to many Iewes and Moores, whom by disputing and
writing hee brought to leaue their sects, and to imbrace the name and profession of
Christians. At the same time florished Deminike de la Calcada, whose practise was to
retire the pilgrimes which went to Saint Iaques, and to direct them in their way. At
the place of whose aboade there was since a city built of that name: he caused a Chappel
to bee built there in honour of the Virgin Mary, and a little from thence, fiue yeeres
before his death, he made his sepulcher: for at that time they buried not any in holie
ground. Now it is a Cathedral Church.
The end of the eight Booke.





The Contents of the ninth Booke.

1. VNion of the realmes of Castille, Leon, Nauarre and Arragon, vnder the King D.
Alphonso the 7. of that name in Leon, and 2. in Castille, and the first in Nauarre
and Arrago^
2. Seege and taking of the city of Sarragosse from the Moores, the which was afterwards
the chiefe of the realme of Arragon.
3. The County of Prouence anexed to the house of Barcelone, by hereditary succession.
4. D. Alphonso Henriques 2. Earle of Portugal, and the bad gouernment of the Countesse
D. Theresa his Mother.
5. The licentions life of the Queene D. Vrraca heire of Castille her diuorce from King D.
Alphonso her husband, and the miseries which happened in Castille.
6. Conspiracy of the Nobility and States of Castille and Leon, against the Queene D. Vrraca,
and the establishing of her sonne D. Alphonso.
7. Raymond in the reyall dignity, accounted the 8. of that name, and the 27. King of Leon,
and 5. of Castille.
8. Disordred and prodigious testament of D. Alphonso the 7. King of Nauarre and Arragon.
9. Vsurpations of townes and Lands in Nauarre by King Alphonso Raymond of Castille.
10. D. Garcia Ramir the 19. King of Nauarre, and 7. of that name.
11. D. Frere Ramir the 5. King of Arragon and 2. of that name.
12. Kings of Nauarre and Arragon, forced to acknowledge the soueraignty of Castille.
13. Vnion of Cattelogne to the crowne of Arragon, by the marriage of the Earle of Barcelon.
D. Raymond Berenger, with D. Petronille.
14. Accord betwixt D. Raymond Betenger, Prince Regent of Arragon, with the Templers
and Hospitaliers, vpon the testament of King D. Alphonso.
15. The Earle of Portugal takes the title of King.
16. Change of the State in Affrike, and the new raigne of the Almohades.
17. Taking of Lisbone, and other townes from the Moores, by the new King D. Alphonso
Henriques.
18. D. Sancho the 20. King of Nauarre 7. of that name.
19. Change of Religion among the Moores in Spaine, and persecution of Christians by the
new sectaries.
20. D. Sancho the 6. King of Castille 3. of that name.
21. D. Fernand the 2. of that name 28. King of Leon.
22. Institution of the Order of the Knights of Calatrana.


This ninth booke containes the rest of the Kings of Nauarre,
Arragon, Leon and Castille, and the erection of the Earldome of Portugal to a
Kingdome by D. Alphonso Henriques as followeth.

NAVARRE. ARRAGON. LEON. CASTILLE.
18. Alphonso Emperour. 1-4. the same. 1-26. the same. 7-4. the same. 2.
19. D. Garcia Ramir. 7. 5. D. Fr. Ramir. 2. 27. D. Alphon. Ra. 8-5. the same. 3.
20. D. Sancho. 7. D. Petronille and 28. D. Fernand 2. 6. D. Sancho. 3.
D. Raymond Berenger
vnites
Arragon and Cattelogne.


PORTVGAL.
D. Alphonso Henriques. 2. Earle, and the first which tooke vpon him
the title of King.


D. Alphonso the eighteenth King of Nauarre.
Emperor of Spaine.
ALL the Christian Kingdomes of Spaine were vnited in one
body,Nauarre, Ar. 1. rag^a, Leon and Castille. in the yeere 1108. by the succession of Leon, Castille,An. 1108.
Toledo and other conquests, fallne to D. Vrraca, wife to D.
Alphonso King of Nauarre and Arragon, intitled Emperor
of Spaine by a better right then his Predecessors: notwithstanding
that some Chronicles will not haue him put in the
ranke and number of the Kings of Castille and Leon, for that
it was D. Vrraca his wife, and not hee which was heire of the
sayd Realmes D. Pedro Ansures during the Kings absence, who was in Nauarre and
Arragon, gouerned, and was Viceroy in Castille; in which time the Moores went to
field, and did great harme vnto the Christians, taking the towne of Coria, with other
places. D. Alphonso King of Nauarre, entred with an army into Castille, leading with
him D. Vrrca his wife, but there needed not any force, for all obeyed him, both the
townes, forts and Noblemen of the country, whom hee gouerned with all mildnesse,
humanity and iustice, and repulsed the inuasions of the Moores on the fronters of
his wiues dominions: but hee made sharper warre against them vpon the confines of
Nauarre and Arragon: in Castille hee repaired Vilhorade; in Rioje Berlanga; and vpon
the riuer of Duero, Almasan and Soria. The surname of warrior was giuen him by
reason of his deeds of armes, and the battailes wherein he was during his raigne: The
Histories report that he did fight 29. times in a pitcht field, and was victor in them al, except
in the two last battailes,D. Alphonso se^^es to assar^h ins^ lse of Castille, which were fought nere vnto Fraga. Hauing goften footing
in Castille, he began to forecast what might happen, if his wife should die without
children by him; wherefore he put gouernors and captaines of his countries of Nauar
and Arragon in al the strong places of Castille, that if he were forced to quitthese realms
of Castille, Leon, Toledo and their depedances, he might keep those people in some awe,

and leaue it with his honor and aduantage: the which did somewhat estrange the Noblemen
of Castile.The bad qualities of D. Vrraca Queene of Castile. He knew also, that his wife D. Vrraca was proud, ingrate, inconstant,
and not very continent, and therefore with good aduice he armed himselfe for
all euents. This woman vpon a light occasion, conceiued a great hatred against the
Earle D. Pedro Ansures, Lord of Vailledolit, who had nourished her, and had kept her
Estates after the death of the king her father, onely for that in his letters written to the
king her husband, and her, aduising them to come and take possession of her inheritance,
he had intitled her husband King of Castile. Whereupon she sought to take Vailledolit,
and other lands from him, but the King did presently restore them: and to the end
he should be the more secure, against the rage of this woman, hee sent him into Arragon,
with D. Elo his wife, giuing him the gouernement of the young Earle of Vrgel his
Cousin.
The first expedition which he made against the Moores,Expedition against the Mahume^^sts. was about the yeare, 1110.
vppon the frontiers of Nauarre and Arragon, where he tooke from them the towne of
Exea,An. 1110. in which warre he was assisted by many voluntarie Noblemen and Gentlemen
of France, beeing disirous to winne honor by bearing armes against the Mahumetists.
Running along the riuer of Ebro, he tooke Tihaust, Borja, Magallon, and other places
of those marches: so as the happy successe of this enterprise gaue him courage to
effect that which his predecessors Kings of Nauarre had long before deseigned; which
was, to reduce the cittie of Sarragossa vnder his obedience, the which as he made shew
to beseege,Moores defeated by D. Alphonso. spoiling the countrie round about it King Abucalen came with a great power,
and presented him battaile, neate vnto Valtierra, where the Moore was vanquished,
and slaine vpon the place. By meanes of this victorie, King D. Alphonso took Morella,
and resolued to beseege Sarragossa, wherefore he put a strong garrison into the
fort of Castella, of old souldiers, called at that time in Spaine Almogarabes, who were
continually entertained vpon the Moores frontiers.Sarragoss^ beseeged. This seege was long and dangerous,
for the Moores defended this cittie courragiously, beeing great, full of men, and
well fortified.
In the armie of king D. Alphonso, there were many Noblemen of France, which
had vowed to carrie armes against the Infidels, among the which were Gaston Lord of
Berne,Noblemen of France in the compe before Sarragossa. the Earle of Cominges, and Rotron Earle of Perche, by whom the Towne of
Tudele, seated vpon Ebro, betwixt Sarragossa and Calaorra, was taken by surprize.
The Moores which were there in garrison, did much annoy the campe; for that they
spoiled their victuallers and merchants, and cut off their victuals: whereupon D. Alphonso
sent Cont Rotron with good troupes of foot, and sixe hundred horse. The Earle
kept himselfe close in certaine valleys, couered with woods, neere vnto the towne, and
sent foorth some men into the open plaines, to get some spoile, and to driue away
their cattell; who being discouered by the Moores of the fort, they sallyed foorth with
all their forces, to the end that not any one of these runners should escape. Whilest
they were in skirmish, the Earle came out of his ambush, and cut off their retreate to
the towne, the which he found ill garded, so as he seazed thereon without any difficultie.
The king D. Alphonso to reward the Earle of Perche for this prize, which was of
so great importance,Tudele taken by the Earle of Perche. for that seege where hoe was, gaue him this place of Tudele, the
which was afterwards annexed to the crowne of Nauarre. The Moores amazed at this
losse, began to faint in many places: so as Mon^ajo, and other neighbour townes, were
made subiect to D. Alphonso within few dayes. The Sarragossans were much assisted by
the Moores, which commanded at Lerida and Fraga, as well for the danger which did
threaten them, as for their conformity in Religion.
During this seege, the king D. Alphonso beeing in the cittie of Barbastro, there came
vnto his Court Count Bertrand of Tholousa, sonne to Count Raymond, and D. Eluira
bastard daughter to the deceased King D. Alphonso the 6. This young Prince had bin
dispossessed of all his Estate by the Earle of Po^ctiers, who beeing gratiously intertayned
and honored by king D. Alphonso, to the end he might bee ayded by him, to recouer
his Estate, he made himselfe his vassall, acknowledging him for his Soueraigne
Lord of all the did, or should possesse (according to the Spanish Histories.) The King

receiued him into his protection, and gaue him good hope, it was about the yeare 1116.
yet this did little auaile Cont Bertrand; for the continuall warre which D. Alphonso had
against the Moores, would not suffer him to attend the affaires of Tholousa, besides
William Earle of Poictiers was the kings friend, and came himselfe in person to the war
against the Moores in Spaine, and was at the seege of Sarragossa, with the Earles of
Perche, Cominges and Bigorre, the Lord of Beam, the Vicount of Lauedan, Bishop
of Escar, and many other Noblemen and Knights of France, whereas also were all the
Noblemen of Nauarre and Arragon, both Ecclesiasticall and secular; among the which
those of greatest marke, were Diego Lope Ladron, Ximen Fortunes de Leet, Simon Fortunes
de mont Castel, Pedro Momesio, Lope Ximenes Torelia, Lope Sancho of Ogabre, Pedro
Ximenes Iustice of Arragon, Iean Galindio d'Antilia, Lope Fortunes of Albero, Pedro
Myr Entenza,Almudebar taken from the Moores. Raymond Peres d'Erillo, N. of Almorauid, and with them many of Castile
and other places of Spaine. About the yeare 1118. Almudebar, a strong place and
well furnished, was taken by the French; the which strucke such a terror into the Mores
thereabouts, as they abandoned Sarrignena, Salce, Robres, Zeura, and Gurrea, the
which were seazed on by the Arragonois, whilest that the French with the other forces
did batter Sarragossa, with all violence, the which the Moores defended valiantly, the
king D. Alphonso beeing then gone into Castile. The Spaniards write, that the French
seeing this seege to grow tedious, and beeing out of hope to take the cittie, they retired
in a manner all home to their houses, except the chiefe Commanders, to whome
D. Alphonso brought new supplies, about Iuly this yeare 1118. The beseeged beginning
to doubt that they should not be able to keepe the cittie long, they employed all
their money, meanes, and credit, intreating the Moores that were neere and sarre off,
to succour them in their great necessitie. Who sending a captaine vnto them called Temin,
with men and victuals: he was incountred and defeated neere vnto Daroca, by
the king D. Alphonso,Sarr^gessa taken. and the Earle of Prouence, who (according vnto Surites, the
Writer of the Historie of Arragon,) was there with sixe hundred horse; contrarie to
that which the Spaniards say: so as the Moores despayring of all succours, beganne to
parle, and to treate of conditions to yeeld. Some notwithstauding to do more honor
to the Clergie of those times, say, that D. William Gaston, Bishop of Pampelone, generall
of the souldiers of Nauarre, behaued himselfe so in his quarter, as hauing made
a great and spacious breach, he entred the towne by force, the Moores making wonderfull
resistance, with their king Almocauen, who was slaine among the ruines. This
great cittie was taken in December, in the aforesayd yeare 1118. where the king D. Alphonso
entring,Episcopal seate restored to Sarragossa. he lodged in the pallace of the kings of the Moores, called Acuda, nere
vnto the Port of Toledo, beginning to settle the estate thereof, to make it the Capitall
cittie of all the Realmes which he enioyed, or that he might conquer hereafter, intituling
himselfe king of Sarragossa. His chiefe care was to settle the Clergie, and to inrich
that Order, which had serued him much in the seege of the towne: wherefore the
Mosque Maior was then consecrated for a cathedrall Church, vnder the name of S.
Sauueur, and one Pedro de Libana, was chosen Bishop, confirmed by Pope Gelasius
then raigning. They found many Christians Musarabes in Sarragossa, who had liued
there among the Arabians, with great liberty of their Religion, the which they did exercise
in a very ancient church, called Nostre Dame del Pilar: we reade in the Histories
of Arragon, and in the writings of Ierom Surita, that the Lords of Bearne, and the earls
of Perche did long enioy very great priuiledges in the cittie of Sarragossa, by the grant
of D. Alphonso. This king and Emperour of Spaine granted great liberties and priuiledges
to this cittie, to prouoke strangers to come and dwell there, namely, the priuiledge
of gentrie, and the lawes and Iustice of Arragon: and in time of factions and seditions
to chuse for their Councell certaine Syndics, Protectors of the people.
As for the dignitie called Iustice of Arragon,Diguitie of chiefe Iustice in Arragon. which was vsed in the time of D. Pelro
Ximenes, it is a Magistrate, the gardien and protector of the publike libertie, against the
violence of great men, yea to suppresse the excesse and tyrannyes of Kings, with soueraigne
iurisdiction, instrituted in the infancie and beginning of principalities and Christian
Estates in Spaine, after the inuasion of the Moores, when as the kings, not by

succession of bloud and birth, but by their valour and vertues were chosen, to be ready
and faithfull Gouernors of the affaires, as well ofwarre, as of Iustice, according vnto
certaine simple lawes, and as then militarie, propounded vnder the title of the court
or law of Sobrarbre. This Magistrate was first called Iustice maior, entertained and
augmented both in dignitie and authoritie from time to time by good kings. There
were great gifts and fees giuen also by this great king vnto the Earle of Bigorre, in recompence
of the good offices he had done him in this warre. These things thus done,
hee went and layed feege before Tarrassone;Tarrassone taken from the Moores. the which made no great resistance, seeing
that the neighbour places were come into the power of the Christians Beeing yelded,
it receiued the ancient Episcopall seate, and one D. Michel was chosen Bishop.
This towne which in former times had belonged to the Crowne of Nauarre, by this
last conquest was annexed to that of Arragon.
D. Alphonso continuing his conquests, tooke the places and forts which were along
the riuer of Xalon, and in the end tooke the towne of Calatajub, into the which he put
a great garrison, as a place which frontred vpon the Moores on the mountaines of
Cuenca, Molina, Valencia, and Castile, he cleansed that which remained of the Moorish
faction vpon the riuer of Xiloca vnto Daroca: he repayred and peopled Montreal,
whereas this deuout king instituted an Order of Knights in imitation of the Templers
of Ierusalem, which was called S. Saluator, affigning them rents and reuenues, to the
end they should employ themselues couragiously to roote out the Infidels in Spaine,Order of knights at S. Sauuiour.
as he had propounded. King D. Alphonso did these great exploites vnto the yeare, 1120
at which time the Moores were dispossessed of all which doth now belong to Arragon.
But in Cattelogne there yet remained the king of Lerlda and Fraga called Aben
Gama,Catt^logee or Barcelone. whose forces were not to be contemned: and the which were as a thorne in the
foot of the Estates of Arragon, but more to Raymond Arnould Earle of Barcelone,
who was a good and a valiant Knight, and who had receiued no small blessings from
God: hauing by vnexpected meanes recouered the lands which were vsurped from him
during his minoritie, and augmented his Estates by new successions of the Earledome
of Cerdagne, of the towne of Tarragone, and euen newly of the County of Besalu, by
the decease of D. Bernand Guillen, by reason of which prosperities he intitled himselfe
Marquis of Spaineu, Earle of Cerdagne, Besal, and afterwards of Prouence and A^millan,
by the death of Gilbert his father-in law, who had no other heire then D.
Doulce, wife to D. Raymond. It is likely, that by this meanes he got the Countie of Prouence,
whereof (as a fee of the Empire) he was inuested by the Emperour Henry the 5.
as we haue sayd. As for those lands which he held in Languedoc, as Carcassone and
others: some Authors write, that the vicious Bernard of Aton, hauing vsurped them,
vnder a counterfeit promise to hold them of him, and to do him homage, hee afterwards
made this acknowledgement to William Earle of Poictiers, vsurper of the Contie
of Tholousa: but D. Raymond forced him by armes to submit himselfe vnto him.
In Portugall Cont Henry had defeuded his country against the Moores wisely and
valiantly,Portugall. and had gouerned with all iustice and honor, vnder the soueraigntie of the
King,D. Alphonso Henrques 2. Earle of Portugal or Emperour Don Alphonso, vntill the yeare 1112. that he died in Galicia, in the
towne of Astorga, and was interred at Braga in S. Maries church, leauing for heire
D. Alphonso Henriques his eldest sonne, about eighteene yeares old. D. Theresa the
Countesse widow, to whom the Earledome of Portugall did belong in proprietie,
shewing her indiscretion, married soone after to a knight of a noble house, called Don
Bermond Paez de Transtamara, with whom hauing liued some time, by a disordered
appetite,The desestable marriage of the Countesse of Portugall. or some other damnable occasion, she left him, and married againe with a
brother of his called D. Fernando Paez of Transtamara; D. Bermond beeing thus forsaken,
and as it were striuing with his wife who should be most incestuous, hee married
her eldest daughter, and sister to D. Alphonso Henriques, called D. Theresa Henriques.
These goodly exploites were done among Christians, in the house of Portugal, which
was but now growing: for expiation whereof, they say, that Fernando Paez, who had
taken away his liuing brothers wife, built a Monasterie at Sobrado in Galicia, nine
leagues from Saint Iaques, a pennance and satisfaction taught by the pastors of those

times, to miserable contemners of Gods lawes and ordonances. The young Earle
Don Alphonso beeing much troubled with these excesses, and moreouer seeing himselfe
contemned, and out of all credit and fauour, for that the adulterous and incestuous
D. Fernando intitled himselfe Earle of Portugal, in the right of his wife, he went to
armes against him, the euent you shall heare hereafter.
If this Countesse were vnchast in her seuerall marriages,Nauarre, Castile, Arragon, etc. her sister D. Vrraca shewed
her selfe as loose and disloyall to her husband King Don Alphonso: so as this Prince
who was endowed with great vertue and wisedome, was forced to restraine her in the
fort of Castellar, nee^e vnto Sarragossa, from whence shee sought by all meanes to
escape; as shee did, with the helpe of some discontented Noblemen of Castile; with
whome shee retired into her Inheritance, where shee tooke councell to bee diuorced
from the King her husband, making her pretext, that shee had beene married against
her will, and by constraint; and moreouer, that shee was his cousin germaine remooued,
and therefore the marriage could not be lawful, without dispensation fro the church
of Rome, the which in those dayes was not much vsed. Of this Councel were the Archbishop
of Toledo, the Bishops of Bourgos, Leon, Palence and others, who were al dispossest,
chased away, and banished by D. Alphonso, and with them the Abbot of S. Facunds,
whose Abbey was giuen to D. Ramir the kings brother. Wherefore the Nobilitie
and Estates of Castile, considering what troubles and miseries would ensue, if this
desseigne were put in execution against the king D. Alphonso, they would not giue their
consents, but took their Queene with all respect, and conducted her into Arragon, to
her husband; who dissembled the wrongs she had done him, receiued her into-fauor: but
as she continued her leud life, forgetting more and more the honor of her self and house,
which should haue bin more deare vnto such a Princesse,Queene D. Vrraca vnchast. then her life, the king in the
and caused her to be conducted to the towne of Soria, chased her from his company for
euer: notwithstanding he kept still many strong places in Castile, not caring much for
the gouernment of the Realme.
Without doubt this king was of a great courage, and gaue good proofes, that he did
more esteeme vertue and his honor,D. Vrrace chasd away by the king D. Alphonso her husband. then all worldly goods, dispossessing himselfe of so
great iurisdictions, as those of Castile, Leon, Toledo, and others, which D. Vrraca had
brought him; who being setled in her countries, began to shew some tokens of amendment,
gouerning her selfe by the aduice and counsell of D. Pedro Ansures, and other
knights of greatest wisdome and fame among the Nobility of Castile. Hauing then assembled
her estates, she complained that many forts were kept from her, demaunding
their aduice and ayde to recouer them: Those which were kept by Captains and gouernors
Castillans, were presently yeelded vnto her, without attending any commaundement
from the king D. Alphonso, in hatrred that he had chased away the Queene. Among
others D. Pedro Ansures, presently after the restitution of some places by him, went to
the king, who was at Castellar; where coming before him, beeing mounted vppon a
white horse, and clad all in scarlet, hee lighted, and holding a halter in his hand, hee
sayed vnto him,Castile separatted. That hee had done vnto his Queene (the naturall and soueraigne
Princesse of Castile) the dutie of faithfull vassall: yet hauing failed vnto the king, to
whome hee had sworne fealtie and homage, hee had brought vnto him both hand and
mouth, the instruments of the oath which hee had made vnto him, to the end that his
Maiestie might dispose of them, and of his whole bodie at his Highnesse pleasure and
command. King Don Alphonso (alwaies like himselfe) although (vppon sufficient
grounds) he were discontented with the yeelding vp of these forts, shewing no good
countenance vnto the Earle, yet vppon his first speech hee pardoned him, yeelding to
the counsell of the wise,Magnanimity of King D. Alphonso. who commended much the loyaltie and integritie of this
knight, the which should serue as a President to posteritie: wherefore he was sent backe
with honor into Castile.
After this, D. Vrraca did nothing of merit: for falling to her old desseigne of diuorce
she obtained it by the authoritie of Pope Pascal. Of whose commandement and Bulls,
Don Diego Gelmirio, Bishop of Compostella, was minister and executioner. Thus
finding her selfe without restraint in her lust and luxuriousnesse, she exceeded strangely.

She had familiar and dishonest conuersation with D. Gomes, Earle of Candespina,
who had in former times pretended to be her husband,Nauarre, Castille, Arragon, etc. who was secretly deliuered of a
sonne, gotten by him, and was for that cause called D. Fernand Hurtado, from whome
as they say, is descended the house of Hurtados, a noble family of Spaine. Although
that some doubt hereof, yet it is most certaine, that the Earle D. Gomes, had in a short
time the whole gouernement of the Realme, and disposed of all the affaires, both of
warre and peace at his pleasure, conuersing as familiarly with the Queene, as if she had
beene his wife: and yet another Knight called D. Pedro de Lara, sonne to Don Ordogno,
Earle of Lara, who entred combat at the seege of Zamora, against the three sonnes of
Aria Goncalo, after the decease of the king D. Sancho, did insinuate himselfe in the
Queenes fauour, and was in a short time one of her greatest minions, whereof the earle
D. Gomes was very iealous. The dissolute and vnchast life of D. Vrraca was so publikely
knowne to all the world, as king D. Alphonso (mooued with a iust disdaine, both for it,
and for the aboue-mentioned diuorce) resolued to enter into Castile with an armie,
putting all to fire and sword,Queene D. Vrraca vnchast. beeing much incensed as well at the dissolute life of the
Queene, as at the Castillans basenesse, who obeyed her, bearing them also a spleene,
for that they had deliuered her those places which he had giuen them in gard.
There went against him to field the Queenes two fauorites, D. Gomes, and D. Pedro,
with the forces of Castile and Leon, who hauing incountred the kings armie, consisting
of Nauarrois and Arragonois,D. Vrraca chased away by the King D. Alphonso her husband. they came to fight neare vnto Candespina, and
not farre from Sepulueda. D. Pedro who led the foreward, was first charged, who abandoned
his men basely vpon the first incounter, and retired to Bourgos, where the
Queene, was carrying newes of the route which he had no leysure to see. The army of
Castile was defeated and put to flight, and many good Knights slain and others taken,
namely, D. Gomes Earle of Candespina, with a brother of his called Diagomes died vppon
the place. The valour of one of the house of Olea was great, which carried the
Standard of the Earle D. Gomes, who beeing ouerthrowne from his horse, and both his
hands cut off,Castile separated. he held his Standard fast in his armes whilest hee liued, crying out with a
loud voyce, Olea, Olea. After this victorie, D. Alphonso past vnto Leon, by the territorie
of Campos, making a cruell spoyle and murther, whersoeuer his armie went, vpon
D. Pedro's faction. And for that his treasure failed him, the souldiers abandoning themselues
to the spoyle, committed infinit thefts and sacriledges, sparing nothing, were it
holy or prophane.
King D. Alphonso hauing past into Galicia with the like disorder, the Nobilitie of
those countries, assembled all that were fit to carrie armes, and came to meet with this
furious enemy, bringing in the armie young D. Alphonso Raymond, the sonne of D.
Vrraca, and of Cont Raymond of Bourgongne her first husband. There king D. Alphonso
had another battaile, neere vnto a place called Carrera of Anguas, betwixt the
townes of Leon and Astorga,Loyaltie and integritie of D. Pedro Ansures. where the Nauarrois and Arragonois had the victorie.
So as hauing slaine a great number of Leonois, put the rest of the army to flight, and
taken D. Pedro de Trauas prisoner, D. Alphonso Raymond was forced to saue himselfe in
Portugall. King D. Alphonso past no farther, but returned with his victorious armie,
ruining all those which followed D. Pedro de Lara's partie: who with their Queene shut
themselues vp in a place neere vnto Palenza, called Mencon, which was the retreate of
them that had fled: and so returned into his owne country, with many prisoners, and
great spoiles.
6* The Queene beeing freed from so great a danger, continued her lustfull and vnchast
life,Magnanimity of King D. Alphonso. with her minion D. Pedro, with as little shame and respect, as shee had beene
accustomed; who playing the king, yea the very tyrant, incensed the Nobility in such
sort, as many of them conspired to abandon the Queene, and to call vnto the gouernment,
D. Alphonso Raymond her sonne, who by hereditarie succession ought to haue
succeeded her. The chiefe of these conspirators were. D. Gutiere, Fernandes de Castro,
and D. Gomes de Moncanedo, who with their confederates (hoping that the infant D.
Alphonso should draw great ayde from his vncle Pope Calixtus, who then gouerned the
Church of Rome) they caused D. Alphonso to come vnto their assembly; and in despite

of the Queene his mother, and her Minion D. Pedro, made him king of Castile and
Leon, in the yeare 1122. D. Alphonso King of Nauarre hauing raigned in those realms,
almost 14. yeares, in continuall troubles and care.
This Pope Calixtus of whom we haue spoken, was before called Guy, brother to Cont
Raymond, and Cont William of Bourgogne, who being Archb. of Vienna, had bin aduanced
to the sea of Rome, after the decease of Gelasius the 2. in the yeare 1120. in the
Abbey of Clugny, where Gelasius died, flying the fury of the Emperor Henry the 5. This
Calixtus was to contend against Maurice Archb. of Braga, a Limosin, called Bourdin,
who had bene chosen Pope by the Emperours faction, against the election of Gelasius,
and caused himselfe to be called Gregory the 8. Hee had bin brought into Spaine by D.
Bernard, Archb. and Primate of Toledo, with a great opinion of his holines and wisedome,
and therefore he made him bishop of Coimbra, and afterwards. Archb. of Braga:
but he sought to make him a bad requitall, perswading Pope Pascall, who was Predecessor
to Gelasius, to depriue D. Bernard of his dignity, and to choose him in his place, offering
him a good summe of mony. The Pope who was exceeding couetous, took his
mony, and put him in hope, but he did not any thing. Wherefore there growing great
dissention betwixt the Pope and the Emperor Henry, for the nomination of Prelates,
Bourdin, who had changed his name, and taken that of Maurice, to his promotion to Braga,
ioyned with the Emperor, and censed not till he was made Pope of Rome, whilest
Gelasius liued, who soone after died, leauing this quarrell to bee decided by Calixtus.
Then might you haue seene Christs Vicars command armies,The Papacie disputed by a^mes. place guards, giue the
word, be in battels armed, giue the bodies and goods of miserable Christians in prey,
and to countenance the most horrible insolencies which warre could produce. Gregory
the 8. going from Sutri, where he had assembled his forces, prest Rome by al acts of hostility,
spoyling pilgrims which went to get pardons, according to the Romane doctrine.
On the other side, Calixtus sending many souldiers out of Bourgongne, vnder
the conduct of Iohn de Crema, Cardinall of S. Chrisogone, he himselfe followed after in
person, with other troupes, so as he entred Rome with great effusion of bloud, and
there suppressed Gregorie; where making him a ridiculous spectacle vnto the people,
mounted vpon a Camell, with his face backward, holding the tayle in his hand, for a
bridle, he put him in perpetuall prison, where hauing renounced his Popedome, he ended
his dayes. Thus were Ecclesiasticall charges executed among Christians in those
dayes. Pope Calixtus hauing preuailed ouer his aduersarie about the time that D. Alphonso
Raymond his nephew was chosen in Castile to raigne in stead of his vnchast mother,
it was likely this election should be confirmed and supported by the authority of
Rome, against all that should contradict it.
The estate of Portugall was troubled with the like disorder,Portugal. and D. Alphonso Henriques,
and the Portugals were prest with the like difficulties, by the disordered appetites
of their Countesse,VVarre betwixt the Mother and the son in Portugal The Countesse D. Theresa and her vnlawfull husband taken prisoner. D. Theresa his mother, who was then enioyed by D. Fernand Pacz:
against whom D. Alphonso armed, pursuing him as a Tyrant and incestuous adulterer,
their armies ioyned neere vnto Guymaranes, where D. Alphonso was vanquished, being
too hastie to fight, and would not attend some supplies, which D. Egas Nugnes (who
had bred him vp, and gouerned him in his infancie) brought vnto him: by whome hee
was then sharply blamed for his rashnesse, proceeding from want of experience and
heat of youth. Hauing recouered new forces, there was a second battaile fought, wheras
D. Alphonso had the better: for D. Ferdinands armie was put to route, and himselfe
with the Countesse put in a safe prison, from whence D. Fernand was afterwards deliuered
at her intreatie, with promise neuer more to stile himselfe Earle of Portugall, but
to be a perpetuall subiect and vas^all vnto D. Alphonso Henriques, who by this meanes
remayned a peaceable Earle in Portugall. These fruites did the two vnchast and lasciuious
sisters reape, beeing Daughters to king Alphonso the sixth, and in a manner
at the same time.
D. Alphonso the 7. left raigning in Castile, where he had some places at his deuotion,casfile
held by a Nauarrois garison: during whose raign dyed S. Dominike of Calcada in Rioje,

who was reputed a Saint: hee was buried in the tombe which hee had made in his life
time. He had beene a Monke of the Order of Saint Benet, at Valbanera, and after in the
Monasterie of Saint AEmylian, where they did not much esteeme him: wherefore he
gaue himselfe to a solitari^ life, and to follow the doctrine of Gregorie bishop of Ostia:
for he was a man without any learning. At the place of his Sepulcher, there is at this
present a towne built with a Cathedrall church, and Episcopall see, carrying his name,
vnited at this present to that of Calaorra. He was much honoured in his life time, and
after his death his memorie was reuerenced: Monkes beeing then admired, which gaue
themselues to a monasticke and solitarie life. At that time there was giuen by the king
D. Alphonso, to the Monasterio of Saint Mary of Valbanera, the church of Leuador, to
that of Saint Saluadour of Leyre, halfe the towne of Arascues: in imitation of whome
other Noblemen gaue gifts vnto Churches, where they had speciall deuotion, euery
one choosing for his Patron, Aduocate, and Protector, that Saint of whom the churches
and Monasteries were named. This was the ordinarie doctrine of that age to win
Paradise.
In the meane time the Bishops intruded themselues into the Councels of Kings, to
mannage affayres of State,The exercise of Bishops of that age. and to maintaine their Ecclesiasticall priuiledges, rights,
and reuenues, they led armies, and were many times too forward to fight, as wee reade
of D. Pedro of Roda, Bishop of Pampelone, who about the yeare 1115. medling with
the quarrels of some souldiers in the Towne of Tholousa, receiued a blow on the head
with a stone, whereof he died a Martyr, as the Spaniards say: an aduertisement for the
rest to containe themselues in their vocations. D. Mayor Garcia, daughter to the Earle
D. Diego Ordognes; and of D. Vrraca Garcia daughter to the king D. Garcia, gaue vnto
the Monasterie of Nagera about that time, certaine possessions which she had in Calaorra.
D. Fortun Velez a knight, at that time one of the most renowned in the Kingdome
of Nauarre, gaue vnto the same Monasterie, the place of Alecon, to furnish lights
at the Altar of the Virgin Mary: so great and so constant was the opinion of men in
that age, that by gifts vnto the Clergie, they might redeeme their soules from eternall
damnation, as they did not spare the principall townes of their Estates: D. Raymond
Arnold Earle of Barcelone, at the same time, gaue vnto D. Alderic the Archbishop,
the cittie it selfe of Tarragone,The citty of farragone giuen in propriety to the Archbishop of that pla^e. which the Archbishops did enioy in full proprietie, for
the space of foure and thirtie yeares. The foundation of the Hospitall vppon the Pyrenee
mountaines, at the passage of Ronceual, seemes to be a godly worke, the which
was done by D. Sancho de Rosas Bishop of Pampelone, about the yeare 1122. but it was
onely for Pilgrimes, going our of France to Saint Iames, wherein King D. Alphonso
assisted him with money. This Hospitall was built neare vnto the place which was called
Charlemagnegs Chappell, a place which was much subiect to winds, and continuall
stormes: whereupon it was afterwards built lower in Ronceuall where it is now.
As soone as D. Alphonso Raymond was crowned King of Castile and Leon, by the
meanes and direction of D. Pedro de Trauas, a Nobleman, who was allyed in Cattelogne,
to the Earles of Vrgel,Accord betwixt the king of Castile and his mother. and had bred and gouerned that Prince, hee beganne to
pursue his mother, and D. Pedro de Laya her minion. D. Vrraca fortified her selfe in the
tower of Leon, where he beseeged her: but by the mediation of some Noblemen, who
were al of the new Kings partie, a peace was made vpon condition, that she should giue
ouer all gouernement of affaires, and be content to liue a priuate life, hauing a pension
fit for her estate and calling. As for D. Pedxo de Lara, after that hee had wandred
long vp and downe, in the end he left the countrie, and beeing as coldly entertayned in
Nauarre and Arragon, as in Castile, he made his retreate into Barcelone.



D. Alphonso the 8. of that name, and the 27.
King of Leon, and the fifth
of Castille.
7. D. Vrraca being thus dispossessed,An. 1122. D. Alphonso Raymond carryed himselfe for king
of Castile and Leon.Castile and Leon. After which he thought vpon the recouerie of the forts of
Castille, which his father-in-law, D. Alphonso King of Nauarre detayned from him,
wherefore he raysed a mightie armie to vse it, if hee might not recouer that which hee
pretended without armes: with these forces he marched towards Nauarre and Arragon,
which were not vnprouided: for the King had also taken armes to crosse him, if
he should proue insolent, and was alreadie entred into Castile by Rioje, when as the
Prelates of both kingdomes, foreseeing the great miseries which would insue, if these
two great Princes should once enter into warre, they laboured to make a peace and vnitie
betwixt them: and they preuayled so, as they perswaded the new king of Castile,
to make request vnto the king of Nauarre and Arragon,Modestie of greater force then armes. to restore him his townes and
forts; the which was of such force, as without any difficulty, King D. Alphonso beeing
glad that he had taken ^o modest a course, did louingly restore vnto him all that he held
in Castile, retayning onely the countrie which is from Villorado to Calaorra: for
that (sayd he) those lands were of the ancient patrimonie of Nauarre, vsurped by king
D. Alphonso his father-in-law, since the decease of Don Sancho Garcia king of Nauarre,
and by the same reason, the Prouinces of Guipuscoa and Ala^a remained to the crown
of Nauarre. Thus they layed downe armes of ^ther side, and retired into their countries:
Alphonso Raymond King of Castile, seeing himselfe setled in peace, he beganne to
make warre against the Moores,Exploits of K. D. Alphonso the 8. against the Moores. his first enterprise was vpon Coria; which towne had
beene surprized, during the inter-regne or absence of the king of Nauarre and Arragon
after the decease of King D. Alphonso the Braue, his grandfather. This was a worke of
few dayes, for he easily recouered it, but not content herewith, hee past on into the
countries of Extremadura and Portugal, held by the Moores, the which he wasted, and
brought away the spoyles, not any Moore appearing to make head against him. This
good successe of his affaires, gaue him courage to greater attempts, and were as a spur
to the naturall vertue and bountie wherewith God had endowed him, as much as any
Prince of his time: for he was actiue, hardy and valiant, and withall wise, mild, capable,
and very deuour.
In his time flourished the Order of Cisteaux,The vertues of King D. Alphonso the 8. and the religion of S. Bernard, of the
which he was carefull, and a great benefactor, so as they attribute to him the building
of most part of the Monasteries of that habit which are in Spaine: and hee was no lesse
carefull to repayre the ruines of many townes, and castels, which had beene destroyed
by the continuall courses of the Arbians; he built and peopled new, and made many
good lawes and ordonances, for the administration of iustice, and gouernement of
townes: so as for these excellent vertues he was fauoured of God, beloued and respected
of his subiects, and greatly feared of his enemies. It was about his comming to
the Crowne,Zamora made a bishopricke. that his vncle Calixfus erected an Episcopall sea at Zamora: whereof D.
Bernard, Arcl-deacon of Toledo was the first Bishop, whereas now the Sepulcher of
Yllefonce, Arch-bishop of Toledo, is worshipped with diuine honours, found (as the
Histories say) by a shepheare, a testimonie worthie of the inuention. At the same time
(which was about the yeare 1125.) the church ofs. Iames in Gallcia, was made a Metrapolitan,An. 1125.
by the same Pope Calixtus,S. Iames of Compostella made an Archbishopricke. in fauour of his nephew, king D. Alphonso, who
shewed great deuotion to this Saint, for that he had had his breeding, and past most of
his youth in Galicia. The first Archb. of that place was Don Diego Gelmirio, aboue-named,
borne in the same Diocesse; vnder which Archb. were appointed 12. Bishops, Salaman^a,
Auila, Plaisance, Zam^ra, Badajos, Cite Roderigo, Coria, Lugo, Astorga, Oren^e,
Mondoguedo and T^y. Then began the Abbey of S. Dominike of Calcado to increase, to
the which was giuen by Don Alphonso the Warriour, king of Nauarre, the place

called Olgabarte, or otherwise Iubarre; with great freedomes and exemptions. This
Church was made subiect to the Bishop of Calaorra, and at that time there was an Abbot
and Monkes there, whereas since there were Chanoins placed, and in the end it
was made a Cathedrall church, the which is now a towne seated betwixt Nagera and
Vilhorado, and in the beginning was but a small borough, called Malburgue^e, the
which is now by corruption called Margubette, and is ioyned to the Cathedrall
Church of that place, the which at this present is called the Bourg of Saint Dominicke
of Calcada.
King D. Alphonso the warriour had giuen some respite vnto the Moores,Nauarre and Arragon. vnto the
yeare 1125. when as he led his armie against them of Denia and Valencia, and spoyled
the countrie: then passing into Murcia and the marches of Carthagena, hee attempted
Alcaras, but could not take it: wherefore pursuing his good fortune, hee ouer-run the
territories of Granado, then turning by Cordoua, as he prepared to beseege it, he was
diuerted by an armie of Moores Almorauides, to whome hee gaue Battaile and defeated
them. Yet he did not thinke it fit to stay then at this seege, but returned laden with
spoyles into his countrie, whither he led many Christians Musarabes, retired out of the
tyrannie of die Moores, to whom he gaue dwellings and lands, with exemptions and
titles of Nobilitie for them and theirs.
In Portugal,Portugal. Count D. Alphonso Henriques did in like manner annoy the Moores vpon
his frontier,An. 1127. from whome he tooke Leyra, in the yeare 1127. the which hee gaue
to the Monasterie of Saint Croix, in the towne of Coimbra, built by him, as the first
fruites of his victories. Hee tooke in like manner the towne of Torrslnouas. The contrarie
happened in Cattelogne, whereas the Moores (whilest that the king of Nauarre
and Arragon did ouer-runne their westerne countrie) were furiously entred, and committed
infinite spoyles, the which might well bee one of the reasons which made the
seege of Cordoua to cease, and caused the king of Nauarre and Arragon to retire to
come and succor D. Raymond Arnould Earle of Barcelone.
In these warres D. Alphonso king of Nauarre,Nauarre and Arragon. had great ayde and assistance of many
Knights and Noblemen of France, that were neighbours to the Pyrenees, to whome
a great part of the victories obtained by him against the Moores are attributed by the
testimonie of the Spanish Authors themselues. In this voyage of Cattelogne, hee led
with him the infant D. Garcia, sonne and heire to D Ramir Sanches, to whom by right of
succession the kingdome of Nauarre did belong, for that he was issued from the direct
and lawfull line of the king D.D. Garcia rige^ hetre of Nauarre. Sancho Garcia his grandfather. This young Prince was lest
by his dying father in the gouernement of D. Sol widow to the infant D. Pedro, daughter
to Cid, his Aunt by the mothers side, by whome he was bred up in his youth, in all
vertue and religion, and they called him the Lord of Moncon. After this expedition
the king peopled the new Bourg of Pampelone, which he had caused to be built neere
vnto the old towne, and was called at that time Iruna, that is to say, good towne: hee
placed French Inhabitants there, taken out of the souldiers which had followed him in
the warres against the Moores, whem he would reward for their good seruices, in lodging
them in this new increase, which he had made of the towne of Pampelone, giuing
them the priuiledges and exemptions of the towne of Iaca. Some thinke they came
from Cahors in Quercy: he also gaue priuiledges to the Inhabitants of Maragnon.
During these things,Castile. the Countesse of Portugall, who was a prisoner, beeing too
hardly intreated by D. Alphonso Henriques her sonne, had meanes to acquaint D. Alphonso
Raymond, king of Castile her nephew, with her afflictions, and to intreate him to
imbrace her cause, and to f^ee her from that hard prison, wherein shee was detained: in
recompence whereof the offered to make him her heire of the Earledome of Portugal.
D. Alphonso desirous^ to ioyne this peece to his demaynes, came in person with a great
armie, to deliuer this woman, forgetting that the Earle had assisted him in the warre,
which he had against his mother D. Vrraca Queene of Castile and Leon, but hee had
a sharpe incounter in the fields of Valdues, along the bankes of the riuer of Limia*
where beeing vanquished by the armie of D. Alphonso Henriques, his cousin, hee saued
himselfe, being hurt in the foo^e, in the territorie of Leon.

Beeing cured, and hauing raysed another army, he entred againe into Portugal, being
desirous to recouer his honour, and to force the Portugals to acknowledge him,
and to do him the homage which they ought him, as King of Leon. Beeing arriued at
Guymaranes, where the Earle was, he beseeged it, and did all hee could to take the
place: but D. Egas Nugnes the Earles Gouernor going foorth with a safe-conduct; they
so treated, as vpon a promise which Don Egas made vnto the King, that the Earle of
Portugall should take an oath of fealtie, as to his Soueraigne, he returned satisfied into
his Countrey, without doing any other exploit: but the Earle D. Alphonso Henriques
would not performe that which his Gouernor had promised: wherefore D. Egas went
to the King beeing at Toledo, and there presenting himselfe at his feete, with a halter
about his necke, he craued pardon, for that which he had promised, and could not performe;
which was, that the Earle should do him homage for his Earledome of Portugall,
whom the King pardoned, beeing duly informed that hee had done his best indeanour
to effect his promise. These wars (which were the first the Castillans had against
the Portugals, written by the Historians of Portugall, wherof notwithstanding others
make no mention) past about the year 1127. D. Theresa for that time had no ease,
Her sister D. Vrraca made her residence in Saint Vincents church, beeing streightly garded:
yet they say, that going one day to Saint Isidores church in Leon, to take the treasure
which her father and grandfather had giuen vnto that place, as she was carrying
this prey,Death prodigious to D. Vrraca of Castile. hauing one foote within, and another without the doore, shee burst in the
middest, a worthie and condigne punishment due for the adulteries which shee had
committed, and the murthers which ensued not long after, to the preiudice and dishonour
of the Kings house, and of all the Christian Estate in Spaine, as also for the sacriledge.
Others say, that shee dyed in the Castell of Saldagne, beeing brought in
bed of a child by stealth. So Don Alphonso Raymond remayned destitute and without
a mother.
About that time the king of Castile, prouoked by the Moores, who were entered into
the Territories of Toledo, marched farre into their countrey, and tooke from them
by a long and painefull seege,Calatraua taken from the Moores. the towne of Calatraua, the which he gaue to the Archbishop
of Toledo, beeing a great fauourer of the Church and Clergie, into the which
he put a good garrison, the which some beleeue were Templers; who were wonderfully
increased, and growne exceeding rich, euen in Spaine. After which D. Alphonso Raymond
tooke from the Infidels, Alarcos, Caracuel, Almodouar del campo, and other
places, whereof he fortfied some, and razed others. At that time there raigned ouer
the Moores in Spaine and Affricke, H^li Aben-Tefin, the third Miralmumin, and last
of the Almorauides, vpon whom the King of Castile extended his limits vnto the
Mountaines called Sierra Morena, where he fortified Pedroche: then he past into Andalousia
with a great army, and layd feege vnto the towne of Iaen, but it was in vaine:
for being valiantly defended by the Moores, he was forced to retire, and returned with
his army into Castile.
This King D. Alphonso had married D. Berenguela,Cattelogne. daughter to Don Raymond Arnould
Earle of Barcelone,An. 1131. who dyed in the yeare 1131. hauing held the Earledome
eight and forty yeares. A little before his death, he made himselfe of the Order of Saint
Iohn of Hierusalem, called the Hospitaliers. The Earledome of Prouence was fallen
vnto him in the right of his wife D. Doulce, and of other lands in France, whereof hee
caused himselfe to be called Marquis:Genealogie of Cattelogne. by which Lady he had two sonnes, D. Raymond
Berenger, who succeeded him in the principalitie of Cattelogne, and afterward came
by marriage to the Crowne of Arragon, and D. Berenger Raymond, who was Earle or
Marquis of Prouence, thus ordered by his will. of D. Doulce was also borne D. Berenguela
Queene of Castille, and two other daughters, who were married into France.
The Earledome of Prouence had beene in question betwixt D. Raymond Arnould, and
the Earle of Tholousa and Saint Giles, but their sute, after many delayes, was ended by
accord: which was, That the lands of Prouence lying betwixt the riuers of Durance
and Isera, making at this day a part of Daulphine, should belong vnto the Earle of
Tholousa, with the Castell of Beaucaire, the Lands of Argence, Castell of Bolobrege
,
and the moitie of the cittie of Auignon, and of Pont de Sorge, the rest should
remaine to the Earle of Barcelone. According vnto this diuision, D. Berenger Raymond
did inherit Prouence, and there was added, that if any of the parties dyed without lawfull
heires, the other should succeede. Among other Articles of D. Raymond Arnoulds
restament, he ordained, that if his heires dyed without lawfull children, his daughter
Berenguela, Queene of Castile and Leon, and D. Ximena, wife to Roger Earle of Foix
should succeed.
By this noble and vertuous Queene D. Berenguela, D. Alphonso king of Castile,Genealogie of Castile. had
foure children: D. Sancho who was king of Castile, hee was bred vp in his youth and gouerned
by D. G^itiere Fernandes de Castro. The second, D. Fernand, who did inherite
the Realmes of Leon and Gallicia: and two daughters, D. Isabella, called by some D.
Constance, wife to the French King, Lewis the young, the seuenth of that name, he that
did put away Elenor, Countesse of Poictiers, heire of Guienne, daughter to Count
Willyam, who after this diuorce married with Henry Duke of Aniou and Normandie:
who beeing heire to the Crowne of England, had long and cruell warres against the
French, by reason of this Ladies patrimonie, the which continued aboue three hundred
yeares, vnto King Charles the seuenth. The second dughter which D. Alphonso
had by D. Berenguela, was called D. Sancha, or by others D. Beacia, who was Queene
of Nauarre, hauing married the king D. Sancho surnamed the Wise, or the Valiant, as
others write. There is to be seene among the tombes which are in the great Chappell
of the Monasterie of Ogna, an inscription of D. Garcia, who they imagine was sonne
to the sayd D. Alphonso, who had a second wise, daughter to Vladislaus Duke of Polonia,
called D. Ri^a, by whome he had one daughter called D. Sancha, who was married
to D. Alphonso, the fixt king of Arragon, the second of that name. He had familiar acquaintance
with two Gentlewomen, whereof the one, which was called D. Maria,
brought him a daughter, called D. Stephana, or Estienette: the other which was called
D. Gontrude, bare him D. Vrraca, who was first married to D. Garcia Ramires King of
Nauarre: and for her second husband, she married a wise and valiant Knight, called D.
Aluaro Rodrigues, without any respect of her degree, falling from a Queene to be the
wife of a simple Knight: it may be the Ladies of those times had no such haughtie spirits
as they haue at this day, or else could not distinguish betwixt vertue and fortune.
D. Stephana her sister was married to another Knight, of the house of Castro, whome
they called D. Fernand Rodrigues the Castillan, from whom issued a sonne, called D.
Pedro Fernandes de Castro. This was the posteritie of King D. Alphonso of Castile. About
the yeare 1132. he made his eldest sonne D. Sancho a Knight, on Saint Mathias
day, vpon the which he also gaue the towne of Vra, to the Monasterie of Saint Dominicke
of Silos.
It was about this time that Don Alphonso the Warriour,Nauarre and Arragon. King of Nauarre, who alwayes
called himselfe Emperour of Spaine, had certaine quarrels with them that dwelt
on this side the Pyrenees, towards France, in the Duchie of Guienne, the occasion beeing
concealed by the Authors, is not knowne to vs, but that wee may coniecture hee
would fauour Don Alphonso Earle of Tholousa and Saint Giles, from whome VVilliam
Earle of Poictiers detained his liuing:Bayonne taken. but whatsoeuer mooued him, hee beseeged Bayonne,
the which hee tooke with little danger and difficulty, extending his limits much
on that side.
During this seege he made his last will and restament, and as hee was alwaies enuironed
with Bishops, who forgot not themselues in such oportunities, beeing also very
deuout,D. Alphonsos Tetlamen. and seasoned with an opinion, that sinnes are wiped away, and punishments
redeemed by gifts and foundations of rents and reuenues to Churches: Hee gaue vnto
the great Church of Pampelona, and to the Monasterie of Leyre, the towne and
Castell of Estella, to enioy the moytie thereof, with all the rights, profites, and commodities.
To the Monasteries of Saint Mary of Nagera, and of Saint Aemilian of Cogolla,
he gane the towne of Nagera and Tubie with the castels. To the Monasterie of
Saint Dominicke of Silos, hee gaue the Towne of Sanguessa, together with the castell,
and the two boroughs, the old and new. To that of Saint Saluadour of Ogna, the

towne and territorie of Villorado. To the Monasteries of Iean de la Pegna, and of Saint
Peter of Ceresa, and to the Cathedrall churches of Saint Iames in Galicia, and of Saint
Sauiour of Quiedo, he gaue many Legacies of great consequence, but the most important
was, that which he gaue to the religious of the holy Sepulcher, and to the knights
of the Temple,A prodigious clause in D. Alphonsos testament. and the hospitaliers of Ierusalem, of both his Realmes of Nauarre, and
Arragon, and whatsoeuer else he should conquer from the Moores, ordaining in particular,
that his armes and horse should be sent to the Knights of the Temple.
The King gaue all these prodigious Legacies, vpon a wonderfull superstition, together
with a hatred which he bare to them of his bloud, finding himselfe old, and without
any heires of his bodie: but there were but few put in execution, beeing so preiudiciall
to the Christians estate in Spaine, and would haue beene the seed of diuision and wars
betwixt the Princes: yet his testament was made with all solemnities, and fortified with
the paines and threates which were in vse in that age. Beeing returned into his countries,
he ordained a seueral court or iurisdiction for the Inhabitants of Calatajub, granting
them many priuiledges and immunities, and ordaining that the reuenues of the
Clergie should be hereditarie, to the end that the inhabitants, and such as were borne
there, might onely enioy them, as in our time in Castile, those do which are of the Bishoprickes
of Calaorra, Calcada, Bourgos, and Plaisance, and in many places of the
Bishopricke of Pampelone.
In the beginning of the yeare 1133.An. 1133. this King and Emperour of Spaine,Assembly at Sarragossa. called an assembly
of the Bishops and Noblemen of his country at Sarragossa, to resolue vpon the
warre against the Moores. Among those which were there present, they name the infant
D. Garcia Ramires, Lord of Moncon, the right heire of Nauarre: Rotron Earle of
Perche, Lord of Tudele, D. Sancho de Roses, bishop of Pampelone, another D. Sancho
Bishop of Calaorra, D. Garcia Guerra Bishop of Sarragossa, D. Michel of Tarrassone,
and D. Arnould of Husfca,Expedition against the Moores vnfortunate. with many other great personages, both Clergie and Secular.
There they concluded to make warre against the Infidels, enemies to the Christians,
vsurpers of the countrie of Spaine; and withall, order was giuen for all things necessarie
for so great an enterprise: leuies of souldiers were made, and Commissaries
sent out for victuals, carriages, boates and other things necessarie for the conduct of
munition, victuals, instruments and engines of batterie, with great prouision of arms,
and all that was needfull for so great an army.
The King D. Alphonso the warriour hauing resolued to root out the Moores, hee began
on this side Ebro to assayle them of Lerida and Fraga, from whome hee tooke the
towne of Mequinenca by composition, being at that time exceeding strong, and valiantly
defended by the Moores: from thence he came before Fraga, a towne well fortified,
and strong by nature, seated vpon the riuer of Cinca, the which he began to presse
about August, and there made a long and fruitlesse stay: so as winter approching, hee
was forced to raise his seege, hauing an intent to returne in the Spring, the which hee
did in Februarie,An. 1134. If the place were strong before, the Moores had so fortified it
during the winter, as they had made it impregnable: when as they retired, the beseeged
taking courage, as wel by the retreat of the Christians, as by some succors which
they had from about Lerida, they went to field, and charged the rereward of the Nauarrois
army, whom they forced to turne head, and to fight with all his forces. There
was the king D. Alphonso vanquished,Alphonso king of Nauarre vanquished by the Moores. the which was strange, and of hard digestion to
him, who hauing beene accustomed to beate his enemies, euer since he commaunded
an armie. Wherefore he retired wonderfully perplexed, hauing lost that day many
Christians, and among others many valiant Knights, and great personages of his
Realmes of Nauarre and Arragon.
The Moores growne proud with this victorie, and that they had chased the king out
of their limits, entred into his countrie, putting all to fire and sword, which they could
not carrie away with them, and came as farre as Moncon: wherewith the king being incensed,
he thrust himselfe into a calamitie vnworthie of so great and wise a Captaine as
he had alwaies shewed himselfe. But we striue in vaine against the will of heauen, and
worldly man doth in vaine call backe good fortune, which hath once turned her fact

from him, for his sinnes, which hee doth not vouchsafe to acknowledge. His troupes
being dispersed, and euery one retired to his house, after this route he called those that
were neerest vnto him, and attending a conuenient number to attend his person, hee
went in all hast, beeing old and broken, with foure hundred horse to pursue these
Moores, who carried away a great prey, and an infinit number of Christians prisoners,
hauing ouertaken them neere vnto their fort of Fraga, hee found his owne error, and
would gladly haue retired, but it was to late; for the Moores descouering the small
number which pursued them,Descat and death of King D. Alphonso the warrior. turned head, and hauing stretched forth their bands, they
enuironed the King and his whole troupe, and put them in a manner all to the sword,
where amongst the rest the King was slaine. This happened in September, in the
yeere 1134. Such was the end of King D. Alphonso the warrior, a very worthy and a
fortunat Prince, if home-bred calamities, the hatred of his owne bloud, and his ouer
great superstition, had not vndermined and weakned the vigour of his spirit, the which
was much decaied in his latter daies. They say his body was taken vp and buried in
the Monastery of Iesus of Nazareth in Montarragon: yet many hold that it was not
found, beeing (it may bee) scattered in this defeat from his company, and so swallowed
vp in some bogge or riuer, or lost by some other accident, as hath happened to other
Princes, in the like incounters. The brute was among the common people, that
he was escaped in the charge, and that seeing himselfe twice vanquished, wherevnto he
had not beene accustomed, he was so greeued as he durst not shew himselfe to his subiects
any more, but went to Ierusalem, from whence he neuer returned. He had raigned
about thirty yeeres. At this decease, the Estates of Nauarre and Arragon were much
perplexed, both for that their King had left no heire of his body, as also for the desperate
will which he had made. These difficulties were augmented by the factions of the
Nobility, who could not agree vpon the election of a new King.
9. Whilest they contended among themselues, D. Alphonso Raymond King of Castille,
being aduertised of the decease of his father in law, by the aduice and perswasion
of his councell, hee reuiued his pretensions to the Estates of Nauarre and Arragon, as
great grand-child to D. Sancho the great,Vsurpation of some places in Nauarre by by the King of Castille. who was King of Nauarre and Earle of Arragon;
wherevpon hee seized vpon the Lands of the riuer of Oija, of Villorodo, Granon,
Nagera, Logrogno, Arnedo, Biguerra, and many other places vnto Calaorra,
which were thence cut off from the body of Nauarre: so as the iurisdiction of that
Kingdome was then lymited towards Castille, by the riuer of Ebro. D. Alphonso continuing
his conquests, whilest that no man made head against him, hauing attempted
the towne of Victoria in vaine, he ouer-runne the country of Alaua, and tooke the
towne of Maragnon and other forts: striking such a terror into the Nauarrois and
Arragonois, as if they had not feared to loose their exemptions and preuiledges, and
to bee ill intreated by King D. Alphonso, they would haue willingly yeelded all vnto
him.
Amongst the chiefe which did councell and accompany the King in this spoile,Names of Knights and Prelats, which did accompany the King of Castille. were
the Bishops, D. Bernard of Siguenca, D. Sancho of Nagera, and D. Bertrand of Osma; and
of Noblemen D. Lope, and D. Sancho Diaz, D. Garcis Fortuniones, D. Roderigo Goncales,
the Earles D. Pedro Lopes, D. Gomes Nugnes, D. Guttiere Peres de Lorea, Diego Nugnes,
Garcia-Garces, Almerigo standard bearer to the King, D. Lopes Lord Steward of the
Kings house, Melendo Bofino, Ordogno Peres, Rodrigo Goncales of Olea, Guttiere Fernandes,
Rodrigo Fernandes, and Rodrigo Nugnes de Gusman. King D. Alphonso spoyling
all along the riuer of Oija,Expiations of the sins and vsurpatons of D. Alphonso King of Castille. beeing admonished not to forget to make expiation for his
excesse, he gaue many goodly things to the Monastery of Saint Emilian, the which are
found written and receiued by Berenger Arch-deacon of Toledo. Beeing afterwards
entred in Arragon, hee committed the like spoiles as in Nauarre. The Nauarrois and
Arragonois seeing themselues prest by the King of Castille, they made hast to preuent
these mischiefes, wherevnto they were subiect for want of a head: wherefore beeing assembled
at a place called Borja, a towne belonging to D. Pedro de Atares, a knight of
the bloud royall, who some thinke was sonne to D. Garcia, the sonne of D. Sancha, Bastard
to D. Ramir first King of Arragon, and of D. Theresa Caxal his wife, a great

number of them were of aduice, that they should choose him for King of Nauarre and
Arragon, for that they had obserued in him many royall qualities, and did know that
the deceased King had much esteemed him, and had giuen him that towne in reward
of his seruices, with many other guifts. Notwithstanding this personage (otherwise
endowed with great vertues) was graue and exceeding seuere; which made him to bee
the lesse beloued by the Nobility of Nauarre: of whom some held themselues wronged
in their particular, for that offring some-times to visit him, they haue refused them
the entry, the porters saying, that Mounsier was busie about matters of great importance,
but they vnderstood afterwards that the great affaires which had made D. Pedro
exclude his friends,D. Pedro ^^^ected, for hir s^^iolence. were, that his Barber was a trimming him: wherefore his great
ouer-weening and his vnseasonable grauitie, did him then harme, so as hee was not
chosen King of these two large Kingdomes, his greatest aduersaries beeing Pedro Tizan
of Quadrieta, and Pelegrin of Castellezuelo, who gaue the assembly to vnderstand,
that the chiefe vertues, requisite in Kings, wanted in D. Pedro which were clemency
and affability, in steed of which hee was full of Arrogancy and insupportable presumption.

If he haue (say they) made shew thereof in many places lyuing in a priuate estate,
who can doubt, but after that hee hath attained to the royall throne, hee will passe all
bounds of modesty, and that hee will contemne the Noblemen and Gentlemen his
subiects: who shalbe the more reiected, when hee shall finde them to bee vertuous,
for pride in him that holds the soueraigne place, is euer accompanied with iealousie
and deadly hatred against the best men. Wherefore they concluded, that they
must bee very carefull, not to submit themselues to such a man, but should choose
some other Lord, who was descended of the same bloud, whereof the country, by the
Prouidence of God, was not vnfurnished: that they had D. Ramir, brother to the
deceased King, D. Garcia Ramires, Lord of Moncon and others, who had giuen better
hope of them then D. Pedro.

By their perswasions, the Noblemen and men of State assembled at Borja, inclined
to D. Ramir, who was a Monke of the order of Saint Bener. But to the end it might be
effected with more order, and lesse difficulty, they resolued to change the place of their
assembly, and goe to Moncon.


D. Garcia Ramires the seuenth of that name
and the ninteenth King of
Nauarre.
10. IN this dislodging, the Nauarrois grew to bee of an other opinion, considering
that D. Ramir hauing beene bread vp amongst Monkes, for the space of forty
yeeres,Diuision among the Nobility of Nauarre and Arragon. it was likely that hee was better acquainted with matters belonging to a monasticke
and sollitary life, then to gouerne a Kingdome, besides they grew iealous, that
the Arragonois choosing a King of the bloud royall of Arragon, they would by this
meanes aspire to the chiefe places of fauour and honour in Court: wherefore these
things being propounded in priuate assemblies, by D. Sancho de Rosas, Bishop of Pampelone,
Ladron de Gueuara, sonne to Ygnes; chiefe of the house of Gueuara in Alaua,
William Aznares of Oteyca, Fortunion Ynigues of Leete, Ximen Aznares
of Torres and others, it was concluded, that in steed of going to the generall
assembly at Moncon, the Estates of Nauarre should assemble at Pampelone,
the which hauing performed with great diligence, they did choose D. Garcia Ramires,
Lord of Moncon for King of Nauarre, who was sonne to the infant D. Ramir grand-child
to D. Sancho Gartia, and great grand-child, to D. Garcia the 6. who was son vnto the
king D. Sancho the great. D. Garcia was at Moncon at the time of this election, with the
Arragonois, assisting at their assembly, for the election of a future King, hauing no
thought to aspire to that degree, when as Willi, Azneares of Oteya, and Ximen Aznares of

Torres, beeing sent by the assembly of Pampelone, came to aduertise him of that which
had past, and led him secretly away to Pampelone. So D. Garcia Ramires was established
King of Nauarre, in October, 1134. being about forty yeeres old.


D. Ramir the second of that name, and fifth
King of Arragon.
11.Arragon. VVHen as the Arragonois vnderstood that there was a King in Nauarre, they
sodainely made choise of D. Frere Ramir for their King, who had beene
Monke at Tomires, appointed to bee Bishop of Roda and Barbastro, hauing been before
of Bourgos and Pampelone, and in like manner had beene chosen Abbor of Sahagun
in Castille, and was a priest, as D. Rodrigo Ximenes the Archbishop doth write.
To his election was added a dispensation from Pope Ancletus, then raigning. By this
meanes the Realmes of Nauarre and Arragon, which had beene vnited eight and fifty
yeeres, since the King D. Sancho Ramires, were seperated in these two Kings.
D. Frere Ramir, the new King of Arragon, had need of a more quiet estate, in respect
of his breeding vp in Saint Benets order, for thinking to raigne in Arragon, hee found
a rough aduersary in D. Alphonso Raymond King of Castille, wherefore hee retired himselfe
into the mountaines of Sobrarbre, hauing neither force nor courage to oppose
himselfe against him: so as to settle and to assure himselfe, he was forced to vse mildet
meanes then armes, and come to prayers and intreaties, imploying mediators which
were fit to treat, and pleasing to his enemy. Amongst others which labored to make
a peace betwixt these two Princes, were, D. Oldegaire Archbishop of Tarragone; but
both he and the rest lost their labours,Saragossa seized on by the king of Castille. for the King of Castille beeing come neere vnto
Sarragossa, the chiefe city of that Estate, hee was receiued, and commanded there as
King, hauing in his company D. Raymond Berenger, Earle of Barcelone, his wiues brother,
and Roger Earle of Foix who had married the other sister of Queene D. Berenguela,
D. Alphonso Iordain Earle of Tolouse, Armingol Earle of Vrgel, M^r Earle of
Pallars, Berenger Arch-deacon of Toledo, and many other Knights of Castille, Arragon,
Cattelogne, yea and of France.
Hauing with this company disposed of the affaires of Arragon, he returned to Leon,Casfille.
whereas he made an assembly of Prelats, and other chiefe men of his Estates, whereas
hee caused himselfe to bee crowned Emperor of Spaine in the Cathedral church, with
the solemnities and ceremonies requisit in so great an act,Alphonso Raymond King of Castille crowned Emperor of Spaine. receiuing the holy vnction
and the crowne from D. Raymond, Archbishop of Toledo which title was afterwards
confirmed (as some Spaniards write) by Pope Innocent the second, although that the
Kings his Predecessors (who had vsurped the like title, for that they were soueraigne
Lords in their countries, without acknowledging any other secular power) had not affected
the like confirmation. Some say this coronation was at Toledo: it may bee it
was a reiteration of that pompe and ceremony in Castille and the territory of Toledo,
which were distinct Kingdomes, and different from that of Leon, or it may bee a second
coronation, as the custome is in the Empire of Germany.
They adde moreouer that the name of Imperiall was confirmed to that city, by King
D. Alphonso the eight,Toledo the Imperial towne. and armes giuen it, the which it carries at this day, which are, an
Emperor in a roab of gold, sitting in a throne, holding a globe in his left hand, and in
his right a sword. In this pompe the church of Toledo had by guift from the Emperor
D. Alphonso, the towne of Alcala the old, in the yeere 1135. It was a fort built by
the Moores,An. 1135. and ruined in the former warres: wherefore they hold that D. Raymond the
Archbishop did afterwards build the towne of Alcala de Henares, whereas it is at this
day, and whereas in old time the towne of Comp^utum stood.
This Spanish Emperor seeing himselfe in that greatnesse, strooke against the same
stone where his Predecessors had grosly stumbled, and came to diuide his realmes amongst

mongst his children,Castille and Leoa diuided. making them Kings, being ill aduised by bad councel: to D. Sancho
the eldest he gaue Castille and Toledo; and to D. Fernand Leon and Galicia. To D,
Sancho hee extended the ancient lymits of Castille towards Leon, vnto the towne of
Sahagun, by Moral de la Roine, Tordehumes Vregna and Cauillas. To the second he
asigned the Lands of Leon and Galicia, with that part of the Asturies, which lies from
the riuer of Oua vnto Galicia.
These seeds of warre and discord, were laied by the bad councel of the Earles D.
Almeric de Lara, otherwise called Manriques, sonne to D. Pedro de Lara, and D. Fernand
of Transtamara, great Noblemen, who thought to maintaine the greatnesse and reputation
of their houses the better, by these parrages, and from the troubles which might
ensue, then if there were but one Monarke in Spaine, an ordinary practice in great
Christian Estates: this done D. Alphonso returned into Arragon.
D. Garcia Ramires King of Nauarre, seeing the successe of the King of Castille, in the
countries of Nauarre and Arragon,Nauarre. doubting hee should not be able to resist the great
power of this new Emperor D. Alphonso, especially if hee made himselfe maister of D.
Ramirs Kingdome, as hee was very likely, hee resolued to purchase a peace and his
friendship, by some submission vnto him for his realme of Nauarre. D. Alphonso
then being returned into Arragon,Nauarre (...) salto Casille, after the ceremonies of his eoronation, these two
Princes had an enterview at Pradilla, with great shewes of loue, where their accord and
league was confirmed.
King D. Ramir,Arragon. who could not obtaine his realme of Arragon, pretended to recouer
that of Nauarre from D. Garcia Ramires, saying that it belonged vnto him, as beeing
brother, and lawfull successor to the deceased King D. Alphonso the warrior; not withstanding
that D. Garcia had more interest then hee, or his Predecessors Kings of Arragon,
being sonne to the Insant D. Ramir Sanches, and grand-child to the King D Sancho
Garcis, slaine by his brother. Raymond through desire of raigne, after which Parricide,
the Nauarrois called in D. Sancho of Arragon, father to the Kings D. Pedro, D.
Alphonso, and of this Monke, to raigne ouer them, by reason of the minority of the
children of their deceased King, and with the forces of Arragon to repulse the murtherer
D Raymond, and his faction: and to keepe him from raigning in Nauarre: yea D.
Garcia Ramires had a better title to Arragon, then D. Alphonso Raymond King of Castille,
for that he was descended from the King D. Garcia Sanches, the eldest sonne of D.
Sancho the great, but where force raignes, right must giue place. Notwithstanding
all these reasons, D. Frere Ramir would make warre in Nauarre, and being in armes, hee
forced. Garcia to arme also, who to avoide the danger which did threaten him, if D.
Ramir should make an agreement with the King of Castille, hee made hast to doe the
homage, whereof wee haue spoken, but it continued not long: for soone after the
Kingdome of Nauarre recouered the ancient and hereditary soueraignty. D Ramir,
who kept, at Monclus in the mountaines of Sobrarbe, staied not long to submit himselfe
also to the King of Castille, and to doe him homage for his realme of Arragon:
wherefore D. Alphonso restored him all his lands except Sarragossa, and some other
places, which he kept to make vse of them against the Moores.
In the meane time there were cruell warres vpon the fronters of Nauarre and Arragon:
but the Prelats desirous to see this warre ended,VVar betwixt Nauarre and Arr^gon, laboured to reconcile the two
Kings. D. Sancho de Rosas, bishop of Pampelone, an Arragonois borne, delt so in this
treaty of peace, as hee gaue the King D. Garcia occasion to suspect him to be false vnto
him, for the which he chased him out of his countries, wherevpon he was taxed of two
great seuerity; and for that he had banded himselfe against a prelat, he was in a manner
compared to D. Pedro d' Athares, who by reason of his sterne and sower disposition, had
beene reiected from the royal dignity, so dangerous it was to touch these sacred persons,
were they good or bad.
The Prelats who had vndertaken to make this appointment, neuer ceased vntil they
had brought it vnto these termes, that they should choose fixe knights: three of either
realme, by whose iudgement all quarrels should bee ended: for Nauarre were chosen
Ladron de Guenars, William Aznares of Oteyca, and Ximen Aznar^s of Torres, for

Arragon they did choose D. Pedro a Athares,Treaty of peace betwixt Nauarre and Arragen. D. Caxal, and D. F^rris of Huesca. These
six being assembled at Vadoluengo; after many councels and conferences, in the end
they concluded that either party should lay downe armes, and the two Kings should
continue good friends; and for an order betwixt them, they assigned vnto D. Garcia
R^mires, the superiority ouer the Nobility, who should haue the conduct of armies as
Generall of both realmes; and that D. Ramir should haue commandment ouer the
rest of the people, and administer iustice, the which should take place in regard of their
persons onely, and during their liues: with which sentence the Kings were not well
contented. Yet D. Ramir beeing willing to satisfie D. Garcia, came to Pampelone,
where hee was receiued with great honour procuring at his first comming the restitution
of D. Sancho the Bishop, whom hee restored into fauour with the King D. Garcia.
There they consulted for the setting downe of certaine and apparent lymits, betwixt
the two realmes of Nauarre and Arragon. The seperation was drawne by a direct
line, from Saint Encratia, to Biosal, the valley of Roncall remayning to Arragon.
Then passing the riuer of Sarazas,Ancient ^^^mits betwixt Nauarre and Arragon* vnto the place whereas it falls into that of Yda,
and to Pont Saint Martin, and from thence to the place whereas as Yda falls into the
riuer of Arragon, and that of Arragon into Arga, and that of Arga into Ebro, and along
Ebro, into Tudele.
This diuision beeing made,Nauarre* it seemed there should not remaine any cause of hatred
betwixt these two Kings, and that D. Garcia R^mires, should reuerence D. Ramir, as
his father; and D. Ramir imbrace D. Garcia as his sonne, to whom moreouer hee granted,
during his life, out of his pottion, Valtierra. Quadrita, and that which lies betwixt
Roncal, and Bisoal, the which he should hold in see of the crowne of Arragon, to bee
reunited againe after his death. Yet D. Garcia was not satisfied with this accord*
perswading himselfe still, that D. Ramir ought not to raigne in Arragon, for that hee
had beene a professed Monke, and had taken all orders: so as vpon the pursute which
he made to bee freed from the homage which hee had done vnto D. Ramir, for those
places aboue mentioned; he attempted to stay him in Pampelone,Fraude of the King of Naua^e ill executed. giuing the charge
thereof to some of his followers, but they could not put it in execution; for the King
of Arragon was aduertised by a Knight, called Ynigo d' Ayuar, so as hauing conferred
with D. Pedro d' Athares, and other knights of Arragon, he went out of the towne vnknowne,
with foure more with him, posting away with all speed vntill he came to Saint
Sauiour of Leyre, where hee staied three daies for his traine, who came vnto him, according
to his directions, and from thence he retired in safety to Huesca. So it happened
to the King D. Sancho Ramires, as to his great Grand father. D. Gar^^^ Sanches,
when as he would haue taken King Fernand the first King of Castille, his yonger brother,
prisoner, in the towne of Nagera.
Herevpon D. Ramir began to leauy men for the future warre of Nauarre, whereof
the King D. Garcia was assured, and therefore hee made many prouision for his defence
and safety: the best and most worthy to bee imitated, was, that hee made
choice of twelue of the chiefest families of his country,Orders for the Nobility of Nauarre. whom hee bound vnto him
by honours and preferments, making them asit were heads of all the rest of the Nobility
and gentry of Nauarre. Which were the houses of Gueuara, Almorauit, Bactan,
Aybar, Leet, Subica, Rada, Bidaurre, Montagnt, Vrox, Cascant and Mauleon.
He made one Commander ouer these noble houses, which should bee respected of
them next to the Kings person: this was D. Ladron of Gueuara to whom he gaue the
title of Earle, and was the first which called himselfe Earle of Nauarre: this he did, for
that there were some gentlemen of his country beganne to abandon him, to follow
the partie of Arragon, retyring to. Ramir, who entertained them, and assigned
them lands in Arragon. Of which number was D. Caxal, a man of great
quality in those daies, hauing lands in both realmes, so as hee quit them in Nauarre
to serue the King of Arragon, but as hee carried himselfe verie passionatly
in these quarrells, hee fell soone after into a great danger; for beeing fent
by D. Ramir, to the Emperour D. Alphonso of Castille, to confrme a peace
with him, that hee might with more liberty attend the affaires of Nauarre, as hee

past vnaduisedly neere vnto the lands of D. Garcia, beeing aduertised thereof, he caused
him to be taken, at a place called Cares, a little Bourg, the which is now become a
towne, named Pont de la Roine, vpon the riuer of Arga, about the which growes the
best wine of all the countrie of Nauarre. D Caxal was put in a streight prison, where he
continued long: but the Abbot of Saint Saluador of Leyre, who was his kinsman and
friend, gaue vnto the king all the Iewels and treasure of his Abbey to redeeme him:
wherefore after his deliuerie he shewed himselfe very thankeful to this Monasterie, and
gaue vnto it all the lands he had in Tudele.
All matters betwixt the Kings of Castile and Arragon were reconciled,Arragon. and there
was an interview of these two Princes at Alagon, whereas D. Ramor did acknowledge
to hold his Realme in fee, and did homage to D. Alphonso, which submission continued
some yeares. Such was the dexteritie of the King of Castile, hauing reduced these two
Kings vnder his Soueraigntie,Dexterity of D. Alphonso King of Castille. and as it were feudataries of his Empire, that although
they had a great desire to inuade one another, yet he kept them from all open hostility,
as well by his authoritie, as by other meanes: sometimes restraying them by promises,
sometimes by threates, presuming, that if they continued in that estate, he should
haue them more at his commandement, then if one increasing with the ruine of another,
he would grow so great, as he might rebell, and deny him the homage which hee
had sworne.
King D. Ramir presently after he had left the Monasterie, married (with a dispensation
from the Pope, for that he had sung Masse) to a French Ladie, called D. Ignes or
Agnes, daughter to William Earle of Poictiers, and Duke of Guienne, who dyed in the
yeare 1136. going in pilgrimage to Saint Iames, for else his sister, as some hold, by
whom he had the Infanta D. Petronilla, who was afterwards married to the Earle of
Barcelone; he did not long enioy his wife, after whose death, desiring to quit the affaires
of the world, he sent his onely daughter to D. Alphonso King of Castile, to be bred
vp in his Court with the Queene D. Berenguela: notwithstanding that the Noblemen
of Arragon, brought her backe againe, saying, that shee did not find her selfe well in
Castile.
About that time there was a knight retired into Arragon, called D. william Raymond
of Moncada,Arragon and Ca^telg^e, vited by marriage. Senesbal of Cattelogne, who had fled, for certaine outrages which
he had committed. By him there was a treaty of marriage begun, betwixt the Infanta
D. Petronilla, heire of Artagon, and D. Raymond Berenger, Earle of Barcelone his
Lord, the which was afterwards accomplished, and in recompence of so great aseruice,
the Seneshall obtained his pardon, and his dignity, which was to bee chiefe and
captaine of the horsemen. It is not certaine when this marriage was effected, but it
is probable, that it was neere the end of King D. Ramir, for that the Infanta Petronille,
was onely two or three yeeres old, when as the King left the gouernment of the
Realine,An. 1137. to returne to his religious order, which was in the yeere of our Lord 1137.
three yeeres after his election and promotion to the crowne, at which time the authors
write that this marriage was concluded by words, De futuro: the conditions amongst
others, were. That the Earle should not take vpon him the title of King,
but should onely call himselfe Prince of Arragon,Conditions of the trea^y. and Earle of Barcelone, but that the
children which should descend of this marriage, should bee called Kings of Arragon.
That the Earle should carry in chiefe, the first and most ancient armes of Arragon,
which was a crosse argent in a field azure, in all actions of warre, but hee might carry
those of Barcelone in his shield and ensignes, hauing foure bends gueules, or a field
or: yet the ensigne bearers should bee of Arragon; that the Arragonois should take
the deuise of Saint George.
This treaty beeing made and concluded in Barbastro, by the King, beeing assisted
by the Noblemen of Arragon, and the Earle of Barcelone, hee was receiued in quality
of Regent of the Realme of Arragon, with the which Cattelogne remained vnited
a hundred and three yeeres, after that Arragon was made a realme, and two hundred
fifty and three yeeres after that there had beene hereditary Earles in Cattelogne. This
done, King D. Ramir g^^ing ouer all administration and gouernment, as in a royall

estate and habit, hee had alwaies carried a Monkes heart, hee retired into a Monastery
which hee had built, in the Parish of Saint Peter the olde at Huesca, there to
spend the remainder of his daies religiously, with the Chaplins.
This Prince is taxed of cowardise and great cruelty,Cruelty of the King D Ramir. being transported with continual
iealousies, his deeds doe witnesse it, for that by the councel of the Abbot of Saint
Ponce of Tomeres in Languedoc, he cut off the heads of Lepe Ferencio, Rodrigo Ximenes,
Pedro Marlines, and Fernand Gomes, all of the house of Lata: Federic Lisane,
Pedro Verga, Gyles Atrosil, Pedro Carnel Garzia Pigna, Raymond de Fosses, Pedro Luesia,
Michel Azlario and Sancho Fontona, all noble men of great houses; onely vpon a conceit
that hee was conte^^ed by them. This execution was done at Huesca. They
hold that this yeere 1137. the towne of Lerida, held by the Moores, was attempted, but
not taken, by the Earle D. Raymond Berenger, who seeing himselfe aduancedin dignity,
greatnesse and forces, beeing Prince of Arragon and Earle of Barcelone, would also
inlarge his estates, and ioyne vnto it the realme of Nauarte, reuiuing the pretended
title of his father in law D. Frere Ramir, for the effecting whereof hee had many treaties
with the Emperour D. Alphonso of Castille, whom hee found alwaies fauourable, by
the mediation of the Queene D. Berenguela his sister, so as beeing prouoked by the
Earle, and no lesse by his owne ambition, hee led an army against D. Sancho Ramires,
whom hee found well attended to make head against him betwixt Cortes and Gallur,
where it pleased God to stay these armies from fighting, by the meanes of some good
men, who did mediate some kinde of accord for that time.
Notwithstanding Count Raymond (desirous to imbarke the Emperour D. Alphonso,League betwixt the King of Castille and Prince of Arragon against the King of Nauarre.
his brother in law in this warre) came vnto him to Carrion, where hee renewed the
oth of fealty, doing him homage for the country of Arragon; where he did insinua^e
so well into his fauour, as hee got out of his hands the townes of Sarragosse, Tarassone,
Calataiub and Daroca, which were held by the Castillans. Afterwards
D. Raymond Berenger returned againe to D. Alphonsos court at Carrion, whereas
the conditions and Articles were concluded and set downe, concerning the warre
which they should make in common, against D. Garcia King of Nauarre.
Amongst the which they diuided the Beares skinne before hee was taken, agreeing,
that of all the country of Nauarre which they should conquer, the Emperour D.
Alphonso should haue a third part, and the other two should belong vnto D. Raymond,
Prince of Arragon, vpon condition to hold them in fee of the realme of Castille.
At this treaty there were present the Bishops. Berenger of Salamanca, and D. Pedro
of Burgos, with other Noblemen both Clergy and Secular. From Carrion
they went to Soria, where after they had held a councell of prophane things,
they had a great care of religion, that is to say, of the temporall reuenues of the
Church, wherefore the King and Queene did giue vnto the Monastery of Saint
Mary of Valbanera, a house in Canegosa, with certaine immunities, to the end that if
any thing were attempted vniustly, to the ruine of an other, this sinne might by that
meanes be purged.
The army of Castille beeing ready to march,Nauarre* the Emperour D. Alphonso past vnto
the frontier of Nauarre, by the riuer of Ebro, marching along the which, hee came
to Calaorra, where hee was met by D. Sancho Bishop of Calaorra, D. Stephen Prior
of Saint Mary the royall of Nagera, D. Michel Bishop of Tarassone, with the
Earle D. Ladron of Gueuara, and others, who imployed themselues happely to appease
the ambition of this Prince,Peace betwixt Nauarre and Castille. and to conuert the warre into a good peace, the
which was concluded by an enterview of the two Kings of Castille and Nauarre,
betwixt Calaorra and Alfaro: to confirme the which, there was a marriage concluded
betwixt the Infant D. Sancho, the eldest sonne of Castille, and D. Blanche, daughter
to D. Garcia King of Nauarre, in the yeere of our Lord 1140. and promises made
by words, de futuro, by reason of the tender age of the Infanta, who was deliuered vnto
D. Alphonso her father in law, to bee bred vp in Castille, vntil shee were capable for
the consummation of the marriage.

14. This was a second crosse to the designes of the new Prince of Arragon, who
was at the same time in quarrel with the knights of the Temple,Arragon and Cattelog^e or Barcelon* and the Hospitaliers of
Saint Iohn of Ierusalem, which pretended the luccession of the realme of Arragon, by
vertue of the Testament of the deceased King D. Alphonso the Warrior, by the which
they were made heires. Raymond Maister of the hospitaliers was come into Spaine to
that end, who seeing it very difficult to challendge their right by armes, and that to
pursue it by Iustice, besides the rediousnesse, the euent would be vncertaine, and the execution
very hard, hee sought to make an accord, and compounded with D. Raymond
Berenger, quitting vnto him that part which did belong vnto the Hospital, vpon condition,
that if he died without children lawfully begotten, it should returne to the same
religion.
Besides hee receiued many benific^s and charitable guifts for the sayd religion, in
those places which the Earle did then enjoy, with promise of a large portion of all
which hee should conquer from the Moores. According to this accord the Templers
^urceased their action: so as after that time those two Orders got great reuenues
in Arragon, Cattelogne, and Valencia. In the transaction which was made betwixt
D. Raymond Berenger and the Templers, for the Prince there assisted, the Bishops of Saragosse,
and Huesca, with the Archbishop of Tarragone: and moreouer Arn^^ld
Earle of Pallars, Bernard of Comminges, Peter of Bigorre, and other Noblemen and
knights of Arragon, Cattelogne and others: and for the Templers, Euerard Ostan of
Saint Ordogno, Hugo Borra^o Pedro Anticho and Bernard Riginol. This accord was confirmed
by Pope Adrian the fourth.
D. Garcia Ramires King of Nauarre,Nauarre. beeing (by meanes of a peace made with D. Alphonso
Emperor of Spaine) freed from a great danger, he stood very carefully vpon his
gard, in respect of D. Raymond Berenger, who prest him towards Arragon, finding himselfe
strong ynough to resist him: for notwithstanding that the Earle was a wife and
valiant knight, yet the King. Garcia was nothing inferiour vnto him in vertue, greatnesse
of courrage, knowledge and discipline in warre, and was also well assisted with
good and wise Knights, amongst the which hee was faithfully serued by D. Sancho de
Rosas Bishop of Pampelone, newly reconciled, the Earle D. Ladron of Gueuara Lord
in Ayauar, William Aznares Lord in Sanguesse, Ximen Aznares, Lord in Tafalle, Ramir
Garcia, Lord in the towne of Saint Mary of Vxue, Martin de Leet, Lord of Gallipienco,
and Peralta, Peter Tizon Lord in Cadreyta, Rodrigo of Acagra, Lord in Estella,
Roderigo Abarco, Lord in Funes and Valtiera, lean Dia, Lord in Cascant, Ramer Sanches
Lord in Maragnon (they were Gouernors or Captaines in these places) and many
others, as well of his owne country, as of France, Hee kept in fronter places well
manded, like a prouident Prince, as the fort of Tudele, which came vnto him by marriage,
as we will shew, Bureta and Sos.
Hee had put a valiant captaine into the fort of Malon, called Gerard the Diuell into
that of Frescano an other captaine, a stranger, called Robert of M^talon, and so in the
rest which frontered vpon Arragon. Moreouer hee had practised a league with
France, first with Lewis the sixth, surnamed the Grosse and then with Lewis the seuenth,
called the young, who assisted him with their forces, and fortified his army, when as
the Emperour D. Alphonso presented himselfe first betwixt Cortes and Galur, and
then in the second expedition of Calaorra, where the peace was concluded and
confirmed by the marriage of D. Sancho Infant of Castille, with D. Blanche, Infanta
of Nauarre, whom the King D. Garcia had had by D. Marguerite his wife, daughter to
Rotron Earle of Perche, who had brought vnto him the towne of Tudele for her dourie,Genealegy of Nauarre.
the which Count Rotron had obtained from King D. Alphonso the warrior, for his
valour and good deserts. The King D. Garcia Ramires had many other children by
this Ladie: D. Sancho who was King after him, D. Alphonso Ramires; Lord of Castro
Vieijo, D. Marguerite who was Queene of Naples and Sicile, married to William,
sonne to Roger, father and mother to an other William, King of Naples and Sicile.
Queene Marguerite, dyed about the yeere 1141. after which the King D. Garcia married
againe with D. Vrraca, bastard daughter to the Emperor D. Alphonso, which he had by a

gentlewoman, called D. Gontrude, sister to one Diego Abregon, or Apricio. The King
had one daughter by this second wife, called D. Sancha, who was married first to Gaston
Earle of Bearne, and afterwards to D. Pedro de Molina, from whom issued D. Almerigo,
or Manrique, who was vicont of Narbonne, by succession from D. Ormesind, his
grand-mother by the fathers side^some say, that the second wife of there King D. Garcia,
was not D. Vrr^ca, bastard daughter to D. Alphonso King of Castille, but the daughter
of D. Lope Dia^de Haro,Family of Haro Loras of Bis^ay. Lord of Biscay the third of that name, and the first which
intitled himselfe de Haro, the which was called D. Ge^ffrey, who sister D. Vrraca Lopes,
was wife to D. Fernand King of Leon, the second of that name, sonne to the Emperour
D. Alphonso then raigning. These two Ladies had also one brother, called D.
Diego Lopes de Haro, surnamed the good, who was a braue a valiant Knight. Yet
the first opinion taken out of D. Radrigo Ximenes, Archbishop of Toledo, a Nauarrois,
is more approoued by the Spaniards, touching the marriages of the King D.
Garcia.
There is mention made in the Histories of Spaine, of a Lady of this house of Biscay,
called D. Maria Lopes,Doxations to churches. verie deuout and bountifull to the Clergy, who gaue Saint Michel
de Barbadillu, Saint Mary de Lor, Saint Mary d' Estiualis, Aperreg^^^ and Magniriette,
with other lands which are in the Prouince of Alaua, where she dwelt, to the Monasterie
of Nagera. The deuotion of Princes and Noblemen in those daies was
great striuing who should giue most vnto the Church, beeing instructed by the Clergie,
that the onely meanes to redeeme their soules from eternall damnation, was to
doe good to religious men, who praied to God for them, whilest they abandoned
themselues to all voluptuosnesse, and pleasures in their secular estates, spoyling oftentimes
their neighbours, or subiects of their partimonies to inrich (that is to say, to ruine)
the Church, making Bishops, Abbors, Priests and Monkes partakers of their
rapines and spoiles.
During the troubles of Castille.Castille, Arragon and Nauarre, there grew great contention
betwixt D. Simeon Bishop of Burgos, and D. Sancho de Punes, Bishop of Calaorra,
for the church and sepulture of Saint Dominike of Calsada, either of them maintayning
that it was of his Diocese and iurisdiction.Debate among Bishops to enlarge their Dioccses. Therein (in my opinion) they did not striue
who should haue the greatest flock, and feed the^ best for their soules health, but they rather
sought their owne reputations, and particular profits, for that the opinion of the
holinesse to this dead man, did euery day increase, in which place they built a towne,
and moreouer that the Kings then raigning in Spaine were very deuour, and great benefactors;
namely the Emperor D. Alphonso Raymond, and his wife D. Berenguela, who
had a little before indowed this church with great possessions. The cause was argued
before Iudges appointed by the Emperour, yet named by the two Bishops which contended:
for him of Calaorra there was chosen Pedro de Granon, Arch-deacon of Cala^rra,
and for the Bishop of Burgos, the Arch-deacon of Birbiesca, called also Peter, a
dignity of Burgos; these two hauing made diligent inquiry, examined ancient and credible
witnesses, and visited the conf^^es of both Dio^^ses, they gaue sentence for the
Bishop of Calaorra, the which in the yeere 1137. many notable personages assisting at
the Iudgement signed.
In the yeere 1141. the Emperor D. Alphonso,An. 1141. to incourrage men to people the town
which they began to build about the church of Saint Dominike, granted to the Inhabitants
thereof, the vse of the woods, forrests, mountaines and pastures thereabouts
like vnto the other townes their neighbours, and moreouer the waters which fell from
the mount of Fayola, with other commodities, which did help to plant this Bourg,
which beganne then to bee built, and since is growne a good towne, and a Cathedrall
church, as we see it. The towne was vnder the iurisdiction of the church, for a time, for
some occasions, there was a Court rayoll established, in the time of Ferdinand the
third, as we will note hereafter.



D. Alphonso Henriques the first King
of Portugal.
THe affaires of Portugal during these actions aboue mentioned,Portugal remaine obscure,
by the error and negligence of authors; for there is no memory found of the deeds
of D. Alphonso H^nriques, since the conquest of Leyra and of Torresnauas, which was
in the yeere of our Lord 1127. vnto the yeere 1139. when as hee past the riuer of
Tayo, and led an army against a King of the Moores, called Ismar or Ismael. In this
voyage died D. Egas Nugnes who had beene Gouernor to the Earle in his youth, and
his faithfull councellor; hee was interred at the Monastery of Sonsa, neere vnto the
towne of Porto. Hee had founded, according to the opinion of some, the Monastery
of Saint Martin of Cucuayes, in the country of Saint Mary, Ismar came out of his
country, against D. Alphonso Henriques, beeing accompanied by foure other pettie
Kings Moores: the two armies were in view one of an other, in the fields of Obrigue;
the Earles was about Castroverde, which at that time was called Cabecas de Reys,
that is to say, heads of Kings: and as the Christians were much inferiour to the Infidels
in number, so their opinions were diuers, most inclyning to a retreat without
fighting: but the Earle who was of a Noble courage, and generous resolution, perswaded
his people with such forcible reasons, as they resolued to all hazards, and for
a happie presage of a future victory, the souldiars turning themselues to God, were
moued to salute their Earle,R^^al title of the house of Portugal, with a royal name and title, crying all with one voice, Portugal,
Portugal, for the King D Alphonso Henriques.
Beeing thus incourraged, and all in good order, they charged the Moores squadrons,
and made a horrible slaughter of them, so as hauing put them all to flight, they
remained Maisters of the field; they tooke fiue royal Standards of the Moores, and all
their baggage.
The Portugals celebrate this memorable victory,Victory of Obrique. called of Obrique, vnto this day:
the honour whereof is due to them which dwell betwixt Tayo and Duero, and betwixt
Duero and Minio, for the Inhabitants beyond Tayo were at that time subiect to
the Moores, who held also a great part of the country on this side. After this battaile
D. Alphonso Henriques tooke vpon him the title of King of Portugal, and left by
succession to his descendants this title obtained by a millitary prerogatiue, before the
battaile.Armes of Portugal. Then beganne the armes of that royall house, this King taking (in memorie
of so great a victory which God had giuen him) fiue little shields Azure, representing
the Standards of those fiuekings which he had vanquiished, in a great scutchon
argent, placing the small scutchions like a crosse, through deuotion, in signe of our
Sauiours fiue wounds vpon the crosse, adding moreouer to euery one of them fiue
deniers argent, which make in all 25. the which with the fiue scutchons made
the number of thirty representing in some sort the thirty pence which Iudas receiued to
betray his Master, our Lord and Sauiour Iesus Christ (it is the allegory and spirituall
interpretation of the armes of Portugal) to the which was since added a border gueules
charged with castles, or, in the time of D. Sancho the second of that name King of
Portugal, for some causes which we will hereafter specefie. After the defeat of these
fiue Arabian Kings, who, you must vnderstand were vassals to Alboxli, Aben-Te^in, the
great Miralmumin of Affrike King D. Alphonso returned with his victorious and rich
army, to Coimbra, being then the chiefe city of his Estate.
In this happie successe of his affaires,Pr^^^iscs (...) the Countesse of Portugal against her son. D. Theresa his mother, beeing a prisoner,
sought to crosse him, treating with D. Alphonso King or Emperour of Castille, for
her deliuery and restitution: and moreouer by her instruments shee made great complaintes
at Rome, to Pope Innocent the third, accusing her son of cruelty and impiety:
so as the Pope sent the Bishop of Coimbra into Portugal, beeing then at Rome,
with charge to enioyne the King by the Apostolike authority, and in his name to

set the Countesse at liberty: which the sonne refusing to obay, the Bishop did interdict
the citty of Coimbra, and returned to Rome, stealing away secretly in the morning,
without the Kings priuity, wherewith beeing incensed, hee would haue forced
the Chapter to proceed to the Election of a new Bishop, wherein hee was not
obayed, so as hee committed many outrages: wherepon the Pope sent a Caradinall
Legat vnto him, to correct him, but hee lost his time; for the Countesse
continued still in prison, beeing very expedient and necessary for the good and quiet
of the country. For this the Cardinal did interdict all Portugal, and then tooke his
way towards Rome: but hee was pursued by the King, who did greatly feare these
interdictions: and hauing ouertaken him betwixt Coimbra and Vera, neere vnto the
Comanderie of Poyares, hee forced him to disanul this interdiction, and moreouer to
gra^t him whatsoeuer hee desired, partly by force and threats, and partly by perswasions.
Whilest hee was in this debate with the Church, Ismael or Ismar, who had beene
vanquished, came vpon the towne of Leyra,Leyrataken by the Moores. belonging to the Monkes of Saint Croix
of Coimbra (the which for that it was ill garded by a Knight called Payo Guttieres, who
was there in garrison for the Pior) fell againe into the Moores power; whereof the
Abbot being aduertised, leauing his frocke and monkes weed, hee went to horse-backe
with a good troupe of souldiars, where hauing spoiled the Moores country, hee seized
vpon Ronches: soone after King D. Alphonso Henriques came and laied siege to Leyra,
and tooke it, since which time he depriued the Monkes of the Temporality of this place
and of Ronches also, leauing them only the profits of the spiritualty.
The warre betwixt Nauarre and Arragon was hot at this time:Nauarre. but D. Raymond
Prince of Arragon found himselfe troubled, not only against the Moores, which were
neighbors to Arragon and Cattelogne, from whom hee tooke Chalamera and Alcolea,
vpon the riuer of Cinca, in the yeere 1143. but also against some knights of Prouince,
which were enemies to D. Berenger Raymond his brother,An. 1143. hauing seized vpon
some places, and beene the cause of great troubles, so as hee was forced to goe himselfe
in person: wherefore his country was much anoyed by the Nauarrois, who finding all
assured towards Castille, did what they listed: yet at his returne hee had some final reuenge
and tooke the fort of Sos. The peace betwixt the Castillans and Nauarre,Confirmation of the peace betwixt Naurre and Castille. being
setled and entertained, it was againe fortified by the marriage of the King D Garcia
Ramires with D. Vrraca, basta^d daughter to the Emperour D. Alphonso, by
whom hee had the Infanta D. Sancha aboue mentioned^ and wee must not doubt but
that which some haue left written of this Kings third marriage with the daughter of
D. Lope Dias de Haro, is a mere fiction. It is likely the towne of Haro was built at that
time, where of the Lords of Biscay, and there successors, carried the name, from whence
are descended many worthy knights, and great personages in Castille and Leon. The
realme of Nauarre at that time had larger bounds then it had since, hauing no means
to augment them vpon the Moores, for that the realmes of Arragon and Castille lay
betwixt both; so as the Arragonois, Castillans and Cattelans were to make warre against
them, as frontering vpon Valencia, and other their lands and Siegneuries. Yet
the Kings of Nauar, which haue bin since, were so far from extending of their lymits,
as they haue beene often restrained by the violence and too great power of the Kings
of Castille.
About the yeere 1146. An D. 1146. Alphonso Emperour of Spainel resouled to make warre
with all violence against the Moores of Andalusia, by reason of the seditions and reuol^s
which were in Affrike, against the Almorauides, whose History it is needfull to
relate.
16. Alboali, Aben-Tesin (whom some will haue to bee Auicenne the great Phylosopher,Moores.
whose workes wee read, but without any ground) raigning ouer the Moores
of Affrike and Spaine, the third King or Miralmumin of the race of the Almorauides; a
Moore of Affrike,Troubles in the Moores estate in Affrike by Imperstition dyvinations. called Aben-Thumert, very learned in Astrology, could a certaine
young-man called Abdelmon, that he found by the starres, he should get the crowne of
the Arabians ^and therefore hee aduised him to meete with these heauenly influences,

and to prepare himselfe to receiue this great good which they had promised him.
This man although hee were of a base and vile condition, whose father got his lyuing
by making of pots, and other earthen vessel, yet hee was neither faint-hearted, nor
without ambition, wherefore hee gaue such credit to that which the Astrologer had
deliuered vnto him, as leauing his house and trade, hee acquainted himselfe with a
certaine religious Moore, a Doctor in the law of Mahumet, and with all eloquent in
the Arabian tongue, and therefore much esteemed amongst all the Affrican Moores,
to whom hee imparted the prognostication of Aben Thumert, intreating him to councell
him, and to assist him in a matter of so great importance, assuring him that is hee
attained to that which hee aspired, hee would make him the chiefe man amongst the
Arabians, next vnto himselfe.
This Doctor who was called Almohadi, tickled with the hope of greatnesse, could
finde no better, nor more expedient meanes, then to bring in new fects, and to make
some change in religion, knowing that nothing doth more alter and transport the
hearts of men, then perswasion of religion: wherefore he imployed his knowledge and
eloquence to interpret Mahumets Alcaron,A new ^^ct among the Arabians of Af^rike. after a stranger maner, and neuer heard of among
the Arabians, not any other nations were his sactaries: fitting it so well
to the humors and dispositions of the people, as in a short time hee was followed by
the greatest part of the Affrican Moores, a nation easily misled with superstition: so
as if before they tooke Almohadi for a holy man, now they held him for a Prophet,
sent vndoubtedly from God. Hee seeing this businesse succeed so well as hee was
wellcome throughout all Affrike, and admired of all men, hee beganne to put forth
this youngman Abdelmon, giuing the people to vnderstand, that he was of the true and
lawfull royall race of their great Prophet Mahumet, and that hee was a man sent of
God, endowed with such vertue, as hee should subiect all the world to the Law of Mahumet;
that those great matters had beene diuinely fore-told him, and signifyed by
the starres and heauenly motions: so as by his perswasions his fictions were receiued
and beleeued of all men. And proceeding father, he presumed to speake something
against King Alboals, and the present Estate and Gouernment of the Almorauides,
and so by little and little to taxe him openly, declaring with great assurance, that Alboali
was a tyrant, whose race had by force and violence expelled out of the royal throne
of the Arabians in Affrike the lawfull Princes descended from Aben-Alabecy, and that
the will of God, reuealed and knowne vnto him by many signes from heauen, was
that Abdelmon should be aduanced and chosen for King: hee who was sent of God,
and descended from the royall bloud of their great Prophet Mahumet. This Impostor
did so preach vnto them, concurrning with the diuell to bewitch these credulous
men, giuen to the damnable art of dyuining, as many Noblemen and Knights, with
an infynit number of the Affrican people, desirous of Innouations, according
to the mutinous nature of that nation, tooke armes against King Alboali, beeing
accompanied, assisted and councelled by Abdelmon, Aben-Thumert and Almohadi.
Whereof the King aduertised, meaning to suppresse these great alterations,
hee raysed his forces, and had diuers incounters against this new fect, which
carried the name of Almohades, by reason of their Preacher Almohadi.
Wee haue sayd that some were of opinion,Auicenna and other learned Arabians. that the King Albo-Ali Aben Tefin,
was hee whom we call Auicenna or Auicenni, saying that the goodly workes which
are amongst vs at this daie, were compiled and written by his commandement, by the
foure and twenty great Philosophers, and published vnder the name of Auicenna. For
my part I rather beleeue them which haue written that Auicenne or Auicenna, called
also Albo Hali, was an excellent man, learned in Philosophy and Physicke, as his
rare workes written in the Arabicke tongue doe witnesse, beeing translated since
into Latin, who liued in those daies at Cordoua in Spaine, where it seemes the Moores
had alwaies entertained an vniuersity of all sorts of sciences, with a great concourse
of learned men of their nation; the which had beene alwaies well furnished, the
Affricans beeing people giuen to contemplation, and of a subtill spirit: wherefore
they haue made Astrology famous, and aduanced a fect of Physicke diuerse from

that of the Grecians, giuen wonderfully to diuination and coniuring, very superstitious
in matters of religion, and reasonably eloquent either in verse or prose.
Aben Rois whom wee call Auerrois liued and frequented with him, a great Commentator
of Aristotle, who through enuy poysoned Auicenna, who finding it before it
had wrought his full effect, caused the poysoner to be slain, as Mesua and Zoar report:
for hee was a man of great authority and of a Princes house.
Then also liued Aben-Zoar, and other great and learned Arabians, which haue
written many goodly workes in their owne language, in naturall Phylosophy,
Metaphisicke, Physicke and Astrologie, whereof part haue beene preserued and
kept vnto our daies, and some lost. If these were Moores borne in Spaine, it
redoundes to the honour of the countrie: but it is doubtfull whether they came out
of Affrike.
The Moores Estate beeing thus troubled in Affrike,Castile. it mooued the Christian Princes
to make some gallant attempt vpon them of Spaine: wherefore the Emperour
. Alphonso beganne in the yeere of our Lord 1146. to raise a great army of his subiects
of Castille, Toledo, Leon and other countries, and to make the Christians armes
of greater force, hee laboured to make a peace betwixt the King of Nauarre, and D.
Raymond Prince of Arragon, for the effecting wherof hee called them to Saint Stephano
de Gormas, whither beeing come, hee could not obtaine any thing of them,
but a truce for some few daies ^ There notwithstanding they treated of the warre against
the Moores, in the which these two Princes ayded the Emperour: the King of
Nauarre by land, and the Earle of Barcelone by sea, who hauing armed some ships,
and giuen the charge thereof to D. Galceran great Admiral of Cattelogne, and to
the Earle of Vrgel, hee caused them to ioyne with the Geneuois, who either
for pay, or voluntarily in hope of some gaine, came to this warre, and there did
great seruice. The land army was great and well furnished with good and valiant
Knights, the Emperour D. Alphonso, and the King D. Garcia Ramires beeing
there in person, their entrie into Andalusia was so fearefull, as approching
and comming neere vnto Cordoua, with a shew to besiege it, that great and well
peopled cittie,Cordoua yeelded to the King of Castile. which had beene the Queene of Spaine for so many yeares, was yeelded
vnto him by the Gouernour Aben Gami, who presented him the keyes with great humilitie,
not attending either assault or batterie; into the which the Christian Princes
entred in armes, but very peaceably, in the yeare 1147. Yet the Spaniards write, that for
that the towne was of too great a guard, and wonderfully peopled, it was left in see to
Aben-Gami himselfe, who did homage to the King of Castile, the which is very doubtfull,
considering the importance of the place, and the consequence thereof. We may
beleeue that the Emperour assured himselfe after another manner, and with better caution
then the faith of this Mooore, who (they say) sware vpon their Alchoran, to bee
his faithfull vassall: from thence the armie marched towards Baeca, the which beeing
inuested,Baesa taken from the Moores. they had newes that the Moores came to succour it: wherefore the Emperor
going to meet them, he fought with them, and had the victorie, and afterwards tooke
the towne by composition; where leauing a sufficient garrison to assure the countrey
behind his armie, he marched on to Almerie, a towne vpon the Mediterranean sea,
which at this day belongs to Granado, much frequented of Merchants of diuers nations.
There he found the sea armie of Count Raymond, and the galleys of Genoua,
which had alreadie attempted it, vnder the command of Ansaldo Doria, Vbert Torre, and
other captaines of that common-weale. This place was so furiously battered both by
sea and land,Almerie taken by sorce. as it was taken by force: yet the Moores beeing retired into a part of the
cittie of good strength, they were taken to ransome, from whom they drew great sums
of mony.
They say, that at this prize, that great and inestimable Em^raud without peere, was
taken, the which is at this day at Genoua, and was giuen vnto them for their part of
the bootie, and in recompence of the great seruice they had done there.Emeraud of inestimable price. Yet many beleeue,
that the Geneuois brought it out of Palestina, from the towne of Cesarea, at
which seege they were employed. The spoyle and sacke of this place was diuided betwixt

the Castillans, Nauarrois, Geneuois, and the subiects of the Earle D. Raymond. This is
all which was done in that voyage, from whence euery one retired into his countey
rich, some by land, some by sea. The King Don Garcia Ramires accompained his father
-in-law into Castile, where he remayned, with great tranquilitie and content, the
rest of that yeare.
If the Christian affaires in Spaine succeeded well against the Moores,C^^^cell at Rh^ims. those in Syria
declined much: wherupon a Councell was held at Rheims, vnder Pope Eugenius the 3.
to resolue vpon some meanes, to support the estate of the Kings of Ierusalem, by some
ayde from the Princes of Europe, Thither went D. Raymond, Archbishop of Toledo, as
Primate of Spaine: who passing by Saint Denis in France, obserued in a chappell an Inscription
of this tenour: Here lyes Saint E^genius the Martyr, the first Archbishop of
Toledo.
Beeing returned, he reported vnto the Church what he had found, whereof the
Emperor Don Alphonso, and the Kings children were aduertised, who together with
all the people were exceeding glad: for since the death of this holy man, they could not
learne where his body lay. Beeing thus found, they of Toledo procured means to haue
one of his armes, from king Lewis the young. It was a remarkable act of Religion in the
Archbishop Don Raymond in his voyage to Rheims: In our time King Philippe obtayned
from Charles the ninth, the French King, and from Charles Cardinall of Lorraine,
and Abbot of Saint Denis, the rest of the bodie (as they say) of this Martyr,
the which was brought to his Church of Toledo, where he had gouerned, Domi^an
beeing then Emperour at Rome: for they did not know him much in France, neither
did it serue to any purpose, amidst the ciuill, or rather vnciuill warres, growne for matter
of Religion.
D. Raymond Berenger beeing returned into Cattelogne,Arragon and Barcelone. hauing the Geneuois army
ready, and at his commandement, he employed it against the towne of Tortose which
was held by the Moores, the which he beseeged both by sea and land: at which seege
the Earle left D. William Raymond of Moncada, Seneshall of Cattelogne, for his Lieutenant
generall, whilest that he made a voyage to Barcelone, to pacifie some seditions
which were risen in that extie. Such was the diligence of the Seneshall and Geneuois,
as by the 30 day of the seege, after many sharpe assaults giuen and valiantly defended,
the towne was taken,Toriose taken by the Arragonois. and soone after D. Pedro de Semenate arriuing with fresh supplies,
the castell was also taken: the Geneuois had their part of the spoyle, for the good seruices
they had done vnto the Earle. And the Authours of the Arragon Historie write,
that a third part of the towne was giuen in fee to the Seneshall D. William Raymond of
Moneado, and another third part to the common-weale of Genoua, which portion
was afterwards redeemed by the Ea^le D. Raymond Berenger, for 16000. Marauidis Maroquins,
a kind of mony which was then currant, leauing vnto the Geneuois the Iland of Saint Laurence, and granting vnto all the Inhabitants of the citty of Genoua, and of
the iurisdiction (the which was limited by Porto venere towards the East, and by Monaco,
vppon the West, along the sea shore) exemption of all Imposts and customes,
Henrico Guercio, Marin Moro, William Lusio, and others, beeing then Gouernours of
the Common-weale.
Whilest the Earle was busie at this warre,VVarre betwixt Nauarre and Arragon. the King of Nauarre brake the truce
made at Saint Est^enne de Gormas: for that the King Don Garcia hauing caused the
Emperour Don Alphonso, and other Noblemen and Prelates, to perswade and aduise
the Earle, to relinquish the pretensions, which hee vaunted to haue to the Realme of
Nauarre, hee would not do it, but threatened to poursue it, when oportunitie serued:
wherefore the Nauarrois did ouer-runne the Countrey of Arragon, and tooke the
Towns of Thauste and Fayos, where they put good Garrisons, to serue as a frontier against
the Arragonois.
It is no wonder,P^rtugal. if in all these attempts of the Christian Princes in Spaine, against
the Moores, the new King of Portugall did not ioyne with the rest: for that hee was
in disgrace and out of fauour with the Emperour D. Alphonso, who held him as an v^urper
of the Estate of D. Theresa his mother: and moreouer, of the title of a king, in a

Prouince which was subiect to the Soueraigntie of Leon. King D. Alphonso Henriques
hauing liued now 52. yeares without a wife, he married in the yeare 1146. D. Malfada
Manriqua de Lara, daughter to the Earle D. Manr^qt^ue, Lord of Molina, a great Nobleman
of Castile, by whom he had one sonne named D. Sancho, who succeeded him in
the Realme of Portugall, and the Infanta D. Vrraca, who was married first to D. Fernand
the 2. of that name,Gencalogie of the Moores. King of Leon and Gallicia, and from them issued D. Alphonso
King of the same Realmes, father to the King D. Fernand the 3. of Castile and Leon: a
marriage notwithstanding which was broken, by reason of their proximitie of bloud,
and for that they were married without a dispensation. King D. Alphonso Henriques had
another daughter by D. Malfada, called D. Theresa, maried to Philip Earle of Flanders,
the first of that name, and one called Malfada, as the mother. Besides these lawfull children,
the King of Portugall had one bastard before he was married, whom they called
D. Pedro Alphonso of Portugall. Soone after his marriage, beeing importuned by the
continuall complaints of his subiects, for the spoyles which the Moores of Saint Iren
committed in his countrie, he resolued to beseege that place, but he preuailed more by
policie, then happily he should haue done by open force: for marching thither in the
night, after that he had made a vow (passing by that place where as now stands the royall
monasterie of Alcouaca) to build a Monasterie there if his enterprise succeeded well:
it fell out according to his desire, for he put his men secretly into the towne, beeing ill
guarded,S. Iren taken (...) Mores. without discouerie, and tooke it in the yeare 1147. on Saint Michaels day, putting
all that resisted to the sword, and taking many prisoners: Beeing returned to Coimbra,
and hauing giuen thankes vnto God for the fauour which he had done him, hee
performed his vow, and built the Monasterie of Al^ouaca where he placed Monkes of
the Order of Cisteaux, for the loue of Saint Bernard, who liued in those times. After
this conquest, seeing that the Miralmumin of Affricke and Spaine, was much troubled
to defend himselfe against the faction of the Almohades, he followed his good fortune,
and tooke from the Moores the castell of Mafra, where he placed D. Fernand of Montezo
for Gouernor, who in succession of time was great Master of the Order of Auis, of
the profession of S. Benet, which had its beginning during the life of this king of Portugall.
Hee tooke also from them the castell of Sintra, and from thence came to lay
seege to Lisbone, where he was assisted by many knights of France, England, and ^landers,
which came by sea, and landed at Cascais, then came they and camped where as the
Monasterie of S. Francis was since built, the Kings armie beeing lodged where as Saint
Vincent now stands: which places were then without the circuit of the citty wals. The
cittie was so prest by these forces, as after many dangerous assaults, it was taken, the
Christians entring by the port of Alfama, the 25. of October 1147. the seege hauing
continued fiue whole moneths. Many Knights and other strangers, which were come
to this warre, desirous to employ themselues continually against the Infidels, enemies
of our faith,Lisbone taken fro^ the Mores. vowed neuer to returne into their countries, but to remaine in Portugall;
who by the kings permission inhabited there, and peopled Almada, Villeuerda, Arruda,
Zambuja, Castagrera, Lourinhan, Ville franche, and other places. This cittie of Lisbone,
which since hath beene the chiefe of Portugall, and the ornament of Spaine, was
purged by the bishops from the impieties of Mshumet, and their great Mosquee made a
Cathedrall church, where as one Gilbert a stranger, but of a holy life, was made bishop:
and the king caused the Monasterie of S Vincent to be built in the same place where he
had camped. By means of this important conquest, the king took also from the Mores,
Alanguer, Obidos, Torresuedras, and many other places, so as he dispossest them in this
warre, of all the coun^^ie which is called Extremadura, and pa^^ing Tayo, he extended
him limits, conquering Acacar de Sal, Ebora, Yelbes, Moura, Serpa, and vnto Veja, where
he put the Moores which defended it to the sword, for that during this seege, other
Moores hauing taken the towne of ^roncoso, had vnpeopled it, and chased away all
the Christians that were within it.
King D. Alphonso Henriques did these goodly exploits,Moores. whilst that the Arabians were
at war among themselues, by reason of the factions of the Almorauides and Almohades,
the which was continued with such animositie, as after many routes of either part

on the one side the followers of Abdelmon, and his companions Aben-Thumert, and
Almoha^^, not ceasing to vrge the new interpretatior of the law of Mahumet, and to
perswade the Affricans to poursue the race of the Almorauides, as tyrannous, and detayning
the Soueraigntie of the Arabians vniustly: and on the other side, Albo-Ali Aben
Tefin defending the royall Soueraigntie couragiously, which he had receiued from
his predecessors, in the end the chiefe forces of both factions incountring in a bloudie
battell,End of Almorauides raigne in Affrick, and toe beginning of the Almobades. the Almorauides were vanquished, and their King Albohali slaine vppon the
place: and the victors neuer ceased, vntill they had ruined all the contrarie faction, the
soueraigne command remayning to the Almohades: so as Abdelmon was chosen Miralmumin
and king, in the yeare of our redemption 1147. and of the Arabians Empire,
530. the Almorauides Moores hauing raigned in Affricke about 79. yeares, and
55. in Spaine. The troubles of Affricke, not presently pacified, did so busie the new king
Abdelmon, as he had no meanes to prouide for the affaires of Spaine, vntill the yeare
1150. during which time the Christian kings had leysure to do these exploytes.
Beside the which,Arragon and Barcelone. it is found, that D. Raymond Berenger wonne the strong townes of
Lerida and Fraga, and D. Armingl Earle of Vrgel, those of Alquarra, Tamarit, Litera
and others. D. Raymond Berenger changed the Bishoprickes of Roda and Barbastro to
Lerida, with the Popes approbation, the first Prelat was D. William Pedro de Rayeta*
This Prince of Cattelogne beeing no lesse deuout to Monkes then others of his time,
gaue vnto the Monasterie of Escala Dei, the towne of Alma in perpetuitie, whereas the
Monasterie of Oliue was built. Hee intitled himselfe then Prince of Arragon, Earle of
Barcelone, and Marquis of Torrose.
In the yeare 1150.Nauarre. An. 1150 D. Garcia king of Nauarre died, a Prince endowed with royal vertues.
Beeing prouoked by the daily mutinies of the Inhabitants of Pampelone, to suppresse
and punish them, he went thitherward from Estelle, and by the way stayed some
little time at Lorca to hunt: as he galloped through the woods and mountaines, his
horse stumbling, fell with him in a narrow stonie place, so as the king brake his leg, and
with-all was so brused, as he dyed (past all cure) vpon the place, hauing raigned sixteene
yeares and some dayes. His body was carried to Pampelone, and interred in the Cathedrall
Church with a royall pompe, beeing the first of the kings of Nauarre, which had
bin (...) there: D. Sancho his son succeeded him, the seuenth of that name, surnamed
the Wife.
This yeare D. Raymond Berenger continued to annoy the rest of the Moores,Arragon and Barcelone, whom
he chased quite out of all the countrie which lyes betwixt Lerida and Sarragosse, hauing
dispossest them of the forts of Aytona Seros, and Mechinesa: this was when the
Almohades began to shew themselues in Spaine.
The marriage betwixt Lewis the French King,Castile. called the young, and Don Isabella,
daughter to the Emperour D. Alphonso of Castille, and of D. Berenguela, sister to the
Earle D. Raymond, was then treated of. Beeing concluded, some put a conceipt in the
Kings head, that D. Isabella was a bastard: wherefore he came in person into Spaine, vnder
colour to go to Saint Iames, but it was in truth to informe himselfe of the birth
of D. Isabella, and to see her, where he found that she was the lawfull daughter of D.
Alphonso Raymond, and of D. Berenguel^ his wife. In this voyage king Lewis was receiued
in the cittie of Burgos, the royall seate of Castille, with all the honors fit for such a
king, who in his returne came to Toledo, where as he found the King or Emperour D.
Alphonso, and with him the Earle of Barcelone, accompanied with a good number of
his Knights of Cattelogne to honour these kings. It was this king Lewis, who had put
away Elenor Dutchesse of Guienne, and Cou^esse of Poictiers, who married with
Henry king of England, which was the cause of long warres in France.
The yeare following 1151.Arragon and Barcelone. for as much as the towne of Tarragone was not wel peopled,
it may be, for that it did belong vnto the Archbishop and the Clergie, and that
feare of the Moores which were neere, kept the people in those places which were commanded
by martiall men. The Archbishop D. Bernard Cord, made cession againe of the
sayd Towne vnto the Earle D. Raymond, resigning it into his hands, with the permission
of Pope Eugenius the third, and with the consent of the Chapter and Bishops Suffraganes

ganes of the Church. Don Raymond put it instantly into the hands of a Knight called
Robert, and did inuest him with a title of Principalitie. The same yeare his wife D. Petronille,
Queene of Arragon, was brought in bed of her sonne Don Raymond, whose
name, after the decase of his father, was changed to Don Alphonso, and hee inherited
the Realme of Arragon, and Principalitie of Cattelogne.Genealogie of Arragon. This deliuerie was so dangerous,
as the Queene resoluing to dye, made her will, and instituted her after-birth
for her heire, and the Earle his father for Gouernour of his Estates: but God deliuered
her, and sent her health, after which shee had Don Sancho, who was Earle of Roussillon
and of Cerdagne: and two daughters, D. Aldonca the eldest, married to Sancho the
first of that name, and second King of Portugall, the other was wife to Don Armingol,
Earle of Vrgel. After Queene Petronilles lying in, Don Raymond cleansing the rest of
the Countrie which lyes betwixt Sarrgossa and Torrosa of Moores, hee to-oke from
them the Castell of Mirauet. A little before D Berenguels Queene of Castile was deceased,
who desired to be interred at Saint Iemes, for the great opinion she had of the
Apostles intercession, as she had beene instructed by her Prelates.


D. Sancho the seuenth of that name, the 20.
King of Nauuarre.
18 D. Sancho, surnamed the Wise,Nauarre. sonne to D. Garcia, beeing come to the Crowne
of Nauarre, hee made an Assembly and enteruiew of Princes at Tudele, neere
vnto Aigues-chaudes, whither came the Emperour D. Alphonso, and his sonne Don
Sancho King of Castile, and D. Raymond Berenger Prince of Arragon: where they conspired
against the new King of Nauarre, and set downe many Articles concerning the
warre, as the Emperour and Earle had done some yeare before. Among others they
agreed, That the Realme of Nauarre should be conquered at their common charge,
and diuided equally betwixt them except the forts which the Nauarrois held, belonging
to the Crowne of Arragon, the which should be re-united. As for the towne of
Tudele, the Iurisdiction should be diuided, the moitie thereof entring into that portion
of the lands which lye from Ebro to Montcajo: and that for one halfe of the
Realme of Nauarre, which the Earle should enioy, he should, as Gouernour of Arragon,
do homage to the King of Castille. That by Saint Michels day next ensuing, the
Infant Don Sancho should take vnto him D. Blanche the Infanta of Nauarre, to marry
her, or (if the thought good) to leaue her. These and such other like conditions were
concluded betwixt these Princes, to the ruine of the young King D. Sancho of Nauarre,
and of his Estates, if God had not preserued him. With this resolution the Castillan
and Arragonois parted from Tudele, and went euery one into his Countrie, to giue
order for that which was needfull for the warres, thinking that their enemie, who was
but a child, could not defend himselfe against so great forces: but God had otherwise
decreed, and confounded all their practises. Soone after D. Pedro ^' Athares dyed, who
had fayled to bee King of Nauarre and Arragon, the founder of the Monasterie of S.
Mary of Veruela, where he was interred.
The Nauarro is doubting some practise against their Prince, in this Assembly of Tudele,
were very carefull to fortifie their frontier places, and to renew the allyances of
the house of Nauarre, with the French king, and other Noblemen of that nation. The
young king D. Sancho was crowned after the death of his father, in the Church of Pampelone,
where he sware to obserue the lawes and statutes of the Countrie, which were
the same which they call at this day the lawe of Arragon, according to the which Nauarre,
Guipuscoa, and the places ioying to Nauarre, were then gouerned. Saint Sebastian,
which was at that time a place of great trafficke, had priuiledges granted by
him, and so had the Towne of Durando in Biscaye. They surnamed this king the Sage,
for that in truth he was a wife and a discreet Prince, and for his valour and courage hee

was called by some, Valiant. Hee had some knowledge of learning, honored learned
men, and was studious of the Scriptures, as the vse was in those times, and shewed himselfe
a great Iusticer: for all which vertues he was much esteemed by other Princes, and
was honoured, feared, and loued of his subiects. The armies of the league made at Tudele,
beganne to annoy him at his first entrance, and did him some harme vppon his
fronters, yet he did not loose any place of importance: for although hee were very
young, yet he was of an actiue spirit, and a noble courage, and was well and faithfully
assisted by his allies, and serued by the Nauarrois. The warre was hottest in the valley
of Roncall; but there is no mention, that either in that yeare, or in the other following,
there was any memorable exployt done, and they hold that Lewis the French king,
who had beene a great friend to Don Garcia his deceased father,French king fauours the king of Nauarre. did wonderfully crosse
the enterprises of the League, and hindred them all he could, beeing either vppon his
treatie of marriage, or else newly married to Dona Isabells Infsanta of Castile, in fauour
of which allyance the Emperour D. Alphonso did desist from that warre, or did
neglect it, and Don Sancho his sonne, King of Castile, (who had his choice to marrie
D. Blanche,Genealogie of Castile. or to leaue her) married her, and had a Ionne by her at the end of the yeare
called D. Alphonso, who was king of Castile and Toledo, after the father. Some hold
that the marriage of king Lewis with D. Isabella, was after all this, in the yeare 1154.
and that the King of Nauarre came to Burgos, to the celebration thereof, the which
was admired by the French, for the exceeding pompe.
The Countrie of Nagera was then one of the chief gouernments of Castile, for the
Gouernour thereof was Captaine generall of the fronter towards Nauarre. The Infant
Don. Sancho who was called king of Castile, did enioy those lands, and had a Lieutenant
called Raderigo Pelaes, a wise Knight. About that time died D. Roderigo Gomes,
sonne to Don Gomes of Candespina, one of the greatest Noblemen in Castile, whose
Tombe is yet to be seene in the Cloyster of Saint Sauuiour of Ogna: and the towne of
Sur^ta was peopled with Christians Musarabes, which came out of Calatajub, Sarragossa,
and other parts of Arragon.
The Earle Don Raymond Berenger sought all meanes possible to seaze vppon Nauarre,Arragon.
so desirous he was to ioyne it vnto Arragon: importuning the Emperour Don
Alphonso continually, to declare himselfe an open enemie to D. Sancho, so as in the
yeare 1156.1156. there was a new League made betwixt them, to vndertake this warre
where among other Articles, for the better fortifying of their friendship, there was a
future marriage concluded betwixt Don Raymond, the young Infant of Arragon, who
was afterwards called Don Alphonso, and D. Sancho daughter to the Emperour Don
Alphonso, by his second wife. Dona Rica, daughter to Vladislaus king of Pologne, whom
he had married in the yeare, 1151. yet they could neuer perswade the Emperour Don
Alphonso to hurt the king of Nauarre, whom he loued; but rather assisted him vnderhand.
The same League was renued at Toledo, in the yeare 1157. after Don Raymonds
returne out of Prouence. The occasion of which voyage was to defend his Nephew,
heire to his Brother Don Berenerg Raymond, who (beeing in a manner dispossest of his
Estate by the enemies of their house, which had slaine his father in an incounter) had
need of his ayde. Hee repulsed the young Earles enemies, assured his Estates, and
brought him into Cattelogne, there to bee brought vp. And for that in those troubles
of Prouence, the Knights and Commanders of Saint Iohn of Hierusalem, (who were
growne mercenarie in these Christian warres) did intermeddle, hee gaue them large
reuenues in Cattelogne. After the renewing of this League, we find no mention of
any worthie act done by this earle, but that hee debaucht some faithlesse and trecherous
Knights, which fled out of Nauarre and Arragon; yea one of the greatest called
Garcia Almorauit, who came vnto him to Lerida, and there made himselfe his vassall,
and receiued from the Earle the title of Lord of Ronceuaux, Vrros, and Obanos,
which were not in his power: wherefore it is to be presumed, that from that time hee
sought to gouerne his Estates peaceably, seeing he could not get the Crowne of Nauarre:
and with this desire he ended his dayes, after all his vaine attempts against this
Kingdome. Soone after this last assembly at Toledo, the king of Castile was ingaged in

warre against the Moores of Andalusia, which made him perchance neglect that of Nauarre,
besides He did not greatly affect it.
19 The troubles of Affricke beeing past, as we haue sayd,Moores* Abdelmon established Miralmumin
of the Arabians, and the Almohades in credit by the ruine of the Almorauides.
The Preacher Almohadi would also haue the Moores of Spaine submit themselues
to this yoake: wherefore leauing Aben Thumert the Astrologian at Maroc, hee
past with Abdelmon into Spaine, with great numbers of souldiers, beeing puft vp with
pride by their late victorie against their enemies. They found no great resistance there:
for the pettie Kings and Gouernors of Prouinces and townes in Spaine, beeing prest
by the Christians, and too weake to make head against them, seeing the race of the
Almorauides of Affricke extinct, from whom they might haue expected some succors,
they sought nothing more then support, to maintaine themselues in their authoritie,
and greatnesse,Change of Religion among the Arabians in Spaine. which is most commonly the chiefe god of great men of this world, and
therefore as men which regarded not Religion, but for a colour, and for their owne
priuate commodities: so as leauing the interpretation of the Alcaron, they embraced
the new doctrine of Almohadi, without any opposition, thinking to preserue themselues
by that meanes. And as this Impostor did vomit foorth greater blasphemies and
impieties, then his Predecessors had done against the true Religion, they became violent
and furious persecutors of the Christians: so as the poore Musarabes, who had had
some peace of conscience, liuing among the Moores, and had there exercised their religion,
without any violence done vnto them for many yeares, were in great perplexitie,
beeing now persecuted by these new Sectaries of Almohadi, both in their persons
and goods, with all kind of rigor: for that they would not yeeld to their superstitions:
so as either by the reuolts, or by death, or by the continuall flying away of these poore
people, all the townes of Spaine which were held by the Moores, were vnpeopled of
Christians,Chris^ians persecuted by the Mo^^es in Spaine. who for aboue 400. yeares had preserued themselues, inuoking (though
with little knowledge) the name of Iesus Christ. The gouernement of the Almohades
in Spaine, continued in Abdelmon and his successors 52. yeares, vntill that notable battle
in the fields of Tholousa, called by another name of the mountaines of Muradal, or
of Vbeda. Abdelmon hauing aspired to that which he pretended, held his royall seate in
the cittie of Maroc, and shewed himself a profitable Prince, and pleasing to the Mores,
notwithstanding that he was a Potters sonne, and for his chiefe Councellors, the Astrologian
Aben Thumert, and the Preacher Almohadi, who dying within few months
after this conquest, was by the commandement of King Abdelmon, buried with pompe
and royall honours in a sumptuous Tombe, neare vnto the cittie of Maroc, whereas
since the foolish multitude, holding him to be some great Prophet, and a messenger of
God, made prayers and vowes in all their necessities: as amongst the Christians they
had recourse vpon all occasions, to the sepulchers (either true or fained) of Apostles,
holy Confessors and Marryrs of the name of Iesus Christ. This passage of the Almohades,
bred a great alteration in Spaine, whereas many Moores which held their countries
in fee and homage of Christian Princes reuolted.
The Emperour D. Alphonso led first an armie of Christians against this new Estate,Castile. Death of the Emperor D. Alphonso.
in the yeare 1157. beeing accompanied by his two sons, D. Sancho, and D. Fernand,
who had the titles of Kings: in Andalusia he recouered the towne of Baeca, which had
beene lost, and tooke Quesada and Andujar. But he did not long enioy this victorie
with his subiects, for bringing backe his armie towards Toledo, hee fell suddenly sicke,
the which (as he past the mountaine or streight of Muradal) did so increase, as hee was
forced to light at a place called Fresnedas, where he dyed in the armes of D. Iohn Archbishop
of Toledo, and of his sonne D. Fernand: D. Sancho remayning behind to guard
those places which he had newly conquered. Hee was a worthie Prince, but too ambitious,
a great fauourer and benefactor of the Clergie, a friend to the people, and a seuere
punisher of the insolencies of great men: of whom the Spaniards write this Historie.
That a certaine Gentleman called D. Fernand in Gallicia, hauing taken away a
poore labourers goods, for which wrong he could haue no iustice from the ordinatie
Magistrate of the country, so as he came to the Emperor beeing at Toledo, where hauing

watched his oportunitie, he cast himselfe at his feet, making knowne vnto him the
violence which had beene done him by D. Fernand, and demanded Iustice: The Emperour
did not disdaine this poore man, but beeing duly informed of the fact, he sent vnto
the Gouernour, and Merino Maior of Gallicia, commanding them to cause restitution
to be made presently vnto the Labourer, of all that he should find had beene taken
from him, but the Gentleman would not obey any commaund, neither durst the
Iudge force him, either fearing to displease him, or else wanting meanes to constraine
him: whereof the Emperor beeing aduertised, hee parted from Toledo, to come into
Gallicia, where hauing made diligent inquirie of D. Fernands fact, and of his disobedience
and contumacie, he caused his house to be enuironed; where being taken, he commanded
he should be hanged before his owne gate; for a warning to others to liue vprightly
and in peace with their neighbors, and not to contemne Iustice nor their Prince.
A noble act and worthie imitation. He had raigned king and emperour 35. yeares: his
bodie was carried to Toledo, and interted in the royall chappell of that Church. His Estates
were diuided after his death, as hath beene sayd, betwixt his two sons D. Sancho
and D. Fernand.


D. Sancho the sixth King of Castile.
20 THe Realmes of Castile and Toledo,Castile and Leon diuided. were then dis-united from Leon and Galicia,
in the yeare 1157. D. Sancho being aduertised of his fathers death, he parted suddenly
from Baeca, and came to Toledo to his funerall. A Prince who did nothing degenerate
from the vertues of his Ancestors, yea did rather exceed them, but he raigned
little.


D. Fernand, the 28. King of Leon.
21 HIs brother D. Fernand,Leon. neither attending his comming, nor the performance of
his funerals, departed presently, and went to take possession of his Kingdomes
of Leon and Galicia, according to the fathers will, which diuision was a great cause of
ciuill warres, to the preiudice and dishonour of the Christians name in Spaine: wherefore
great Monarkes should be warned by these examples, (which are ordinarie in Histories)
neuer to dismember their Monarchies, but to employ all their spirits and wisedome,
to continue it still vnited, although they leaue many children, leauing the Soueraigne
authoritie ouer the rest, vnto him whom the lawes and customes do call.
D. Fernand beeing receiued and setled in his Realmes of Leon and Galicia,Nauarre. hee began
to intreate his Nobilitie ill, and among others he dispossest one of the chiefse knights
of Leon called D. Pedro Ponce de Minerua, of his lands and goods, who for this cause
came into Castile, to beseech the King D. Sancho, to mediate his restitution, and to
bring him againe into fauour with the king his brother. But it falling out at that time,
that Don Sancho the wise king of Nauarre, beeing aduertised of the death of the Emperour
D. Alphonso, had made certaine roades into Castile almost vnto Burgos, for
that D. Sancho had alwaies signed the Leagues which the Earle of Barcelone had made
against his father and him, with the Emperour D. Alphonso: and moreouer, detayned
from him Nagera, and the lands vpon the riuer of Oja, this knight was entertained by
the king of Castile, who imployed him in this warre of Nautuarre, and made him head of
an armie, which he sent vnto the fronters, by the riuers of Oja, which hauing incountred
that of Nauarre neere to Bagnares, they came to battaile in the fields of Valpierre
neere to S. Assent^o. In the Nauarrois Armie D. Lope Dias de Haro, Earle of Biscay, led
the foreward: Count Ladron of Gueuara had charge of the rereward, with the Earle
D. Sancho of Larrinacar, Inigo Ramires d' Aiuar, with other, and the king the battaile.
On the other side, the Earle D. Pedro Ponce had ordered his men as well, and were more
in number: wherefore comming to fight, although in the beginning the Nauarrois seemed
to haue the better, yet were they defeated, and forced to saue themselues in the
next forts.

The king D. Sancho had this route for that he was too hastie to fight and would not
attend the succours of horse and foote, which came out of France; which beeing arriued,
and desirous to wipe out this blemish and infamie, they charged the Castillans,
which gaue them battaile againe in the same fields of Valpierre, and defeated them.
These things are written in some Histories,Battell of Valpierre. but not allowed nor credited by other
Spanish Authors: for that they insert some things which haue small probabilitie, and
others that are meere fictions. Whereas they say, that Don Pedro Ponce de Minerua,
vsed a strange liberalitie to prisoners, both Nauarrois and French, setting them all free
without any ransome, which is not probable: and they also affirme, that D. Sancho king
of Nauarre dyed in the first battayle, the which is reprooued by other Authors, and by
the letters and titles which are yet extant, witnessing that he liued aboue 37. yeares after:
by these reasons, whatsoeuer is written of these two victories may iustly bee suspected.
That which is written of the Earle Don Raymond Berenger,Arragon. Prince and Gouernour
of Arragon, is more authenticke: that burning with desire to haue the Realme of Nauarre,
he did solicite D. Sancho King of Castile to declare himselfe with him, and that
they two ioyning their forces together, should set vpon the King of Nauarre: and that
in the yeare 1158. D. Raymond came againe into Castile, accompanied with a great
number of Prelates and Knights, to renue their League, yet without any effect for Castile,
for this assembly and enterview past not without great contention, for that Don
Raymond Berenger refused to do homage vnto the King of Castille, for the townes of
Sarragossa and Calatajub: but in the end he was forced to acknowledge himselfe his
vassall in that regard, with a bond to come to Court, and to assist at the coronation of
the Kings of Castile.Castile, to carrie the royall sword before them at those ceremonies. As for
the Earle D. Pedro Ponce de Minerua, and other Noblemen which were in the like perplexitie,
the best Spanish Authors say, that the king D. Sancho tooke the panies to goe
himselfe in person with them into Leon, to reconcile them to the King D. Fernand
his brother, who came in a peacefull manner, to meete him as farre as Sahagun, receiued
him honorably, with great shewes of loue, and restored these Noblemen to their
goods and honours; yea he augmented them by his bountie, in fauour of the King D.
Sancho, to whom he carried so great honour and respect, as he offered to acknowledge
to hold of him (as his vassall) his Realmes of Leon and Galicia; the which D. Sancho
would not accept, saying, God forbid, that the son of so great a Prince as the Emperor Don
Alphonso was, should euer acknowledge to hold his land of any. In the end after great feasts
and ioy, these two Kings parted good friends.
The king D. Sancho being returned to Toledo, hee had newes that the Moores were
gone to field, and came with a great power to beseege Calatraua, a fort of great importance
vpon the frontier, the which did then belong vnto the knights of the temple;
who amazed at the brute of this seege, did so distrust their owne strength to defend it,
as they deliuered it into the kings hands, to the end he should send Captanies and souldiers
to resist the Moores. The king hauing receiued it into his protection, and meaning
to prouide for it, he found himselfe much troubled: for there was not any one that presented
himselfe to take this charge, but they all drew backe and excused themselues, fearing
the great power which was said the Mores had. In the end God inspired the hearts
of two religious men of the Order of Cisteaux, who offered vnto the king, that if it pleased
him to giue them that place in gard, they would defend it like honest men. One of
these religious men was Friar Raymond, Abbot of the Monasterie of S. Mary de Hitero,
vpon the riuer of Pisuerga, in the Diocesse of Palence, not of Hilero in Nauarre, which
was not then built: the other was one of his Monkes, called Diego Velasco, who had caried
armes long before he became a religious man of that Order. The offer was pleasing
vnto the King, but more to D. Iohn Archbishop of Toledo, for that the lands of his
Diocesse should be first annoyed by the entry of the Moores to Calatraua: wherefore
this Prelate by preaching and publike exhortations, began to commend this Abbot D.
Raymond, and to incourage all men to assist him, so as in a short time hee was followed
by a great number of Nobilitie and other souldiers, some thrust on to winne honour,

some mooued with zeale to defend the Christian Religion against the inuasion of Infildes,
and some wirh shame. The king, the Archbishop, the Nobilitie of his Court,
and the Inhabitants of Toledo, euery one for his part, furnished money, armes, horses,
corne, and other necessaries for a towne which attends a seege; and all with such willingnesse
and bountie, as the Abbot might well put himselfe into Calatraua, beeing
assured not to be taken for want of men, victuals, and munition of warre: but before
hee dislodged, the king to incourage him to do his duty, and to recompence the good
which he had showne, to employ himselfe for the defence of the countrie, mooued also
with some Religion, gaue vnto God, to the Virgin Mary his mother, to the congregation
of Cisteaux, to the Abbot D. Raymond, and to his Monkes, both present and
to come, the towne of Calatraua with all the confines, hilles, land, waters, meddowes,
pastures, entries and issues, rights, names and actions belonging thereunto, whereof
he caused letters pattents to be drawne in the yeare, 1158.Calatraus giuten (...) the Monkes of Cis^eaux. signed by his Secretarie
Martin Peleaz: in the which are named as witnesses, Don Sancho king of Nauarre, vassall
to the king of Castile, Don Iean Archbishop Primate of Spaine, Don Raymond Bishop
of Palence and others.
The Abbot hauing this prouision he set forward, and came to Calatraua, a place
of great importance, as we haue sayd, and the onely rampar for the Christians on that
side against the Moores: who either aduertised of this great preparation to defend that
place, or for some other lets, did no great exploit worthie the great brute which had
runne of their armie, neither came they to beseege Calatraua, whereof the King was
exceeding glad, and the Abbot with his Monkes no lesse, who by their couragious resolution
had gotten this towne, the which the Templers had basely abandoned. Many
Gentlemen which had followed the Abbot in this voyage, seeing him in such reputation
left the world, and made themselues Monkes of Cisteaux, yet with a decent habit,
fit for the exercise of armes, the which they meant to follow against the Infidels
Moores, enemies to the Christian Religion.
This was the beginning of the Knights of Calatraua,Knights of Calatraua first instituted. an Order which was famous
in Spaine. The Abbot Don Raymond beeing freed from feare of seege, leauing a good
garrison in Calatraua, he returned to Toledo, and from thence past to his Monastery
of Hitero: about the which he gathered together a great multitude of people, to the
number of twenty thousand, as the Histories report, whome with their mooueable
goods and cattell, hee transported to Calatraua, and other places of the fronter, which
was badly peopled, making it as it were a strong bastion against the enterprises of the
Arabians.Death of Don Sancho toe Desired. The king Don Sancho the desired, liued not long after, but dyed the same
yeare. They write, that his wife D. Blanche beeing deceased some few dayes before in
child-bed, hee was so opprest with griefe, as he fell sicke and dyed. His death was very
preiudiciall to the Realme of Castile, and followed by many miseries, the which he did
well fore-see. He left the gouernement of his sonne Don Alphonso, who was yet very
young, to a knight whose name was Don Guttiere Fernand Ruis de Castro, ordayning
that hee should bee bred vp vnder his discipline, vntill hee came to the age of fifteene
yeares complete: willing that the Knights which held any places and garrisons, should
keepe them vntill that time. They surnamed him the Desired, by reason of the great
vertues wherewith hee was adorned, and the hope and taste the people had of his good
and iust gouernement, in one yeare, or there-abouts, that hee raigned. Hee was buried
at Toledo in the Cathedrall church, neere to the Empeour Don Alphonso his father*
The Queene Don Blanche his wife lyes in the Monasterie of Saint Mary the
royall of Nagera, to the which a little before her death shee had giuen the towne of
Nectaries, neare vnto Torrezillas de los Cameros.
The Earle Don Raymond Berenger Gouernour of Arragon,Arragon and Barcelone. hauing in the meane
time made warre against Don. Sancho King of Nauarre, with his forces of Arragon
and Cattelogne, beeing not able to ingage the King of Castile, and taken Buereta,
with some other pettie forts of small importance, seeing in the end that hee striued
in vaine against an enemie which had not onely meanes to defend himselfe, but also
on the contrarie, to offend him: hee yeelded himselfe tractable to the perswasions

of certain good Prelates, who were much grieued to see Christians seeke the ruine one
of another,1159. Peace betwixt Nauarre and Arragon. for their ambition: wherefore in the yeare 1159. after many treaties of
Peace, betwixt these two Princes, in the end there was an interview, and they remained
good friends, making an end of all their quarrels, which had continued almost fiue
and twentie yeares.
We must not wonder, if Secular Princes were in combustion, seeking to rule one
ouer another, hauing (it may be) some plausible pretext, seeing that the Prelates of
Spaine were a president for them without any reason.Primacie of Toledo confirmed. The Primacie which hee of Toledo
held ouer other Bishops, was not acknowledged of all: for the Archbishop
of Braga, and he of Saint Iames resfused to obey him:
but the Primate of Primates, Adrian the third, sending
l Hyacinth his Legat from Rome,
forced them by a sentence.
The end of the ninth Booke.





THE TENTH BOOKE
of the Historie of Spaine.

The Contents.
1. D. Alphonso the seuenth King of Castile, and the fourth of that name, called the Noble,
and the troubles which did rise by the factions of Castro and Lara.
2 D. Alphonso the second of that name, and sixth King of Arragon, Earle of Barcelone.
3 Confirmation of the Order of Calatraua.
4 Beginning and continuance of the ancient house of Biscay.
5 Marriage of King D. Alphonso the noble, and of Elenor daughter to Henry the second
King of England.
6 Warre of Nauarre against Castile and Arragon.
7 Marriage of D. Alphonso the second king of Arragon, with D. Sancha of Castile, to
the disgrace of the daughter of Manuel Emperour of Constantinople.
8 Prou^nce annexed to the Crowne of Arragon, the which is exempted from all fealtie and
homage to Castile.
9 Institution of the knights of the sword, of the Order of S. Iames in Galicia. Their increase
and forces, with their Commanderies and benefices.
10 Commanderies and other benefices of the Order of Calatra^a, and their strength.
11 Continuance of the warre against Nauarre, and the taking of the lands of Bureu^ and
Rioja from this Realme by the Castillans*
12 Sedition of the Nobilitie of Castile to defend their Immunities.
13 Continuance of the deedes of D. Alphonso Henriques the new King of Portugal, and
the quarrels betwixt him and the king of Leon.
14 Limitations and diuisions of the conquests which were to be made vpon the Moores, betwixt
the Christian Princes of Spaine.
15 Exploits of the Portugals against the Moores.
16 Continuance of the raigne and deeds of D. Fernand the second king of Leon.
17 Beginning of the towne of Victoria in Alaua: Expedition of the Nauarrois in Castile,
and other deeds of armes of D. Sanc^o the seuenth.
18 Cattelog^e reiects the Soueraigntie of the French.
19 The last acts of D. Alphonso Henriques, king of Portugal.
20 D. Sancho first of that name, the second king of Portugal.
21 Marriage of D. Fernand, the 28. king of Leon, and his death.
22 D. Alphonso the ninth of that name, and 29. king of Leon.
23 Submission of the king of Leon, to him of Castile. Assembly of the ordinarie estates in
Castile. Enmitie and hatred betwixt fiue Christian kings raigning in Spaine.
24 Deeds of D. Sancho king of Portugal, the first of that name, and the institution of the
Order of Au^z.
25 Continuance of the deeds of D. Alphonso king of Castile, the building of the fort of
of Nauarre, neere to Nagera.
26 Aben Ioseph Mazemut king of the Moores, and his exploits against the Christians of
Spaine.

27 D. Sancho the strong 21 King of Nauarre the 8. of that name.
28 Spoiles done by the Moores in the countries of Castille and Leon.
29 D. Pedro the 2. of that name, 7. King of Arragon, his marriages and submission to the
Pope.
30 Descent of the house of Champagne vnto Thibault King of Nauarre, the first of that
family.
31 Inuasions of the realme of Nauarre by the Castillans and Arragonois, the Prouince of
Guipuscoa taken from it.
32 Buildings and reparations of D. Alphonso the Noble, King of Castille, marriage of
D. Blanche his daughter, with Lewis, father to Saint Lewis the French King.
33 D. Rodrigo Ximenes Archbishop of Toledo: his deeds, buildings and the vniversity
made at Palence by King D. Alphonso.
34 Great preparatiues of warre, both by the Christian Princes, and the Moores: the memorable
battaile of Muradal.
35 Armories of Nauarre.
36 The last exploits of D. Sancho King of Portugal. D. Alphonso second of that name,
and third King of Portugal.
37 Exploits of D. Pedro the 2. King of Arragon. Hatred betwixt him and Symon Earle of Montfort, his death in the warre of the Albigeois, mooued by Saint Dominike.
38 D. Iaques the 1. of that name 8. King of Arragon.
39 Seditions at Pampelone. Exercises of armes appointed by D. Sancho the 8. King of
Nauarre, as necessary for a warlike nation.
40 Order of the Knights of Alcantara.
41 D. Henry the first of that name, and 8. King of Castille.
42 Councel of Saint Iohn de Latran, vnder Innocent the 3. sute for the Primacy of
Spaine.

This tenth Booke conteines the descent and continuance
of the royall families of Spaine. that is,

Of Nauarre.
21 D. Sancho 8.


Of Leon.
29 D. Alphonso. 9.


Of Portugal.
2 D. Sancho 1.
3. D. Alphonso. 2.


Of Arragon.
6 D. Alphonso. 2.
7 D. Pedro. 2.
8 D. Iaques. 1.


Of Castille.
7 D. Alphonso. 4.
8 D. Henry. 1.


D. Alphonso the noble the seuenth King of Castille
the fourth of that name.
THE death of the King D. Sancho confirmed his surname of
desired, for that there followed dangerous combustions* begunne
betwixt two great families of Castille, through iealousie
and desire of rule. The young Kings person (beeing then
but foure yeeres old) was vnder the charge of D. Guttiere Fernando
Ruis de Castro, according vnto the will of the deceased
King his father, who had also ordained that the captaines and
Gouernors of Prouinces and places should continue in their

charges,Troubles in Castille, by reason of the Kings No^^age. vntill that his sonne D. Alphonso should bee fifteene yeeres old compleate.
Those of the house of Lara, being men of great account, were discontented with this
decree; of which family the chiefe was the Earle D. Manrique de Lara, who had two
brethren, D. Aluaro, and D. Nugno, all sonnes to D. Pedro de Lara (of whom wee haue
made mention) and of D. Aba, forsaken by the Earle D. Garcia de Cabra: with these
there ioyned, by reason of consanguinity, D. Garcia d' Acia, their brother by the mothers
side, sonne to that Lady D. Aba, and the Earle D. Garcia de Cabra, her first husband:
they were greeued to see the Kings person, and the chiefe affaires of the Realme
in the hands of them of Castro, who held many places, and good gouernments in
Castille and Toledo: wherefore they sought all occasions to seize vpon the authority,
and to dispossesse their aduersaries: D. Guttiere Fernandes, was an ancient Knight,
wise, faithfull, and without any malice, who gaue no man occasion to complaine, but
great meanes to such as enuied his honour to hurt him by his sincerity. Hee had
also beene Gouernor to the King D. Sancho his father, in his youth, and was so worthy
a knight, as they say hee had made and armed fiue hundred Knights, with his owne
hand. Onely hee wanted the happinesse to haue children: but his brother D. Ruy
Fernandes, called the Bald, had foure. D. Fernand, D. Aluar, D. Pedro and D. Guttiere,
surnamed Ruys, and one daughter, called D. Sancha Ruys married to D. Aluaro Ruys de
Gusman.
These factions declaring themselues, euery one stood vpon his gard: and for that it
was not easie to dissolue that which D. Sancho had decreed by his testament, nor to
wrest the authority from them of Castro by force, being in possession: the brothers of
Lara found meanes to circumuent the good knight D. Guttiere Fernandes, by goodly
perswasions, saying, that for the good of the general peace, he should bee content with
those honours hee had, and suffer the Earle D. Manriques to keepe the Kings person:
the which should in no sort blemish his authority,Indiscretion of D. Guttiere Fernandes. but should giue great reputation
vnto the Earle, who was a noble man of that quality, as hee well deserued it: all the
foure brothers promising and swearing vnto him, that they would alwaies preserue
and defend the honour and authority which was due to his reuerent age. D. Guttiere
deceiued with these good words deliuered the King into the hands of these foure brethren,
who remained with D. Garcia d' Acia, as the eldest, the rest hauing at that time
no meanes to contradict it, but soone after they had an oportunity to get the King
from him: for D. Garcia, who was not cunning, nor of a bad disposition, beeing entred
into some termes and difficulty, touching the entertainment of the yong Kings house,
and the necessary prouisions of money for his Estate with the brothers of Lara, they
wrought in such manner as hee resigned this burthensome charge vnto them, the
which they willingly accepted, as a thing which they had long affected; wherein the
Earle D. Garcia, did some-what wrong his honour and faile of his dutie, as well as D.
Guttiere Fernandes de Castro had done; so the King came into the power of D. Manriques
de Lara.
These alterations, vnfit for the dignity of the young King, discontented D. Guttiere,
and withall, those of Lara beganne to faile in that which they had promised him;
wherefore he let them vnderstand that he would haue the King D. Alphonso againe, to
nourish and breed him vp according to the disposition of the King D. Sanchos will:
but they mocked him, as a man which had lost his sences. Wherevpon these two
houses went to armes, and drew vnto them their kinsmen, friends and partisans. giuing
way and meanes to all the lewd people of the country to commit a thousand insolencies,
following the one or the other faction, as it is vsuall in ciuill warres.
And moreouer they made a passage for D. Fernand King of Leon, to enter into the
territories of Castille, where hee committed great excesse vnder pretext to pacefie the
warres betwixt these two houses of Castro and Lara: for beeing entred with an army,
he seized vpon those forts, which were neerest vnto his fronters of Leon, along the riuer
of Duero, and passing on further, beecaused the Earle D. Manriques and his brethren
to dislodge, who carried the King D. Alphonso with them to Soria. During
these tumults D. Guttiere Fernandes de Castro died, and was buried in the Monastery of

Saint Christopher of Encas: after whole decease the Earle D. Manriques caused his
Nephewes D. Fernand, D. Aluaro, D. Pedro and D. Guttiere Ruis to be sommoned to deliuer
vp into his hands the places belonging vnto the crowne, the which they held,
and had commanded vnto their vncles death: but they made answere that they were
not bound to deliuer them vp, seeing that the will of the deceased King was, that
they should hold them vntill the King D. Alphonso were full fifteene yeeres old. There
vpon, D. Manrique commanded that the body of D. Gutti^re Fernandes should bee vnterred,
and charging him with fellony and treason against the King and crown, hee
sought to haue him found guilty.
His foure Nephewes imbraced the cause, and defended both themselues and their
deceased vncle, saying that they neither had, nor did commit any fellony, in retayning
of those places, seeing it was according to the last will and testament of the King D.
Sincho, the which they had neuer demanded of their vncle lyuing. The Lords of the
councell, who were Iudges in this cause, gaue sentence that there was not any fellony
committed, and therefore they ordained, that the body of D. Guttiere, which had beene
against the law of Nations inhumainely pulled out of his graue, should bee laied in againe,
Their contentions were so great, and the miseries which ensued so infinit, as
prest by necessity, they were forced to ingage all the reuenues of Castille and Toledo,
for twelue yeeres, vnto King Fernand; and in the end the Earle D. Manriques bound
himselfe to deliuer vnto the King of Leon,Treachery of D. Manriques de Lara against his Prince and country. the person of young D. Alphonso, his Lord,
and to make him his vassal. And to performe his promise, he led the King D. Fernand
to Soria, where hauing propounded certaine reasons, in an assembly of the Noblemen
of Castille, to perswade them that it was expedient the Kings person should bee
put into his vncles custody, they deliuered him vnto him, protesting that they put him
into his hands, being a free Prince, and therefore they intreated him to maintaine him
in his liberty. The Noblemen durst not herein contradict the King D. Fernand, being
within the country and in armes. The young Infant beeing carried in a gentlemans
armes, beganne to weepe and cry out, wherefore they carried him backe to the lodging
to giue him an aple, or some such like thing to please him. At that time there
was present D. Pedro Nugnes Almexir, a hardy and generous knight, who beeing greeued
at this trecherous act of the Earle D. Manrique, gaue order (that whilest they dandled
the child, to still him) they should bring him a good horse behinde the Kings lodging,
then approching neere vnto the young Prince,Pero Nugnes a faithful vassal. making shew to flatter him, hee
tooke him in his armes, and slipping away by some secret passage well knowne to
him, he carried him to his horse, and so fled with him to the towne of Saint Estienne of
Gormas: doing this act for the liberty of his King with such dexterity and diligence
(whilest that the King D. Fernand attended the Infants returne) as he was gon a good
way before it was discouered.
This beeing knowne by the King D. Fernand hee grew into a great rage, and vsing
threats, he commanded D. Manrique and the rest of his faction, to giue order, that the
child might bee found out and brought againe, wheresoeuer he were: wherevpon the
Earle D. Manrique, and his brethren, vnder collour of seeking their King D. Alphonso,
had meanes to get out of Soria, where all was in Combustion. Being arriued at Saint
Estienne de Gormas, that night they seized againe of the Kings person: notwithstanding
whether remorse of so foule an act, altered the mindes of these knights of Lara, or
that all the bretheren were not a like affected, as D. Manrique: D. Nugno the yongest of
the brethren tooke king D. Alphonso, and carried him to Atienca, not respecting the accord
made with the King D. Fernand, who holding himselfe deceiued by D. Manrique,
sent him word by a knight, that hee was a traytor, and that he would bee reuenged. The
Earle made no other answer, but that it was lawful for him to doe any thing to deliuer
his King and natural Prince from captiuity. Afterwards the Earle meeting with the
King D. Fernand, who accused him of treachery, and demaunded Iustice of the Estates
of Castille; he answered againe, that he knew not that he was a traytor, but that hee repented
him not to haue done his best endeauor, to deliuer his King, a child of so tender
age from such vniust slauery.

After many reasons and allegations of either side,The yong King D. Alphonso giuen in garde to the inhabitants of Auila. the Earle D. Manrique was absolued:
but the King D. Fernand kept in a manner all the places and townes in Castille,
except some of the lesser, which continued vnder the obedience of the King D. Alphonso,
who was not in any great safety, vntill they had found meanes to put him into the
Citie of Auila, where hee was faithfully kept, by his good subiects the inhabitants
thereof, vntill he was twelue yeeres old, wherefore they say commonly in Spaine, the
Loyal of Auila.
The tumults and confusions of Castille,Nauarre. inuited D. Sancho King of Nauarre, surnamed
the wise, to make his profit, which is the marke whereat all worldly men doe aime:
yet had he some iust pretension to doe it, especially to inuade the lands lying vpon the
riuer of Oja, which the Emperour D. Alphonso had laied hold on, during the vacancie
and Interregne of Nauarre and Arragon. So as hee went to armes, entred in hostile
manner into that Prouince, and tooke Logrogno, Entrena and Cerezo: and passing
on, he also tooke Birbiesca, and in a manner all that was in his way, euen vnto Burgos:
all which places he did fortefie, but yet he enioyed them not long. The King of
Nauarre did all these things, without any resistance made by them of Castille, beeing
fauoured by the confusion of the time, and the infancy of the young King D. Alphonso:
besides that towards Arragon hee found himselfe assured by a peace concluded with
the Earle D. Raymond Berenger,Death of D. Ra^mon^ berenger Earle of Barcelone 1162. the which was the better confirmed by his death, which
happened in the yeere 1162. in Piedmont, in the Bourge of Saint Dalmace, neere vnto
Turin. This Prince went by sea into Italy, with his Nephew the Earle of Prouence, to
conferre with the Emperor Frederic Barbarossa, who made warre then in the Dutchy
of Milan.


D. Alphonso the second, and the sixth King
of Arragon.
2. THis Earle had gouerned Cattelogne and Barcelone thirty one yeeres,Arragon. and the
realme of Arragon fiue and twenty. He was wise and valiant, but too ambitious.
He lest D. Raymond his sonne, who was afterwards called D. Alphonso, heire of both Estates
by his testament: by the which hee gaue vnto D. Pedro his second son, the Earledome
of Cerdagne, with the same rights as Cont Bernard William had held it, and
moreouer the demeins and reuenues of the lands of Carcassone,Disposition of D. Raymond Berengers wil. and rights of Narbonne,
and other places in Languedoc, reseruing the homage vnto the Earle of Barcelon
and King of Arragon his eldest: substituting to D. Pedro his third son D. Sancho,
in case hee died without children, and them two to their eldest brother D. Alphonso, either
of them in his Siegneuries, with his children, vnto Henry the second, King of England,
his ally and faithfull friend, the Queene D. Petronille his wife remayning Regent
and tutresse of her Son, and Realme; but she brought D. Alphonso, being but 12. yeeres
old, to the gouernment of the State, vnder the conduct of the Earle of Prouence, his
cousin germain, the Queene giuing ouer that charge, as vnfit for women. This was
the first King of Arragon that was Earle of Barcelone, since which time these two Estates
have not beene diuided.
Returning to D. Sancho King of Nauarre,Nauarre. hee gouerned his realme wisely and iustly,
and had about him many good and vertuous Prelats and Knights: amongst the which
were D. Viuian Bishop of Pampelone, the Earle D. Bela Ladron Lord, that is to say, gouernor
in Alaua, Rodrigues Martines Gouernor in Maragnon: Pedro Ruis in Estella,
and Gallipienco; Sancho Ramires in Sanguessa, Ximeno of Ayuar in Roncal; Ximen Aznares
in Tafalla, Sancho Esquerra in Saint Mary of Vxua, Martin de Lees in Peralta, Aznar
de Rada in Falses and in Valtierra, Peter of Aracury in Logrogno and Tudele, with
diuers others. As for his domestike affaires, hee was married to D. Sancha Infanta of
Castille, whom others call Beacia or Beatrix, daughter to the Emperor D. Alphonso, by
whom he had a goodly issue: D. Sancho, who was King after his father, D. Fernand, and

D. Ramir,Geneology of Nauarre. the which was Bishop of Pampelone: for Ecclesiastical charges which had
great reuenues, were not there giuen to Pastors, which had care of Christians manners
and consciences, but were portions for Kings children: hee was otherwise called D.
Remy. Beside three sonnes, she brought him three daughters, D. Berenguela, who was
married to Richard King of England, surnamed Corde-Lion, and had for her dowry the
country of Maine in France, where shee spent the remainder of her daies, like a vertuous
widow, after the decease of the King her husband D. Sanchos second daughter was
D. Theresa, otherwise called Constance, who died a virgin: and the third was D. Blanche,
married to Thiband Earle of Champaigne and Brie, from whom the race of the Kings
of Nauarre, of the house of Champaigne had their beginning, in D. Thiband their son.
About the yeere 1165.An. 1165. the sentence of the Processe betwixt the Bishops of Pampelone
and Sarragosse, begunne in the time of D. Lope. Predecessor to D. Viuian, with D.
Pedro of Zarroja, for the lymits of their Dioceses, and Iurisdictions, which had beene
iudged by the Legat Hyacinthe, Cardinal of the title of Saint Mary in Cosmedin, was
confirmed by Pope Alexander the third, successor to Adrian the fourth, beeing at
Montpellier in France, who also by his Bull confirmed the preuiledges of the Church
of Pampelone, and the order of the regular Chanoins of Saint Augustin, instituted by
D. Pedro Roda, the Bishop, as other Popes his Predecessors had done.
During these things,Portugal. D. Alphonso Henriques King of Portugal, hauing some quiet
with the Moores, who were not well setled vnder the obedience of the Almohades,
spent his time about the fortification of the fronter townes of his realme, vnto the
yeeres 1165. when as he went againe to field, parting from Alcacar de Sal, and went
and laied siege to Cezimbra, the which he carried, and in like manner Palmela hauing
put the Moores of Badajos to rout, in the mountaines of Cezimbra, comming with
great troupes of horse to succor these two places. It is a remarkable thing in this
Prince, that although he were three score and fiue yeeres old, yet he was continually in
armes, and himselfe in person, enduring the trauels and discomodities of the warre, as
wel as the yongest. The troubles of Castile and Leon procured his peace on that side,
where hee was to dispute his royal title, and the acknowledgment of the lands held by
him, with D. Fernand king of Leon: who giuing some time of breathing vnto the Castillans
, vpon whom he had made his profit, although he could not get their kings person,
he retired into Leon, leauing them of Lara and Castro to end their owne quarrels.
3 The Estates of Castille and the Gouernors of places,Castille. amidest so great troubles
which the King D. Fernand, hee of Nauarre, and the factions of the noblemen of the
country had caused, maintained themselues as well as they could, whilest that the
King D. Alphonso was bred vp at Auila. The Order of the knights of Calatraua, which
had his beginning in the time of the King D. Sancho the Desired,Confirmation of the order of Calatraua. was now confirmed
by Pope Alexander the third, by his Breefe in the yeere 1164. directed vnto D. Garcia,
first Maister of the knights of that Order. It appeeres by the Spanish Histories,
that at that time there were Abbots at Calatraua, and that D. Raymond liued yet: in
whose place there succeeded Priors, by grant from the Chapter generall of the Order
of Cisteaux. We finde also that at that time the house of Aualos (which hath beene
famous since in Castille) was then great in Nauarre, from whence it is descended: and
mention is made of many great personages of that family: of D. Ximen d' Aualox,
Iean Mertines, and Sancho Martines d' Aualos brethren, and of Garcia Nunes d' Aualos:The family of Aualos.
whereof D. Ximen, in the yeere 1162. gaue vnto the Monastery of Saint Emibian,
certaine rights which he had in the church of Saint Felix a' Aualos, the letters whereof
are yet extant in that Monastery.
The King D. Alphonso beeing eleuen yeere old; the Earles D. Manrique, D. Aluaro
and D. Nugno de Lara with other Noblemen, which had the charge of him, thought it
now fit, that he should goe and visit the townes of his realme, and shew himselfe to his
subiects, who desired to see him: wherefore they drew him out of Auila, with good
troupes of horse, besides an hundred and fifty horse which they of Auila gaue him for
his gard. Some places which D. Fernand King of Leon had seized on in Castille, beganne
already to reuolt; but when as King D. Alphonso went his progresse, euery

towne where hee past, obeyed him, vntil hee came to Toledo, whereas D. Fernand Ruis
Castro was Gouernor, since the raigne of the King D. Sanche, and ment to keepe it vntill
the King D. Alphonso was fifteene yeeres old, as it was decreed by the fathers will:
but the Earle D. Manrique de Lara was not of that minde: for hauing some secret intelligence
with a knight of Toledo, called D. Estienne Illian, who had built the parish
church, and the high tower of Saint Romains, and was in some bad termes with D.
Fernand Ruis, hee had by his prctises meanes to stirre vp the people to a mutiny, hauing
caused the King to approach to Saint Romains tower, in a disguised habit, where
he hung out his armes and collours, so as D. Fernand (fearing his owne weaknesse) abandoned
the castle, and fortefied himselfe in Huete.
By this meanes the city of Toledo was deliuered vnto the Earle Manrique in the
Kings name, by this knight D. Estienne Illian, whose picture armed on horse-backe,
for this goodly act, is to bee seene in the body of the great church of Toledo, and not
for any prowesse that is knowne to the ignorant people. In recompence whereof
they gaue him the gouernment of this Citie. From thence D. Manrique led the
King to Huete, against D. Fernand Ruis, who beeing faithfully and couragiously assisted
by the Inhabitants of Huete, sallied forth against the Earle D. Manrique, where
there was a cruell battaile: before the fight D. Fernand had giuen his armes and deuice
vnto a Squire of his, setting him in the most remarkable place of the battaile, to
the end they should take him for his master: for hee knew they had vowed and conspired
his death, at what price soeuer: so as comming to fight, the Earle D. Manrique
followed by his choise men, picked out this Squire, whom hee slue with his owne hand:
but an other of D. Fernands Squiers,The Earle D. Manrique de Lara slaine before Huete. reuenging his Campanions death, gaue the
Earle a deadly wound, and slue him vpon the place: so as D. Manriques army hauing
lost their Generall, was put to route, and defeated. D. Nugno de Lara for his brothers
death, did afterwards accuse D. Fernand of treason, saying that hee had caused his
brother to bee trecherously slaine, but it was ended by the Prelats, by reason of the
great spoiles they endured; but the hatred continued still betwixt these two families:
many forts came afterwards into the power of the yong King D. Alphonso, without any
resistance.
The towne of Surita which was held by Lope d' Arenas, would not yeeld, obiecting
the testament of the young King D. Sancho, yet notwithstanding they would haue the
place, and hauing inuested it, they beganne to batter it. D. Lope Diaz de Haro, Lord
of Biscay, was at this siege well accompanied, although hee had not beene called, the
Earle D. Nugno de Lara and hee* beeing at some iarre. The taking of this place seeming
euery day more difficult, D. Nugno, and the Earle D. Suero entred into the towne,
vpon assurance giuen by oth, to parle, with Lope d' Arenas the Gouernor, but they were
detained prisoners; Lope was soone after punished for this fraude, God shewing that
there is not any thing which displeases him more then false-hood and treachery; and in
truth there is no brute beast more detestable then that man which seekes to circumuent
by promises and othes.
There was in King D. Alphonsos campe, one which had serued, or beene bred vp in
Lope d' Arenas house, who presented himselfe vnto the King, offring to deliuer him the
place, if hee would giue him meanes to liue, and that there were any one which would
bee content hee should wound him, that hee might haue some collour to flie vnto the
enemy. The King promised to recompence him well, but as for the hurting of any
one, there was some difficulty: yet there was one Pedro Diaz, or Pedro Ruis, as others
call him, of Toledo, offred himselfe to receiue the blow. This varlet, whose name was
Domin^gullo, drew his sword presently, and gaue this poore Pedro Diaz, a deadly
wound, and then fled, the gard and other soldiars making shew to follow him towards
the towne, where hee was receiued and knowne by his old Master Lope d' Arenas, who
nothing suspecting Dominguillo, was trecherously slaine by him; the murtherer hauing
meanes to slip downe the wall, and to recouer the campe. Vpon the Gouernors
death the souldiars and inhabitants resolued to yeeld the towne of Surita vnto the
King, Dominguillo, who was prowd of this execution, demanded his reward of the

King: but the King by a memorable example of Iustice, whosoeuer aduised him, vsed an
admirable proportion in this action: for hee first caused his eyes to bee put out, for
the murther which he had committed, hauing not made him acquainted therewith;
and then hee gaue him that which was needfull for his entertainement: but hearing
after that hee did glory too much in his treason, hee caused him to bee slaine.
After this enterprise of Surita, the King dismissed his souldiers, who returned to their
houses.
Howsoeuer D. Alphonso Henriques King of Portugal, ended his quarrels with D. Fernand
of Leon;Portugal. yet in the yeere of our Lord 1169. hee had confirmation of his royall
titles from Pope Alexander, to whom he sent his Bulles, taking the King D. Alphonso
Henriques, his successours, Realme and subiects, into the protection of the church of
Rome, paying two markes of gold for an acknowledgment or rent; the which the
Archbishop of Braga, did receiue yeerely for the church of Rome, yet no man can say,
that this rent was euer paied; and if D. Fernand married his daughter D. Vrraca, by
whom he had one sonne called D. Alphonso, who succeeded him in his realmes of Leon
and Galicia; yet this affinity did not suppresse the troubles and lamentable factions,
which followed.
King D. Fernand, by the aduise of banished Portugais, caused the city of Rodrique to
be fortified, the which some hold to bee ancient Mirobrisa, and there placed a good garrison,
the which did wonderfully annoy the Portugals that lay neere it, and built Ledesma,
neere to Salamanca, which did much in domage that city, as you shal heare: this King
tooke pleasure in building,Places built by D. Fernand when hee was not prest with warre: and therefore they say
that Granada, which is neere to Coria Valenc^a in the Bishoprike of Quiedo, Villalpando,
Mansilla Majorga in the Bishoprike of Leon, and Castro in Toraphe in the Bishoprike
of Zamora are his workes. Hee was diuorced from. Vrraca, by reason of consanguinity,
and tooke to his second wife D. Theresa daughter to Nugno de Lara* after whose
death he had a third wife called D. Vrraca Lopes, daughter to D. Lope Diaz, Lord of Biscay;
By this last wife D. Fernand had D. Sancho and D. Garcia, lawful heires to the realme
of Leon,Genealogy of Leon. for that they were, by the Popes sentence, borne in lawful wed-locke, and not D.
Alphonso: yet they raigned not; neither did they leaue any heires.
4 The house of Biscay was then in great esteeme;The house of Biscay out of the which was issued the
third wife of the King D. Fernand: the order and continuance of which family is thus set
downe by the Spanish writers. They name for the best knowne stem of this house, D. suria,
who by his mothers side was Nephew to the King of Scotland, begotten by a knight
of Biscay, called D. Lope, who obtained the Siegneury of Biscay in the yeere 870. Suria in
the Cantabrian tongue signifies white. He carried in his armories two wolues sables, either
of them with a Lambe in his mouth, in a field Argent, which were the ancient armes
of Biscay: he married to his second wife D. Dalda, daughter and heire to D. Sancho Esteguis
Ordognes, Lord of Tauira of Durango, by whom he had one sonne, called D. Manso
Lopes, who was Lord of Biscay, and of Tauira of Durango this D. Manso had by his
first wife (for hee was married thrice) one sonne, called D. Inigo Esguerra, that is to say,
deafe, in the Biscaine tongue, who was the third Lord of Biscay. Of him was borne D.
Lope Diaz the fourth Lord of Biscaie, who liued in the time of D. Fernand Concales
Earle of Castille, D. Sancho Lopes was his sonne and the fifth Lord of Biscay: who
although hee had two sonnes, D. Inigo and D. Garcia, surnamed Sanches, yet did neither
of them succeed him in the Siegneurie of Biscay: the reason was, that the souldiars
beeing in mutynie, at their returne from a certaine warre in Cubijana of Morillas,
in the Prouince of Alaua, as D. Sancho Lopes came amongst their drawne
swords to paci^ie them, he receiued a wound for an other, and was slaine, leauing these
two verie little: wherefore the Biscaines hauing neede of a Lord able to gouerne
them, they made choise of D. Inigo Esguerra the second of that name, bastard
brother to the deceased, who was the sixth Lord of Biscay: of him came D. Lope
Diaz the second, who ruled in Biscay. And to make some recompence to the
children of D. Sancho Lopes, D. Inigo Sancho had Lodio giuen him for a portion, and D.
Garcia that of Orozco. D. Lope Diaz the seuenth Lord of Biscay, was father to D. Diego

Lopes, who succeeded him in the daies of King D. Alphonso the sixth. This D. Diego was
the eighth Lord of Biscay, surnamed the white, and being maried to a Lady of Arragon,
he begat one sonne called D. Lope Diaz, who was afterwards the ninth Lord of Biscay,
the third of that name. It is that D. Lope which was at the siege of Surita, with King D.
Alphonso, called the Noble, in whose raigne wee now are come, and whole daughter D.
Vrraca was married to Fernand the second King of Leon and Gallicia: hee also (hauing
built vp the towne of Haro, in Rioje) surnamed himselfe of Haro, and left it to his posterity.
He had of D. Mencia his wife, one sonne called D. Diego Lopes de Haro, heire of his
fathers estates, and an other daughter called D. Gaufreda, who some say had beene
Queene of Nauarre, but it is doubtfull. This D. Diego Lopes, was the tenth Lord of Biscay,
and a very good Knight: who had the honor to bee standard-bearer to the King of
Castille, and was at al the exploits of warre, done by King D. Alphonso the ninth. Hee had
to wife D. Maria Diaz de Lara, daughter to Cont Nugno, of whom we haue made mention,
and she bare him D. Lopes Diaz de Haro, who was the eleuenth Lord of Biscay. His
Image is to be seene kneeling, in the quier of the great church of Toledo, planted against
a piller. The succession of these Lords, shall bee here-after set downe according to
the time.
Returning to King D. Alphonso,Castille. after the taking of Surita, hauing dismissed his souldiars,
he returned to Toledo, where hee kept his court, and assembled the Noblemen and
knights his vassals: where finding himselfe in free possession of all the country of Toledo,
he came to Burgos, where hee called an other assembly, and kept his court, in the
yeere 1170.An. 1170. touching that which lies on this side the mountaines, belonging to Castille
and Nagera:D. Alphonso the noble King of Castille comes of years. and for that the fifteenth yeere of his age was now ended, all the townes and
forts were yeeled vp vnto him, without any contradiction, according to the will of his
deceased father, yea those which were held by D. Fernand of Castro, who was neuer
more seene in Castille, by reason of the quarrels he had with the house of Lara, but passing
to the Moores, hee shewed himselfe a perpetuall enemy to his country. In the assembly
at Burgos, there was speech of the excesse, and outrages done by Fernand King
of Leon; to reuenge the which hee resolued to proclaime warre against him, but it was
not put in execution long after, by reason of D. Alphonsos youth, who was not yet capable
of so great an enterprise. There they treated also of the Kings marriage with Elenor
daughter to Henry the second King of England,And marries Elenor of England. who was as renouned as any Prince at
that day in Christendome: he was sonne to Geoffrey Duke of Aniou and Normandie. It
was this Henry which had married Queene Elenor, heire of the Dutchie of Guienne, and
countie of Poictou, put away by Lewis the seuenth the French King.
5 After these things, there was an enter-view of two yong Kings, D. Alphonso of Castille,
and D. Alphonso of Arragon, at Sahagun, with shewes of great loue; and from
thence they went to Sarragosse, from whence there was an Ambassage sent to effect the
marriage of the King of Castille. The Ambassadors were D. Celebrun Archbishop of Toledo,
the Bishops of Palenza, Calaorra, Burgos and Segobia, the Earles D. Ponce and D.
Nugno, with other Noblemen; who found the court, with the Queene mother and her
daughter at Burdeaux: whose returne the King of Castille attended at Sarragosse,
where during his aboad, the league was renewed betwixt Castille and Arragon, and
a new made for the mutuall defence of both Kings, against all men, except the King
of England, in the which were named all the great men belonging to either estate:
for assurance whereof, there was consigned and laied in pawne the castles of Nagera,
Biguerra, Clauijo, Ocon and Arueda, for the King of Castille; and for the
King of Arragon, Hariza, Daroca, Aranda, Epila Borja: with a condition that hee
which should breake the league, should loose these places: and the conuentions
were signed and confirmed by the two Kings, and their chiefest Nobles. The Ambassadors
of Castille were welcome to Burdeaux, and their charge was very pleasing
to the king of England: wherevpon the Princesse Elenor was sent into Spaine,
beeing accompanied by Bernard Archbishop of Bourdeaux, the Bishoppes of Poictiers,
Angoulesme, Perigueux, Xaintes, Agen, and Bazas: by Raoul de la
Faye, Seneshall of Guienne, Helie Earle of Perigort, the Vicounts of Tartax,

Chasteleraud, Chastillon, Mortmar, Vendome, Augoulesme, Labrit or Albret, with very
many other Noblemen and Knights. By the treaty made with the Ambassadors it was
sayd, that the assurace and contract of marriage should bee made at Tarrassone, and
should be sollemnly ratefied in the presence of the King of Arragon: wherefore the
two Kings came to Tarrassone, where these things were celebrated and sworne with
great sollemnity,Guifts to th^ new Queene of Castille in fouor of (...) marriage. in the yeere of our Lord 1170. and for accomplishment thereof at that
instant D. Alphonso King of Castille, caused all the Knights of Castille, which were there
present, to sweare fealtie to his future spouse: and moreouer hee gaue vnto her in faaour
of the marriage, the castles and city of Burgos, Castro, Xeris, Auia, Moncon, Saldagne,
Tariego, Dueregnas, Carrion, Aabeson, Medina del Aampo, Villa Escusa, Aguillar
and Astudillo, and for her idle expences and to furnish her cabinet, he assigned particularly
vnto her, Burgos, Nagera, and Castro Xeris: besides he gaue vnto her the rents of
the port of Saint Emeterio, Besgo, Cabedo, Briza de Centillana, Calaorra, Logrogno,
Arnedo, Biguerra, Granon, Vilhorado, Pancoruo, Monasterio, Poza, Atienca, Osma,
Penafiil, Curiel, Surita, Hita, Aegna Negra and others. Moreouer hee promised to
giue her the moytie of all hee should conquer from the Moores from the day of their
marriage. These promises and matrimoniall conuentions were sworne in the presence
of the Archbishop of Bourdeaux, and other English Ambassadors, to whom in
the Queenes name hee caused the forts to bee deliuered, and the homages aboue mentioned
to bee done, all in the presence of the King of Arragon, as an indifferent arbitrator
for both parties. These things thus finished, the two Kings of Castille and Arragon,
parted good friends, and the Ambassadors, with the new spouse, came with D.
Alphonso the Noble, to Burgos, where the marriage was celebrated with great state
and royal pompe, after which the court parting from Burgos, it came to Nagera, in
the countrie of Oja, where the King gaue leaue to many which had come to attend the
solemnitie of his marriage, namely to them of Auila, who had alwaies followed him,
to whom for their willingnesse to serue him, hee graunted many priuiledges.
After which hee led the Queene to Toledo, where hee grew so amorons of a Iew,
whom they called Hermosa, as hee forgot his new spouse, and intangled himselfe
so farre in her loue,Disordanat Iust of D. Alphonso king of Castille. as hee almost lost his sences; whereat some Knights of Castille
beeing verie much greeued, they thought to doe an act pleasing vnto God, and
profitable to the commen-weale; to kill this Iew, the which in the beginning the King
did beare verie impatiently, but in the end hee acknowledged his error, and detested
it.
Vpon the confines of Arragon and Castille, there began at that time a petty estate
in Albarrazin,Fort of Albarrazin. which place was vsurped by a Knight, called D. Pedro Ruis d' Acagra, who
held it of God and his sword. Hee was borne in Nauarre, and wonne the loue of the
Moores of Murcia, and other neighbour places, which did fauour and succor him in his
enterprises, and withall hee had newly made a league with D. Sancho King of Nauarre,
who supported him and vsed him, to bridle Arragon and Castille, with which estates hee
had or feared some Iarres. This fort which had beene in ancient time called Saint Marie
of Albarrazin, was a troublesome thorne in the feete of the Kings of Castille and
Arragon,An. 1172. into whose territories D. Pedro Ruis ^ Asagra, made often roads, at his pleasure:
who hauing about this yeere of our Lord 1172. taken some places in Castille,
the King D. Alphonso the noble, resolued to make warre against him, and to take them
from him if hee could: for this consideration hee made a priuate league with the King
of Arragon, who was interessed; by the which it was concluded, that the King of Arragon
should haue the fort of Albarrazin, and hee of Castille should haue the rest
which D. Pedro did hold, for the obseruing of which Articles, hee of Arragon did
giue in pawne to the King of Castille, the castle of Hariza, with Aranda, Boria and
Arguedas: and the castle of Verdejo was giuen to the King of Arragon by him
of castille, bynding also the townes of Agreda, Aquilar and Cerueda: which places
were assurances for that which had beene contracted betwixt them, promising
that if there should bee any contrauention, or fraude betwixt them, it should bee repaired
within three yeeres, or the places lost for him that had committed the fraude. But

these deseignes went to smoake, the two Kings beeing at a iarre for Hariza, the which
was deliuered to the King of Castille by Nugno Sanches a knight, without the King of
Arragons expresse command, and before the warre of Nauarre was begunne. Then the
King of Castille was most commonly accompanied by D. Celebrun Archbishop of Toledo,
Primat of Spaine, the Bishops D. Ioselin of Siguenca, Goncalo of Segobia, Raymond
of Pale^^a, Pedro of Bourgos, Sancho d' Auila, Bernard d' Osma, with other Prelats
and Church-men, of which kinde of men Kings councels did then most commonly consist*
and therefore whatsoeuer Princes committed, were it good or bad, is iustly to bee
imputed to them, be it in religion or in matters of State. There were also many Noblemen
of Marke in those daies; amongst the which were D. Ponce, Lord Steward, and D.
Nugnes standard-bearer of Castille D. Goncalo Maragnon, a standard-bearer also, and D.
Roderigo Guttieres a Steward, which were the chiefe offices of the crowne: they were annual,
as it seemes, or else at the Kings pleasure.
6. By their aduice and assistance, with other Prelats, Noblemen and Knights of his
realmes,Nauarre. D. Alphonso entred Nauarre in the yeere 1173. with a great army, against his vncle
D. Sancho the wife,An. 1173. moued therevnto, as wel by the spoiles which he had done in the
territories of Rioje and Bureua, during his nonage, as also by the perswasion of the King
of Arragon his cousin, whose countrie D. Sancho had inuaded, whilest that the armie
of Arragon was in the Realme of Valencia against the Moores, thinking to make his
profit thereby,Nauarre inuaded by the Kings of Castille and Arragon. whilest the King of Arragon was absent with his forces. So breaking
the accord and peace, which hee had made with the deceased D. Raymond, and renewed
with Queene Petronilla, hee had ouerrunne his country, and forced D. Alphonso
King of Arragon, to giue ouer his prais-worthie enterprises, and to turne head against
his enemie, whom he had repulsed into Nauarre, entring by Tudele, where hee did besiege
and take the towne of Arguedas, the which hee fortefied and manned with a good
garrison.
These two Kings of Castille and Arragon beeing in armes, and pressing D. Sancho in
diuers places, hee found himselfe to weake to make head against them, so as his countries
endured great spoiles and miseries, for his armie beeing defeated towards Castille,
the Castillans did runne as farre as Pampelone: on the other side the King of
Arragon tooke from him the towne and castle of Milagro, the garrison whereof did alwaies
keepe his fronters in alarme, by reason whereof hee razed it, but it was since repaired
by the Nauarrois. Notwithstanding these two vnited forces, yet D. Sancho
defended himselfe valiantly against the King of Arragon and tooke from him the castles
of Trasmos and Caxuelos. The most renouned Knights which were in those
daies in Nauarre, as appeeres by the ancient Records of townes and Monasteries,
were Inigo Almorauid in Roncal, Sancho Ramires in Aybar, Iordain in Saint Marie
in Vxue, Ximen Almorauid in Peralta, Garcia of Albero in Tudele, and Martin Ruis in
Estella, who had the gouernment of these places and forts, and commanded D. Shanchos
souldiers.
7. During these warres,Arragon. the King of Castille resolued to propound a marriage vnto
D. Alphonso King of Arragon, the which had beene treated of betwixt him and D. Sancha
his aunt, daughter to the Emperor D. Alphonso, by his second wife D. Rica, and would
attempt (by the charity which did guide both him and his councel) to breake the marriage
which was already concluded betwixt the sayd King of Arragon and the daughter
of Manuel the first Emperour of Constantinople,King of Arragon leaues the Emperors daughter, to marry D. Sancho of Castille. and so farre aduanced, as shee was
come alreadie to Montpellier, when as D. Alphonso of Arragon forsooke her to hearken
to the marriage of D. Sancho of Castille, to the great contempt and disgrace of the Emperor.
This other marriage was afterwards celebrated in Sarragossa, in the presence
of Cardinal Hiacinthe, the Popes Legat in Spaine, in the yeere 1174. in consideration
whereof,An. 1174. the King of Arragon gaue vnto his spouse many townes in Arragon and
Cattelogne, imitating the example of the King of Castile, who had extraordinarily aduanced
the Princesse of England.
8 Queene Petronilla of Arragon was deceased the yeere before this marriage, it
may bee whilst her sonne was in Prouence to dispute the succession of the Earle of

Prouence his cousin, who had beene slaine nere vnto Nice by the Nissards: whose inhetitance
he had obtained,Prouence re^ui^es to the Crowne of Arragon. notwithstanding that the Earle of Tolousa were a great enemy
vnto him. They write that this Princesse by her last wil and testament did ordaine, that
no women should succeed to the crowne of Arragon.
It was the same yeere 1174.Castille. that King D. Alphonso the noble confirmed the priuiledges
of the city of Toledo, the which we haue set downe by Articles during the life of the
Emperor D. Alphonso the sixth: a while after the King D. Alphonso of Castille, beeing at
the siege of Cuenca,Arragon exempt for the soueraignty of Castille. he quit vnto D. Alphonso of Arragon the fealty and homage, and al
pretension of soueraignty, which hee had to the realme of Arragon, in confirmation of
their friendship, and in respect of their new contracted alliance, three and fortie
yeeres after that the Realme of Arragon had begu^ne to hold of the crowne of
Castille.
The Noblemen and Knights which had conducted Manuell the Emperors daughter
to Montpellier,Arragon. seeing themselues and their Princesse thus mocked, not knowing what
other course to take, they would haue carried her backe into Greece: But either by loue
or force they married her to William Earle of Montpellier, in whose house shee was
lodged: of which marriage issued a daughter, called Mary, who in time, was wife to
the sonne and heire of this D. Alphonso King of Castille.Gerealogie of Arragon. This sonnes name was D.
Pedro, borne of D. Sancho of Castille, besides shee brought the King her husband, D.
Alphonso, who was Earle of Prouence, and D. Fernand, who beeing a Monke in the royall
Monasterie of Poblette, which his father had finished, Hee left it, to bee Abbot of
Montarragon. King D. Alphonso had three daughters also by the Queene D. Sancha,
that is D. Constance who was married first to the King of Hongarie, and afterwards
to the Emperour. Frederic the second, D. Elcnor and D. Sancha, both Countesses of
Tolousa, the one married to Cont Raymond the father, and the other to Cont Raymond
the sonne. This Queene D. Sancha was verie deuout, after the manner of that age:
wherefore as soone as she was married she built the Monastery of Sixena, of the Nuns
of Saint Iean.
9 This age was (as the rest) full of deuotions,Castille^ and inuentions of new seruices: for
Cardinall Hyacinthe beeing Legate a Latere for the Pope in Spaine, the order of
knights or men at armes,Order of Saint Iames. of Saint Iames, had his beginning in the realme of Galicia, by
an emulation betwixt some knights, and Monkes of Saint Eloy, a Monastery in the same
Kingdome. These good religious fathers seeing the great concourse of people which
came from all parts of Christendome to the sepulcher of Saint Iames, they beganne to
build Hospitals, out of their reuenues which were very great, vpon the passage which in
Spaine they doe commonly call the French way, to lodge and feed Pilgrimes, and to
supplie all their necessities, in sicknesse or in health: wherein they imployed themselues
honestly, and the first Hospitall of their foundation was that of Saint Marke the Euangilists,
without the walles of the city of Leon: afterwards they built another vpon the
passage of Castille, called de las Tiendas. In imitation of these Monkes, vsing such courtesie
to strangers which went to Saint Iames, there were thirteene Knights, very deuout
to this Apostle, taking him for their particular Patron and aduocate, according to
their instruction, vowed themselues to gard and assure the way for pilgrimes against
the incursions of the Moores, and other theeues which troubled Spaine; and hauing
imparted their deseigne to the Monkes of Saint Eloy, they agreed to make one body
amongst them, and to make the patrimonie of the Monastery of Saint Eloy common,
with that of these Knights, and others which should ioyne with them: at that time they
did enioy about twenty castles; which made the Monkes more willing to allow of this
communion: al these holy souldiars were married from their first institution, wherefore
they did onelie vow coniugal chastetie, and as for pouerty it was not very great,
they onelie renounced the propertie of their goods, for the seruice of the order: enioying
the fruites, whereof they payed tithe vnto the Monkes for the diuine seruice,
wherein they were imployed: they did vowe obedience to their Prior
and Maister, by such an order, as the Monkes should bee subiect to their Priors
both for spirituall and temporall; and the Knights to the same Prior touching the

spiritualty; but in regard of the temporall they should obay the maister of the order.
Whereof the first was named D.First conuent of Knights of Saint Iames. Pedro Fernandes de Puente Encalada. The first conuent
which was built for these Knights, was neere vnto Saint Markes Hospitall, without the
walles of Leon, on a peece of ground belonging to the Monkes of Saint Eloy, which
they gaue; into the which they all retired, taking vpon them a modest kinde of habit,
fit for the warre, carrying upon a white cloake a red-crosse, in forme of a sword, for a
marke of their order, and for an argument of humilitie they had haire powled,
which was no smal abasement in those times.
Their Order was vnder Saint Augustin, according to that of the Monkes of Saint Eloy:
and all these things were ordred in the presence of Cardinal Hyacinthe, the Legat,
and allowed by him, hauing especiall authority for it. A while after D. Pedro, the Master
of the Order, accompanied with certaine Knights, this order beeing wonderfully
increased, went to Rome, to present himselfe to Pope Alexander, who confirmed the
order in the yeare of our Lord 1175. according to the disposition of Cardinal Hyacinthe
his Legat, who was afterwards Pope. Many have beleeued, and some haue written,
that this order of Knights of Saint Iames is more ancient, grounding it vpon a certaine
priuiledge which is found at Salamanca, in the Monasterie of the Holie Ghost,
where at this present the relligious women of that order are: for besides the moderne
Castillan Language, in the which this priuiledge is written, with the date and yeere
thereof, counted from the natiuity of our Lord Iesus Christ, discouers the falshood:
for that in those daies all Instruments, titles and letters were in written in Latin, and that
they did account the yeeres from the Aera of Caesar, there is not any mention found in
Authors of the Institution of this Order, nor of any exploit of the Knights thereof, before
this time: besides other makes of falshood which may bee discouered in this
priuiledge, as to intitle the King D. Fernand the Great Lord of Biscay, and King of
Leon, which hee was not, and by consequence had no cause to grant priuiledges to that
Monastery of the citie of Salamanca, which hath been alwaies of the iurisdiction of Leon.
Whereas in the yeere 1034. which is the date thereof, there raigned D. Bernard the
third of that name, so as it is not without cause if they doubt of the truth of the priuiledges
granted to churches and conuents.
These Knights newly instituted being fallne into some dislike with D. Fernand King
of Leon, raigning at that time, they left their Conuent of Saint Marke at Leon, and retired
into Castille, where they were courteously receiued by the King D. Alphonso,
who gaue them the towne and Castle of Vcles, called in old time Vrcesia, where they
built that renowned conuent, which is the chiefe seate of their religion and order:
yet they sent some of their brethren to dwell in their first conuent of Saint Marke at
Leon, after the decease of the King D. Fernand, vpon condition that the superioritie
should belong to that of Vcles: but it is not obserued, for the conuent of S. Marke doth
not acknowledge that of Vcles in any thing, but doth keep their first reuenues, the which
were since augmented in Estremadura, after the conquest thereof by them of Leon. In
time this order did extend farre into Portugal, where it got great reuenues vnder the
obedience of the conuent of Vcles, vnto the King D. Denis, who put the Knights
out of his country.
This order of the Knights of Saint Iames did so grow in wealth and number, by
the bountie of Kings,A thousand launces of the Order of Saint Iames. and indulgences of Popes, as they were able to arme a thousand
launces compleat, in both conuents of Vcles and Saint Marke: and before that by the
authority of Pope Adrian the sixth, the masters place was incorporate to the crowne
of Castille, the Maisters of the Order were chosen and displaced, if there were cause,
by the suffrages of thirteene brethren, who had that authoritie and power from the
whole Order, the which doth enioy more dignities, conuents, monasteries, colleges,Two chiefe (...)
and other lands, then any Order that is in Spaine: first there are those principal
conuents, which are the chiefe of all the rest, which bee Vcles and Saint Marke, under
the which are foure Hermitages, Saint Marie de la Pegna, neere vnto the Towne of
Segure of the Mountaine, Saint Saluator of Munstiers, neere to Almesca: Saint Mary
of Cagnamanes in the fields of Montiel, and Saint Anthony about Alhambra.

Besides one Conuent in the Cittie of Seuille, two Colledges in the Vniuersitie of Salamanca,Colledges.
sixe Monasteries of Religious women; which were the holy Ghost at Salamanca,
S. ^oy at Toledo, Saint Croix at Vailledolit, Saint Iames at Granado, S. Olalia at Merida,
and Saint Iames in Iunguera of Barcelone.Religious command^ries of women. They haue also fiue Hospitals: S. Iames
of Toledo, where they go to be cured which haue the poxe or French disease* and all other
infirmities which depend thereon, S. Iames at Cuenca, las Tiendas in Castile the
old,Hospital^* the hospitall neere vnto the Co^^ent of Saint Mark at Leon, and the hospitall of the
Conuent at Vcles. Moreouer, this Order hath many commanderies, the which are bound
to serue in time of warre against the Moores, and to furnish 368. lances: those which belong
to the iurisdiction of Vcles, are, the great Commanderie of Castille, that of Paracuellos,
Monthernand, Mora, dos Barrios, Monreal, Horcajo, el Corral of Almaguer, el
Campo de Critana, Alhambra, Membrilla, Montizon, Bedmar, Vacas, Segura de la Sierra,
which is the best Commanderie of all Spaine: Yeste, Moratallal, Carauaca, Aledo,
Ricote, Biedma, Cieca, Soconos, Torres, and Cagnamares, Montiel, Socuellamos,
Villamaior, Carrizoja, Vilhermosa, Vallanoua de la Fuente, the buildings del campo de
Montiel, Villa Escusa de Haro, the buildings of Mancha, and the riuer of Tayo, Huelamo,
Orria, Estremera, Saint Croix de Sarca, Villoria, Villarubia, Alpages, and the Priorie
of Vcles, the Chamber of the Priuiledges of the Order, and Alorqui. These bee those
which acknowledge Vcles. Now those follow which are of the Iurisdiction of Saint Mark
of Leon, the great Commanderie Aquilarejo, Calcadilla, la Puebla de Sancho Peres,
el Santo, Villafrancha, la Fuente del maestre, Almendralegio, Lobon, Montijo, Merida,
Alcuescar, Riuera, and Azebucha, Hallame, Ellotiua, Palomas, Ornachos, Reyna
Hinojosa, Medina de la Torres, Valencia ventoso, Monasterio, Montemolino, Vsagre,
Azuaga, Guadalcanal, Mures, Benacuca, Estepa, the houses of Corduba, the buildings
in the Prouince of Leon, the Prouince of the conuent of Leon, Villauoua of Alisdar,
Vena Mexi, the Prouostship of Bienuenida. In Castile the old, are Pegna, Vsende,
Estriana, Castrotoraua. Besides all these there are the commanderies of la Torre d' Ocague,
Sarca, Mirauel, Castelleja de la Cuesta, Barra, Castroverde. And in the Realme
of Valencia are the commanderies of Museros, Enguerra, Orcheta, Sagra, Zenet and
Fradel. Besides these Commanderies, this Order hath at this day aboue fixe hundred
Knights of the habit, aboue two hundred Clerkes breethren, which remaine in the conuents,
with Vicarages and other Benefices, so as it is wonderfull great and rich. And although
it were first instituted to make warre against the Infidels, yet there are few at this
day which affect these commanderies, or the habit to that end, but only to increase their
reuenues, or to be in greater reputation among souldiers, by meanes of this habit. Such
was the iurisdiction of this Order of Knights.
During the raigne of this King Don Alphonso the Noble, the Monasterie of religious
women of Balbuena was built by Peter of Balbuena an Hermite: in like manner one Iohn
of Ortega, borne at Quintana in Ortugno, in the Diocesse of Burgos, was sanctified, I
know not for what holines, and his bodie was buried in the yeare 1173. in the Monastery
which carries his name: where the Spanish Authors say, hee did many miracles. There
were infinit donations made vnto Monasteries, Conuents, and Orders of Knights, by the
King and the Nobility of Spaine, for the redemption of their soules, and of their kindred
and friends deceased, as their letters report.
10 The Order of the Knights of Calatraua, whose beginning wee haue described in
the life of the king D. Sancho the desired, was much augmented at that time,Order of Calatraua. and was only
gouerned by masters: whereof the first was called D. Garcia, to whom succeeded D. Martin
Peres of Syon: and the third master which gouerned at that time, was D. Nugno Peres,
of Quignones. The first Conuent of this Order was at Calatraua: but since the Knights
made diuers changes, as appeares by their Histories, as to Ciruelos, Buxeda, Corcoles,
and castel of Saluatierra: and since the chiefe seate of their Order was translated to the castell
of Couo, in the time of D. Nugno Hernandes the twelfth Master, where it now remaines.
The rents and reuenues of this holy company of Warriours haue so increased
from time to time, by the bountie of the Kings of Castile, as they haue beene seene
to serue against the Moores with 300 Lances well appointed, whereunto those Commanderies

are ordinarily bound, whose names be, first the great commanderie, Clauerra,
Obre^^a, and Argama^illa* the commanderies of Malagon, Mancares, Almagro, Montancheulos,
Daymiel, Villarubia, val de pegnas, Eluico, and Saint Croix, Fuenteel Moral,
and the houses of Citte Real, Castellanos, Almedouar del campo, Puerto Llano, Corral
of Caracuel, Piedra Buena, Herrera, Fuente del Imperador, Carrion, Guadalerza, Mestanca, Castilsers, Balestreros, Alcolea, Possuelo, Torroua, Bolagnos, Morall, Almiradiel,
Hauanilla, the houses of Seuile, the houses of Corduba, Belmer, Villafranca, Lopera,
Canaueral, Ximena, and Recena Pegna de Martos, Biuoras, Moratalaz, Tores and
Canena, Vallaga, Sorita, Almoguera, Auignon, and Verniches, the houses of Talauera,
those of Toledo, Huerta, Val de Carauanes, the houses of Plaisance, Ateca, Carezuela,
Ortas, Calatraua the old. And in the realme of Arragon are the commanderies of Alca^is,
Mouroijo, Penna Roija, Faraxneda, Ralfas, Castelseras, Laguna rotta, Molinos. In that
of Valencia there are also other commanderies. In Castile are the Priories of Seuile, Granado,
Iaen, Alhama, Fuencaliente, Porcuna, Sugueca, and Villatoro, besides other dignities
and ecclesiasticall reuenues. This Order was confirmed Pope Alexander the third,
and receiued into the protection and tuition of the Apostolike Sea, and had vnder it,
Knights of the Alcantara for a time.
About the year 1176.Nauarre. was founded the Monasterie of our Ladie of Irancu, by Don
Pedro de Paris,An. 1176. bishop of Pampelone, who notwithstanding he called himselfe so, was of
Nauarre. It is very likely that the Prelates in those dayes had a great desire to build Monasteries
and such like houses, that they might leaue markes and memorie after their
death of their diligence in the estate whereunto they were called: for otherwise they could
leaue no subiect to speake of them, that age beeing vnlearned, and full of ignorance, so
as not knowing in a manner any other duties, they thought themselues sufficiently discharged,
if they did build any retreate for Monkes: and withall, they had an assurance,
that their beginning should not remaine imperfect, nor vnprouided of rich reuenues, seing
that the hearts of Kings, and of all men in generall, were seasoned with this perswasion,
that to enrich the Clergie, was the true meanes to wipe out all their offences, and to
bee saued: Wherefore all their exhortations, councells, and other care, tended only to
this end, to entertaine all, especially the Nobilitie in this opinion. This Bishop, according
to this kind of doctrine, built and erected this Monasterie of Nostra Signora of
Irancu, and there placed the religious of Cisteaux: the Abbot of which place is of
great authoritie in Nauarre, and hath a voyce in the assembly of the Estates, as a chiefe
member of the Clergie.
11 Returning to the secular affaires of Castile, wee finde that this yeare,
Don Alphonso,Castille. the Noble, made another roade into Nauarre, being assisted by Don Celebrun,
Arch-bishop of Toledo, and many other Bishops, but to small effect. The most
renowned among the Knights, which serued him, were Don Goncal of Maragnon, his
Standard-bearer, and Don Roderigo Guttieres Lord Steward: these were Offices in the
court of Castile,An. 1177. which were held during the kings pleasure.
This warre was diuerted by the inuasions which the Moores made into Castile and
Arragon,Cuenca taken from the Moores. in the yeare 1177. Whereupon the two Kings ioyning their forces together,
beseeged Cuenca. The place was strong and well manned, and hard to be forced: wherefore
the King of Castile left the king of Arragon there, who after many assaults tooke it.
There they placed and instituted in Episcopall seate, changing that of old Valeria, by a
graunt from Pope Alexander the third. After which, the Moores of Alarcon, doubting
they should not be able to defend that place, quit it: which conquests remained to Castille:
and this was at the same time when as King Don Alphonso the Noble, did remit the
Soueraigntie and homage which the King of Arragon did owe to the Crowne of
Castille.
In the yeare 1179.An. 1179. there was a new League made and confirmed betwixt these Princes
of Castille and Arragon,League against Nauarre. to make warre against the king of Nauarre, at their common
charge, and equall conquests: according to the which Don Alphonso the Noble
did so presse the King Don Sancho alongst the Riuer of Oja, as hee tooke from him
the places which hee had seazed on during his infancie, and recouered Burbiesca,

Cereso, Granon, Entrena, and Logrogno, remaining by this meanes Lord and Master
of Rioje and Bureua,Rio^e and (...) taken by the ^astillans from Nauarr^ the which the kings of Nauarre could neuer after get. The losse
was made more grieuous by the death of Donna Beacia, Queene of Nauarre, a Princesse
of great vertue, who (as some write) was buried in the Cathedrall church of Pampelone.
12. After all this, D. Alphonso the Noble came to Burgos, to prouide for the necessities
of the warre, as well against Nauarre, as the Moores: and hauing need of great sums
of money to that end, he propounded in a generall assembly of the Estates at Burgos, to
leauie taxe vpon the people, whereunto the Nobility as well as the rest should contribute,
imposing fiue Marauidis of gold for euery person, the which was valued aboue fiue
Ducats: this counsell was giuen him by Diego Lopes de Haro,Nobility of Castile defend their freedoms Lord of Biscay, but it tooke
no effect: for all the Gentlemen of Castile (beeing discontented that hee sought to infringe
their liberties) fell to armes, and beeing led by the Earle Don Pedro de Lara, they
were resolued to defend it, with the hazard of their liues. Wherefore D. Alphonso changed
his opinion, and let them vnderstand, that from thencefoorth hee would maintaine
their immunities, and that whatsoeuer he had then propounded, was not to continue,
but onely to supply the present necessitie of this affaires, which he would seeke to furnish
by some other meanes. For the great resolution which D. Pedro de Lara shewed in this
action, they say, that the Nobilitie of Castille did grant to him and to his successors, a
sollemne break^ fast, in testimonie of his good indeuour in a businesse of so great consequence:
and moreouer they affirme, that thereby the Lords of Lara haue the first voice
for the Nobilitie in the Court of Castil.VVhente the Prouerb com^ in Spaine, to reuenge his N^bilitie for 500 solz. It is not from these 5. Marauidis of gold, that the
Prouerbe is growne in Spaine, To reuenge or defend their Nobilitie for fiue hundred
solz, for fiue Marauidis are not fiue hundred solz. Wherefore leauing all the fables which
some produce to that purpose, you must vnderstand, that according to the ancient lawes
of Castile, the iniurie which any one did vnto a Gentleman, where they was a ciuill reparation,
they payed fiue hundred solz for a fyne, which were worth foure hundred Marauidis
of currant money at those dayes, and that which was done to one which was no Gentleman,
was repayred by three hundred solz, which were worth but two hundred and fortie
Marauidis: wherefore the Prouerbe, to reuenge his Nobility, for 500. solz, is drawne
from these ciuill lawes. D. Alphonso king of Castile meaning to follow the warre with all
vehemencie against the Moores, after that he had recouered those places which D. Sancho
king of Nauarre had taken from him, and the quarrels betwixt him and his vncle Don
Fernand king of Leon beeing somewhat reconciled: by the mediation of the Noblemen
and Prelates of both Realmes, and by the meanes of the king of Arragon, who sent Don
Berenger Bishop of Lerida, and D. Raymond of Moncada thither: the more to tye the holy
Knights vnto him, and to haue them readie at need, he made Vcles the chiefe seate of the
Knights of Saint Iames, to whom he gaue the Townes of Mora, Ocagne, Oreja, and other
places, along the riuer of Tayo. He gaue to the Order of Calatraua, the townes of
Magueda, Aceca, Cogolludo, Surita and others: hee peopled the towne of Palence in
Vera, or rather Playsance, and there placed the auncient Episcopall sea: hee fortified Toledo,
and rampared Alarcos in that Diocesse, beeing a place of importance vpon a hill
on the left hand, comming from Almodouar del Campo, to Cite reall* about Caracuel.
13 In the meane time there fell out a great quarrell, betwixt Don Fernand king of
Leon,Portugal. and Don Alphonso Henriques King of Portugall, by reason of the fort of Cite Roderigo,Kings of Leon and castile in quarrell.
whereas the King of Leon maintained a garrison which did much annoy the Portugals:
for the souldiers of this place did continually spoile the Portugals countrie, without
any respect: wherefore D. Alphonso Henriques, who was now very old, sent this sonne
D. Sancho with an army against this garrison of the King of Leon, and to race the place,
whereof D. Fernand beeing aduertised, he fortified his guard there, and approching himselfe
with good troupes, he encountred the Portugals neere to a place called Arraganal,
or Arganal, where they were defeated, and their Generall D. Sancho taken, with many
Noblemen and Knights of his armie, who notwithstanding were courteously set at libertie
by the King of Leon.
D. Alphonso Henriques wonderfully incensed at this losse, being now aboue 85. yeares
old, he gathered his army together, and went to horse, where entring Galicia in hostile

manner, he tooke Lymia, Turon, and other places: then returning into his countrie, hee
drew his forces againe together, and marched beyond Guadiana, where he did assaile the
cittie of Badajos which the Moores held, beeing in a countrie, the conquest whereof
did belong to the Realme of Leon: whereby it appeares, that among the Christian Princes
of Spaine, there was some diuision made for their warres against the Moores, to the
end they should not crosse one another by their ambition and couetousnesse. The king
of Portugal battered Badajos with such speed, as he had meanes to enter it, and wonne
two parts of the towne, forcing the Moores to retire into a part, which was of some
strength, where they defended themselues. The King of Leon hearing of this enterprise
of the King of Portugall, (although he were not fully reconciled with his nephew of Castile,
by reason of the new troubles which happened by the reuolt of D. Fernand Ruiz de
Castro, and that he must of force leaue some part of his forces to make head vpon the frontiers
of Castile, (if happily they would presse him on that side) marched from Zamora,
which was newly taken by him, with such souldiars as he could gather together, towards
Badajos, whereas D. Alphonso came to meet him, and gaue him battaile, which the Portugals
lost: so as D. Alphonso Henriques was forced to fortifie himselfe in that part of Badajos,
which he had wonne* yet finding himselfe not very safe, he resolued to retire as well as
he could into his countrie: but as they went out of the cittie in a great presse, hee bruized
his foot against a barre of the gate, so as he was taken by the Leonois, who carryed him
to the campe to the king D. Fernand, who receiued him with all honour, as his father-in-law,
and a great Prince as he was,D. Alphonso K. of Portugal taken, and the warre of (...) from thence he was carried to Auila, where hee was
carefully looked vnto, and there made an accord with the King of Leon his sonne-in-law:
so as they continued good friends. The places which the Portugals had taken in Galicia,
were restored, and D. Fernand desired no other satisfaction, but an oath of fealtie and acknowledgement
of the countrie of Portugal, holding of Leon. So Don Alphonso Henriques
returned free into his Realme of Portugall: after which time he could not ride, being
Iame of his fall, but was still carried in a coach or chariot.
As for D. Fernand Ruis de Castro,Ieon. who, as wee haue sayd, had left the king of Castiles
seruice, and was retired into the Moores countrie, after that hee had followed their armies
some time, in the end he came to serue D. Fernand King of Leon, by whom he was
put into cite Roderigo, after that he had succoured it, and chased away the Portugals.
This Knight who was of a turbulent spirit, and did hate the Castillans deadly, bred a quarell
betwixt the Kings of Leon and Castile, making continuall roades from his garrison
of cite Roderigo, into the countrie of D. Alphonso King of Castile, and had newly defeated
some troupes of Castillans, which were gathered together to repulse him, whereas
some were slaine vpon the place, and some taken prisoners, among the which was the
Earle D. Nugno de Lara, and others whome he deliuered afterwards vpon their faith. This
was the occasion which did much trouble and hinder the King D. Fernand, when as hee
came against his father-in-law:Badaios taken by D. Fernand of Leon. and the Portugals who beseeged Badajos, a towne in his
iurisdiction belonging to the Moores, whom notwithstanding hee chased away, making
himselfe master of the towne: where he left Aben Abel, a Moore for Gouernor, in whom
he trusted, for that the Inhabitants were all Moores: but this Infidell did not keepe the
place long, but yeelded it to Aben Iacob, great Miralmumin of the Almohades, sonne and
heire to Abdelmon deceased.
15 Aben Abel did not onely commit this trecherie against the king D. Fernand,Portugal. but
moreouer hauing gathered together great forces of the Moores Almohades, hee ouerrunne
and spoyled the territories of Leon: then entring into Portugal, he came and beseeged
the towne of Saint Iren,Exploits of D. Sancho against the Moores. in the which the king D. Alphonso Henriques was, being
then old, and vnprofitable for the warre; who was in great danger to be taken within that
place: but the King Don Fernand comming in good time, the seege was raised, and the
Moores put to route: who were afterwards pursued by the Infant Don Sancho, who marched
with the armie of Portugall neere vnto Seuille, where beeing incountred by the
Moores, he vanquished them, and then beseeged Niebla: but he was forced to leaue it,
beeing aduertised that the Moores were entred by Extremadura, and did beseege Veija:
wherefore being prest to defend his owne, he left the other. Arriuing at Veija, he defeated

and dispersed the Moores, and freed the towne from danger: this was in the yeare, 1181.1181.
At that time the chiefe in Spaine among the Princes of the Moores,Moores. according to the
diuision which they had made among themselues, vnder the Soueraigntie of Maroc, were
the Kings of Murcia; one of the which called Lobo, had had a perpetuall hatred against the
Royall family of Almohade, called the Mazemutes. This Lobo had beene tributarie to the
King of Arragon: but during the quarrels betwixt Arragon and Castile, he had rebelled,
by the fauour of the King of Castile: whereupon the King of Arragon fauoured the Mazemutes.
Lobo beeing dead, his sonne Modef succeeded him, who was father to Zaen, the
last King of the Moores at Valencia.Zaen the last king of Valeneia. 16 As for Zamora which D. Fernand King of Leon
had newly subdued, leon it was thus: The king of Leon hauing built and peopled the town
of Ledesina and others, to accommodate his new Collonies, hee had somewhat restrained
the territorie of Salamanca, whereat the Inhabitants beeing incensed, they rebelled
against him: and hauing drawne vnto them Auila and Zamora, and infected other neighbour
places with the poyson of their rebellion, they made^choice of a Knight, called Nugno
Rauia, for their head; with whom going to field with a great number, as well of their
cittizens, as of their allies, the King D. Fernand came and charged them neere vnto Valdemuca,
where he did quite defeate them, and tooke their captaine D. Nugno Rauia aliue,
whose head he caused to be cut off. This victorie made the chief of them which had taken
armes against the King, to retire, giuing the rest occasion to giue ouer the enterprise, and
then all ioyntly together demanded pardon, and obtained it. The towne of Zamora beeing
(as we haue sayd) ingaged in this mutinie, the King D. Fernand led his victorious armie
thither, but the Inhabitants yeelded without any difficultie: so within few daies these
two townes, and others by their example, returned to the obedience of the king of Leon.
17 This yeare 1181. D. Sancho king of Nauarre,Nauarre. fortified a little towne, called at that
time Gasteiz, to serue for a barre against the king of Castile, and to defend the frontier
in the Prouince of Alaua. This place being since augmented in circuit and people, was
called Victoria,Victoria built at Alaua. a part whereof (which at this day is called Villa de Suco) was that Bourg
of Gasteiz. The king granted to his new town the same Lawes he had done to Logrogno,
correcting and reforming them in some points: he gaue many priuiledges to the Inhabitants,
namely, that they should not haue any stranger to bee Iudge or Gouernour ouer
them, but one borne in the countrie, who should be chosen and changed by them, if they
found him not faithfull and capable: the which was called the priuiledge Merino, according
to the style of the countrie. They haue obserued this order in the gouernement of
the towne the which is one of the best ordered in Spaine, hauing aboue all things beene
carefull not to admit any new Christian to publike charges, vnlesse he bee of foure descents.
The reason of this name Victoria, was for some victorie obtained in that countrey
against the Castillans, as it is to be presumed: but by the defect of Histories of those times
the particularities are not knowne.
After that this town came vnder the obedience of the kings of Castile, they did much
inlarge it in circuit, and built the foure parishes of Saint Michel, Saint Vincent, S. Peter,
and Saint Illefonce or Alphonse. It is written of this king D. Sancho the Wise, that hauing
about this time ouer-runne the territorie of Rioje and Bureua, the which D. Alphonso
of Castile had taken from him some yeares before, and beeing neere vnto Burgos, at a
place called Atapuerca, he gaue a blow with his sword against an Elme, for a marke that
the limits of Nauarre should extend so farre: then returning with an infinite number of
cattell, and other spoyles, as he had a little past the Monasterie of Saint Peter of Cardegna,
the Abbot of that place, who was a reuerent man, took the Standard of Cid Ruis Diaz
great Grand-father to the king D. Sancho, (who was buried in that Monasterie) and mounted
vpon a Mulet, beeing accompanied by tenne of his Monkes; the strongest of which
carryed this Standard: he made all the hast he could after this armie, vntill hee had ouertaken
the king, before whome he humbled himselfe. The king wondring to see these
Monkes in this equipage, with standard of warre, yet he gaue them good reception, beeing
of himselfe very deuout: and demanding what was the reason of their comming, the
Abbot sayd vnto him, That he was Abbot of Saint Peter of Cardegna, and that he was
come vnto him to beseech him, for the honour of Cid Ruis Diaz, his great Grandfather,

(who was interred with them and his Standard which he saw in their hands) that it would
please him to leaue the prey which he carried away. The King thought thereon a little, in
the end he found himselfe so touched with the remembrance of Cid Ruis, and the deuotion
and great reuerence he bare vnto the religious, as he left this great bootie which hee
had made, to restore it to the owners, wherewith all men were not content.
The quarrels betwixt the kings of Castile and Nauarre continued long,Castile. although by
fits they had some rest, but it was a counterfeit peace, or a feate of warre. Logrogno and
Aguisejo were (by some accord made betwixt these Princes) as neuters betwixt Nauarre
and Castile, in the hands of Ramir de Barea: but the citty of Calaorra was held by a knight
called Don Diego Ximenes, in the name of Don Alphonso, king of Castile. And for that
the warres betwixt these Christian Princes were very dishonorable and preiudiciall to religion,
whereof they carryed the title, Pope Lucius the third then raigning, sent a Cardinall
Legat into Spaine, to reconcile them, who vsed great diligence, but not with such
effect, as he desired. The kings of Castile and Arragon had an interview, and he of Arragon
past to Saint Iames, to visit the Apostles Sepulcher. This Legat did set downe an
order betwixt these two kings, for the conquest of the Moores countrie, whereunto hee
did animate these Princes, and assigned to Arragon, that which lyes from Valencia towards
Cattelogne, and the rest to Castile: with which diuision the kings of Arragon
(which came after) were not well content, so as they were faine to make a new diuision,
extending the iurisdiction of Arragon, vnto Alicant: this happened since in the raigne of
Don Pedro.
18 This king Don Alphonso of Arragon,Arragon. hauing about that time held a Prouinciall
Councell at Tarragone in Cattelogne, made a decree among other things, That from
thence foorth the Notaries should not set downe the yeares of the raigne of the Kings of
France, in any contract which should be made in Cattelogne, as they had till then obserued,
but onely the yere of the Incarnation of our Lord Iesus Christ; which was, that they
would no more acknowledge the soueraigntie of France, of whom Cattelogne and the
Countie of Barcelone did hold and depend. This King D. Alphonso finding himself mightie,
and hauing a good share on this side the mountaines, busied himselfe in the French
warres, taking part with the factions, which were among the Noblemen of that nation,
and yet was neuer in very good tearmes with Castile, but for his own profit: yet he maintained
himselfe wisely in his countrie, and with reputation.
19 Don Alphonso Henriques being very old,Portugall. An. 1183. and at the graues brinke, thought what
was fit for his soules health, as he had beene instructed: he procured in the yeare 1183. to
haue the bodie of Saint Vincent transported to Lisbone; the which they sayd, was in that
countrie called Algarbo, on the holy promontorie, the which hath beene since called (by
reason of this relique) Cape Saint Vincent, he was borne at Sarragossa. The king went
twise in person to Cape S. Vincent, beeing 89. yeares old, for the remouing of this bodie,
the which he placed in the Cathedrall church at Lisbone. This Prince was so religious,
and so great a benefactor to the Clergie, as (besides the three Monasteries of S. Croix
of Coimbta, of Alcouasa, and of S. Vincent at Lisbone) hee built the great Cathedrall
church of that cittie, and that of Ebora, indowing them with greatreuenues. The queene
Donna Malfada his wife, carrying the like zeale, did also build the Monasterie of Saint
Dominike at Porto, the church of Saint Peter, the Monasterie of Leza, of the Order of S.
Iohn, a League from the same cittie, and Saint Mary d Aquas Santas, Saint Saluator of
Goandara, Saint Peter de Retes, Saint Mary de Gojos, and about Guymaranes the Monasterie
of Acosta, with many others, to the number (as they say) of an 150. if they fayle
not in their account. And for a testimonie of great charitie, they say, that these good
Princes left a rent to the barke of Mexanfrio, vpon the riuer of Duero, to the end they
should passe euery one without any fee.
Whilest they busied themselues about these workes of pietie, Aben-Iacob great Miralmumin
of the Arabians, (being aduertised of the routs and ruine of his sectaries in Spain)
past the streight in person with great forces of the Almohades Affricanes, where hauing
ioyned with the Moores of Spaine, hee went to beseege Saint Iren, into the which Don
Sancho the Infant of Portugall had put himselfe, beginning to make his Engines

ready to batter it, where the beseeged were likely to be in great danger: but the good old
man Don Alphonso Henriques would not let the Infidels glorie, in that they had done him
this affront in his old age, but hauing put his men in order, and being resolute, hee ledde
them to succor his sonne, who had intelligence of the Portugall armie, the which (being
fauoured by a furious salley which the beseeged made) charged the Moores armie with
such resolution, as they put them to flight, with great slaughter of their best men, and the
losse of their king Aben Iacob, who being mortally wounded in the charge by a Portugal,
dyed at the passage of the riuer of Tayo.1184. This battell was wonne in the yeare 1184. on S.
Iohn Baptists day, fiue dayes after the Moores had begun the seege. Aben Ioseph his brother
succeeded this Moore, and was the third King of the Almohades.
20 After this famous victorie,Portugal. these Princes, father and son came to Coimbra, which
was at that time the chiefe towne of the Realme of Portugal, and from thence to Porto,
where the marriage of D. Theresa Infanta of Portugall, was concluded with Philip Earle
of Flanders. Beeing returned to Coimbra, D. Alphonso Henriques fell sicke, whereof hee
dyed, being 91. yeares old, hauing raigned with the title of a King about 46. yeares, and
had succeeeded in his fathers Estates, and held them 73.D. Sancho the 2. King of Por^tugal, first of that name. yeare. His body was interred in
the Monasterie of S. Croix of Coimbra, D. Sancho his sonne was king after him in Portugall,
surnamed the Builder of townes.
21 D. Fernand King of Leon,Leon. Fernand King of Leon puts away his wife. had a little before his death, put away D. Vrraca his
daughter, by reason of proximitie of bloud, their marriage beeing made without a dispensation
from the Pope, who beeing (as they write) wonderfully prest by the King, to
giue them leaue to remaine together, would neuer yeeld vnto it, notwithstanding that of
her was borne D. Alphonso, who succeeded his father in the Realmes of Leon and Gallicia:
they were cousins in the third degree. D. Fernand married afterwards with the daughter
of the Earle Don Nugno, who liued little with him: then he tooke to his third wife D.
Vrraca Lopes, daughter to the Earle D. Lopes, and sister to Don Diego Lopes de Haro, with
whom he continued not long, for hee died in the towne of Benauent in the yeare 1188.
hauing had two sonnes by her called D. Sancho Fernandes, and D. Garcia. His bodie was
interred at Compostella, in Saint Iames church, where as his mother D. Berenguela the
Empresse did lye.


D. Alphonso the 9. of that name, the 27.
King of Leon.
22 AT the time of his death; it seemed there remayned no cause of quarrell, betwixt
Leon and Castile, which was not decided and ended.D. Alphonso King of Leon. His sonne D. Alphonso beeing
troubled with continuall stormes and quarrels by his mother-in-law D. Vrraca Lopes,
was retired into Portugall: so as at the time of his fathers death, he was absent, but being
aduertised thereof, he came presently to Leon, where he was receiued and crowned king,
without any contradiction. The King of Castiles Councellors were of opinion, that by
the death of D. Fernand, their Prince had a good oportunitie offered, to bee reuenged of
the wrongs which, were done him during his nonage. If he had then any desire of reuenge
the future euents will shew.
D. Alphonso surnamed the Noble, raigning then in Castille,Castile. was numbred for the 4.
of that name,Ginealogie of Castile. of those that raigned alone in Castille, whose posteritie was very great; for
he had eleuen children by Queene Elenor, daughter of England; the eldest was Queene
Blanche, mother to the king S. Lewis of France: the second D. Berenguela who was queene
of Leon, daughter to D. Alphonso the ninth The 3. was a sonne named D. Sancho, who died
in his Infancie: the 4. was D. Vrraca, Queene of Portugall, married to D. Alphonso the
second of that name surnamed the Grosse: the 5. child was Don Fernand, who died also
yong: the sixt was D. Malfada, dead in Salamanca and was not married: the 7. D. Constance
Abbesse of las Huelgas de Burgos, a Monasterie built by her father. Then had D.
Alphonsa, and D. Elenora two daughters, who died young: and successiuely the Queene
was deliuered of another daughter, called also Elenor like her selfe, who was wife to Don
Iayme, or Iames, first King of that Name, and the eighth King of Arragon.

In the end they had the infant Don Henry, who succeded his father in the realmes of Castile
and Toledo. These were the children which issued of that marriage.
The other Don Alphonso being crowned King of Leon,Leon. his mother-in-law retired into
Nagera, where she liued long in her widdow-hood, and beeing dead, was buried in the
Monasterie of Saint Mary the royall, in the chappell of the true Crosse, whereas afterwards
others of her house were interred, and three of her brethren, Don Lopes Diaz, D.
Martin Lopes, and Don Diego Lopes de Haro. The new king of Leon stayed not long after
his Coronation before he came to the court of Castile, beeing at Carrion, where they
say, that King Don Alphonso the Noble his cousin made him knight, as he did also Conrad
the fourth sonne to the Emperor Fredericke Barbarossa; to honour whom, the Spaniards
write, that he would haue giuen him the Infanta Donna Berenguela his daughter, but
she would not go into Germany: others say, that the marriage was made and accomplished:
but Conrad beeing departed to returne into Germaine, (whither he was called to be
Duke of Suabe) Donna Berenguela desired to be diuorced, the which was done by the
meanes of Don Goncalo Arch-bishop of Toledo, and Cardinal, Gregorie the Popes Legate:
and was afterwards married to D. Alphonso King of Leon, cousin germaine to her
father. Don Raymond called Flacade, Earle of Tholousa, was also made Knight in the
company of these two Princes. In this ceremonie the King of Leon kissed the king of
Castilles hand, which was a fore-telling of the pretensions and quarrels which should fall
out betwixt these two Realmes.
The court beeing then at Carrion,Castile. there was an assembly of Noblemen vassals, which
did acknowledge the Soueraigntie, to take the oath of fealtie vnto the King, as it was
in auncient time obserued almost euery yeare, where they were accustomed to treate
of matters of consequence concerning the State, and the houses of Princes. The Councellors
of greatest note to D. Alphonso King of Castille in this assembly,Assembly of the Estates euery yeare in Spaine. were Don Goncalo
Arch-bishop of Toledo, Primate of Spaine, the Bishops Don Rodrigo of Calaorra,
Don Maurice of Burgos, Don Arderic of Palence, and Don Goncalo of Segobia, Don
Iohn of Cuenca, the Earles Don Pedro de Lara, Don Nugno de Lara, Don Diego Lope de
Haro, Lord of Biscay, chiefe Standard-bearer of the kingdome, Don Rodrigo Guttieres
Lord Stuard, and Guttiere Rodrigues Chancelor.
The discontents and secret hatred betwixt the Christian Princes,Hatred betwixt fiue christian kings raigning then in Spaine. which raigned then
in Spaine, was great, beeing fiue, carrying the titles of Kings, that is, three Alphonsos, of
Castile, Arragon, and Leon, and two Sanchos, one of Nauarre, and the other of Portugal.
The King of Castile presumed to haue superiority ouer the other foure, as his vassals,
notwithstanding any accords which had beene made: wherefore hee thought hee might
lawfully controule them at his pleasure. Some yeares before he had taken from the king
of Nauarre, the lands lying vpon the riuer of Oja, and Bureua, beeing the auncient patrimonie
of Nauarre, which came not to them of Castile by any iust title, but by meere vsurpation
and violence. As for him of Arragon, he complained, that the King of Castile
had neuer kept any thing promised in the League, swhich had beene made betwixt them,
but had made his profit in all warres, of the Arragonois bloud and meanes. The King of
Leon began to find the error which he had committed, to haue come to the court of Castille,
beeing at Carrion, and to haue kissed the Kings hand. As for Portugal, there was
neuer any good correspondencie betwixt these Princes, and them of Castile, since the first
Earle Don Henriques: so as these vlcers hauing infected the hearts of these Potentates, by
iealousie, enuie, and bad councell: they mooued the kings of Arragon and Nauarre first
of all, to make an offensiue and defensiue League; for the conclusion whereof the two
Princes met at Boria, where, of mortall enemies, they became great friends. There it was
accorded, that the frends and enemies of any one of these Princes, shold be reputed for such
by the other, and that they should be bound to assist one another, for the defence of their
Estates. For the obseruation of which accord, either of them did pawne for his part, the
townes and castels following: for the King of Nauarre, the townes of Valtierra, Ablitas,
Montagu, Saint Mary of Vxue, and Chastillon of Sanguesse with their forts: and for
Arragon, the townes of Boria, Sos Malon, Ruesta and Petillas.
For the guard of these ten places, there was chosen, by a common consent of the two

Kings, D. Fernand Ruis d' Ac^gra, a knight borne in Nauarre, but remained in Arragon,
and was Gouernor of Daroca and Calatajub. He tooke an oath to both these Kings well
and faithfully to keepe those places, to de liuer all tenne to him, in whose preiudice the
treatie had beene broken by the other the which was not only sworne by both kings but
also by their eldest sonnes, Don Sancho of Nauarre, and Don Pedro of Arragon. And
moreouer, it was agreed, that whensoeuer Don Fernand (...) would discharge himselfe
of the gard of those places and forts, that foure knights of either partie should be named,
out of the which number, the two kings should either of them choose one, into whose
hands the forts should be deliuered with the hike oath: that is, the fiue townes of Nauarre
to the knight of Arragon, and the fiue of Arragon to the Nauarrois. These things thus
concluded, sworne, and signed, the Kings departed, D. Sancho into Nauarre, and Don
Alphonso Daroca: whereas the articles were againe confirmed and sworne, in the presence
of the chiefe knights of both kingdomes: whereof those of Nauarre were D. Pedro
Ladron de Gneuara, Inigo Ortis, Garcia Almorauid Pedro de Cascante, Michel de Leet, Lope
de Valtierra, and Barthelemy de Rada, all of the most famous families in Nauarre.
This League beeing made in the yeare 1190.1190. was followed by another made betwixt
the kings of Arragon and Leon,A League against casti^^ made by Arragon, Leon, and Portugal. into the which Don Sancho king of Portugall was drawn.
An assembly being made to that end at Huesca, thither came the ambassadors, of Leon and
Portugal, with ample authority and instructions: whereas a League was made among
those Princes like vnto that of Boria, capitulating, that not any one of them should make
warre, truce, or peace, without the consent of the others. These allyances made and confirmed
with all the oaths and solemnities required, did not cause so great a storm as they
did threaten: for the kings of Leon and Portugall were long quiet, without going any
annoyance to Castile: the kings of Arragon and Nauarre made some attempts, but to
small effect.


D. Sancho the 2. King of Portugall, the first
of that name.
24 WHen as Don Sancho came to the Crowne of Portugall,Portugal. Genealogie of Portugal. he was 31. years old:
foure yeares before he had married Donna Aldoncia, or Douce, daughter to
Don Raymond Berenger Earle of Barcelone, and Regent of Arragon, and of
Queene Petronilla. D. Sancho had by this Ladie Douce nine children, whereof there were
foure sonnes, the eldest was called Don Alphonso, and was king after his father, hee was
borne in his Grandfathers life time: the second was D. Fernand, who was Earle of Flanders,
by marrying with the heire of that countrie, whose name was Iane daughter to
Count Baudwin Emperour of Constantinople: the kings third sonne was D. Pedro, who
was great in Arragon, where he married the Earle of Vrgels daughter: the fourth sonne
dyed young, and was called D. Henriques. Besides these sonnes, he had fiue daughters, the
eldest whereof was married to Don Alphonso king of Leon, the ninth of that name, and
was called Donna Theresa, from whom he was diuorced, by reason of consanguinity, notwithstanding
two daughters and one sonne which they had bad: after which diuorce shee
liued religiously in Portugal, in the Monasterie of Lorban, which her father built, and
indowed with great reuenues for her sake. King D. Alphonso who had put her away, did
afterwards marry Donna Berenguela daughter to the king of Castile, who was as neere
allyed to him as the other.
This was the practise of those kings, when they had a desire to change their wiues, either
for their pleasures, or for some other aduancements, the Pope interposing himselfe,
dispencing, binding or dissoluing at his will and pleasure, by the authoritie of the Romish
Sea. The second daughter of D. Sancho king of Portugal, and of D. Aldoncia, was Donna
Malfada, Queene of Castile, a Lady of rare beauty, whom D. Henry of Castile married:
but Pope Innocent the 3. dissolued this marriage within few daies, by the solicitation of
D. Berenguela sister to this king of Castile, who in disdaine, that Don Aluaro de Lara had
concluded it without her priuitie, informed the Pope of their neere allyance that

was betwixt them, and perswaded him to separate them: but this Princesse being thus reiected,
retired in great disdaine into Portugal, where she liued the rest of her daies in the
Monasterie of Ronca, built by her. The third daughter was Donna Sancha, a Nunne in the
Monasterie of Saint Francis of Alanguer, built by her. The fourth, Donna Blanche, Lady
of Guadalacaria in Castile: and the fifth and last was D. Berenguela, who was not maried,
but did accompany her eldest sister Donna Theresa, when as she retired to the Monastery
of Lorban. This King D. Sancho had familiarity with two Gentlewomen after the death
of his wife: the first was called Donna Maria Aires of Fornello, by whom hee had one
daughter called Donna Vrraca, and D. Martin Sanches of Portugall, who was Gouernor
of the fronter of Portugall, and a great fauourite to Don Alphonso, king of Leon his brother-in-law:
he married Donna Olalla Peres, daughter to the Earle D. Pero Fernandes de
Castro. Don Sancho did marrie this Gentlewoman his friend, to knight called D. Gil Vasquez
de Sonca, and tooke a second friend, whose name was Donna Maria Peres de Ribera,
whom he loued much, and by her had Donna Theresa Sanches, who was wife to Don Alphonso
Tellez, founder of the towne of Albuquerque, and had also one sonne called D.
Ruy Sancho of Portugall, and another daughter Donna Constance Sanches, who built the
Monasterie of Saint Francis at Coimbr^. D. Ruy Sancho was slaine in a battaile neere vnto
Porto: so as the king D. Sancho had in all fifteene children; nine lawfull, and sixe Banards,
whereof there were seuen sonnes and eight daughters. After the decease of his father,
hauing raigned abour foure yeares, when as they began to treat of a League against
the King of Castile, whereof we haue made mention, certaine English and French ships
beeing arriued at Lisbone, with many Knights and souldiers, which went to the holy
Land, by the Streight of Gibraltar, beeing stayed there by soule weather, hee made vse
of this occasion, and intreated these passengers to assist him at the siege of Silues, in the
countrie of Algarbe: and about the same time there arriued eighteen other ships of war,
which his brother-in-law Philip Earle of Flanders sent him, with which forces hee tooke
Sylues, and did great harme vnto the Moores of that countrie. It was at that time when
the Emperour Frederick Barbarossa, king Philip Augustus of France, and Richard king of
England, called Corde-Lyon, made their voyage into the East, that this towne of Silues
was taken from the Moores, by the helpe of these strangers. This King Don Sancho built
more townes, and peopled more countries then any of the kings of Portugall, whereby
he purchased the name of Poblador, which is as much to say, as Builder, or peopler of
Townes: Valencia of Minio, Torres-nouas, Monte-Maior the new, Batellas, Penamacor,
Sortella, Penella, Figueira, Couillana. Folgacino, and Montemor, were his works,
with many other places; part of the which hee gaue to the Orders of Saint Iames and
Auis, which began in his time in Portguall: to Saint Iames hee gaue Alcacar de Sal, Pamela
and Almada: and to that of Auis, Valeillas, Alcanebe, Geromegna, Alcantade and
Alpedrin, with the castell of Mafra. He recouered Yelbes from the Moores which they
had taken from Portugall.
25 D. Alphonso king of Castille,Castile. against whom (as wee haue sayd) the other foure
Christian Kings of Spaine had made a League, had not yet beene much annoyed thereby
in the yeare 1194.An. 1194. wherefore hee thought rather to vndertake some warre against the
Moores, then to defend himselfe against his neighbours, of whom he made shew to haue
so little feare, as he would not leaue any thing which he had taken, or that were in controuersie:
nay,Fort of Nauarre betwixt Logrogno and Negera. he built a towne betwixt Logrogno and Nagera, the which he called Nauarret,
to the which he gaue many liberties and freedomes, as appeares by his letters
granted in an assembly at Carrion, in the yeare 1095. Notwithstanding all this, the Confederats
did not stirre: but Histories make mention, that D. Sancho surnamed the Strong,
king of Nauarre, who had newly succeeded his father Don Sancho the Wise, beeing deceased
the yeare before 1194. and he of Leon, allyed themselues with the King of Castile,
for the warre which he intended against the Moores of Andalusia: to beginne the which
he sent for Chiefe and General of his armie, D. Martin Arch-bishop of Toledo, a Prelate
much esteemed by the Historiographers of Spaine, by reason of his great vertues, honoured
among others by Don Roderigo his successour, who termes Don Martin, Stole,
the Diademe of the Church; his wisedome and prouidence, the peace of many; his tongue

the reformation of discipline, his hands, the releefe of the poore, and his armes, the persecution
of Blasphemie, with other such Spanish elegancies, saying in the end, that the
Church was happie which had such a Pastor: these are his very words. This Arch-bishop
finding armes the fittest meanes to propagate the faith of Christ, made so furious an entry
into Andalusia, as he left horrible markes throughout the whole Prouince, where he
filled all with murther, ruine, fire and desolation, and then returned triumphantly, beeing
laden with great and rich spoiles: but this expedition beeing suddenly made against the
Moores, did afterwards bring more miserie and dishonor to the King and his Estate, then
it had done profit or honor vnto the Bishop, who had shewed more rage and fury, then
valour, reason, or warlike discipline.
26 The Arch-bishops exploit, did so incense Aben Ioseph King of the Arabians,Moores.(beeing
sollicited by the Moores of Spaine) as hauing with great speed leuied a mighty armie
of Affricane, Arabians, yea out of the regions neerest vnto the Negros, hee passed the
S^eight, and came into Andalusia, where he ioyned with the Moores of Spaine, and marched
beyond the mountaine which they call Sierra Morena, against the Christians King
Don Alphonso the Noble, beeing aduertised of this great preparation, was come to lodge
at Alarcos, a fort at that time (by reason of the situation) of great Importance, whether
all his vassalls and men of warre of Toledo, Extremadura, and Castile came, where hee
also attended supplies from Nauarre and Leon. The Moores marching with all speede,
approched neere vnto Alarcos, the Christians campe beeing but weake, hauing not all
their forces together: yet seeing the Moores collours flying in the ayre: the king Don
Alphonso, and his Knights resolued not to keepe themselues within their rampars and trenches,
but to charge the enemy valiantly, to the end they might haue the honor of such a
victorie: but it fell out otherwise, for beeing come to handie-strokes, the lesser number,
which were the Christians did valiantly, but the Moores beeing the greater, vanquished,
and slue many braue men:Defeate of Christians nere vnto Alarcos. among the which D. Martin Martines the fourth master of the
holy Knights of Calatraua dyed. The King D. Alphonso beeing sore wounded, saued himselfe
by flight.1195. The losse of this battaile was the losse of Alarcos, and of many Christians
that were within it, who fell into the Moores hands, as many other Townes and strong
places did, the Infidels Seazing vpon the whole countrie, euen vnto the Ports of Yebenes,
which is within sixe Leagues of Toledo. There are to be seene at this day, markes of this
battaile, and of other incounters in those quarters, betwixt Ventas of Darasutan and Sacuela,
in a plain called Matanca, where there are infinit heapes of stones, and many crosses,
shewing, that in former times, there had bin much bloud spilt in those places. Some
charge D. Diego Lopes de Haro, saying, that he retired out of the fight too soone: others
say, that he did it expressely, and led many Knights of Castile with him, beeing discontented
for that the King had compared the knights of Extremadura with them: saying, that
they were as good hors-men, and did fight as well as the Castillans. Others accuse
the king and his captaines, that he made too great hast to fight, and had not attended the
Nauarrois and Leonois, who were vpon the way, and made hast to ioyne with him: so as
the fault of the one and the other, both of King, Captaines and Knights, was to seek their
owne glorie, and not that of God, nor the profit of the common-weale; and the best excuse
they had, was, that they shewed themselues more valiant then wise. The kings of Nauarre
and Leon, beeing aduertised of this defeat, were not much troubled: for he of Nauarre
(without passing any farther) led his men home into his countrie, and the king of
Leon sent backe his, the which did much discontent the king of Castile: for they abandoned
him at his need, whereas if they had aduanced, they might haue stayde the Conquest,
ruines and spoiles, which the Moores made after the battell: yea he noted the little loue,
and bad allyance of the King of Nauarre, who beeing entred into his countrie, would not
vouchsafe to vist him, knowing that he was sicke of the wound, which he had receiued in
the battaile. Don Alphonso king of Leon came to Toledo to see him, although hee loued
him not much better then the king of Nauarre. All this he dissembled for the present, and
reserued the reuenge till a conuenient time.



D. Sancho the 21. King of Nauarre, the eight
of that name.
27. THis King of Nauarre.Nauarre which led succors to D. Alphonso of Castile, was Don Sancho
the Strong, sonne to D. Sancho surnamed the Wise, who had succeeded his father,
in the yeare 1194. as we haue sayd, hauing raigned three and forty yeares, seuen months
and some dayes, he is interred at Pampelone, in the Cathedrall Church. This D. Sancho
the sonne, at his comming to the Crowne, was aduised to proceed politikely with the
King of Castille, vntill he were well setled: and therefore King D. Alphonso, did build at
his owne pleasure, the towne of Nauarret, in the country of Rioje, the which was disputable
betwixt them, and vpon the frontier of Nauarre: the surname of Strong, was giuen
him for his valour, but they did also call him the Retired, for that in his latter dayes hauing
a Canker in one of his feete, (which made it to swell, and put him to great paine)
he shut himselfe vp into the castell of Tudele, and would not suffer any to see him, nor
speake to him but his ordinarie seruants. This was the 21. King of Nauarre in number,
and the eight of that name, descended by the masculine line from the first King D. Garcia
Ximenes, the which had continued in successors males 518. yeares, fayling in him by the
death of the Infant D. Fernand his sonne, who dyed before his father.
This Prince was much esteemed for his vertue, valour, Iustice, and gouernement, so
as the Nauarrois held,Deeds of the king D. Sancho the Strong for the good of the Common-weale and Religion. he was the best King that had raigned ouer them. Among other
testimonies he left of him, he turned the course of the riuer of Ebro, the which did runne
by Mirepoix, and made it passe by Tudele, a towne which he did loue and frequent much:
the which he did beautifie with a collegiall Church, of a fayre building: and richly indowed
it: he fortified the places of his fronters towards Castile and Arragon, and built new
forts; as the castell of Treuigno, in the Prouince of Alaua: he enlarged the towne of Victoria:
and in Rioje, la Garde, and Saint Vincent: and towards Guienne, (which the English
then held) he fortified the towne of Saint Sebastian, and Fonteraby in Guipuscoa,
but it was for another. As for religious buildings, besides the Collegiall Church of Tudele,
he made for his sepulcher, S. Mary the Royall at Ronceuaux, a Colledge of Chanoins,
and moreouer the Monasteries of Saint Mary de Hitero, and Saint Mary de Oliua,
both of the Order of Cisteaux, whose abbots haue a place and voice, in the Estates of Nauarre,
the which the Prior of Ronceuaux hath in like manner, yet he was not very liberall,
but in case of necessitie and workes of piety: wherefore hee gathered together greater
treasures then any King in Spaine. By this his sparing, it may be, he lost the Prouinces
of Alaua and Guipuscoa, which were ioyned to Castile. The iurisdiction of Nauarre was
neuer so much restrained, as during the raigne of these two kings, Sanches the father and
sonne.
This king of whom we speake, gaue himselfe occasion to Don Alphonso the Noble, to
take armes against him: for seeing him much troubled to keepe his countrie from inuasion
of the Moores,King of Nauarre and Leon inuade Castile who were growne proud by their late victorie, and that hee kept his
bed wounded: hee thought it now a fit time to recouer his lands of Rioje and Bureua,
which his aduersarie kept fro^ him: wherfore hauing layd a plot with the king of Leon his
allye and confederate, he attempted warre against D. Alphonso Noble, and entred into
Castile in the yeare 1196.An. 1196. putting all to fire and sword, especially in the countrie of
Soria and Almacan. D. Alphonso king of Leon, aduancing also into the Prouince of
Campo did worse, for he brought in the Moores of Extremadura, with whome hee was
in League.
There is no doubt but Don Alphonso king of Arragon would haue beene a partaker in
this Inuasion of Castile,Arragon. if death had not preuented him in the same yeare 1196. He died
in Perpignan, hauing raigned three and thirty yeares, eight moneths, and some dayes, and
was buried in the royal Monasterie of Poublette, which he had founded: whose sonne and
successor Don Pedro, thought it more safe to leaue the allyance of the kings of Nauarre
and Leon, to ioyne with Castile, in whose defence and preseruation he employed himself

faithfully against the two others: so as D. Alphonso the Noble, had by this support,
meanes to stay the furie of his enemies, and to keepe his countrie and fronter
townes.
During these quarrels amongst Princes,Castille. the Clergy was not idle; for the same yeere
D. Rederigo Bishop of Calaorra, desirous to see the church of Saint Dominike de la Calsada
(which Temple he had caused to be built) made an Episcopalsea,Dissention among the Ciergie. would needs place
Chanoins there: which caused great troubles; for this seemed an attempt against father
Lopes: Abbot of the Monastery of Saint Mary the royal of Nagera, who pretended
to be Bishop of Nagera. On the other side D. Roderigo maintained, that there was
no other Bishop, hauing iurisdiction at Nagera, but hee of Calaorra. The contention
was great and drew neere vnto a scandale: but the King did so imbrace the cause,
as information beeing made of the Abbots life and manners, hee was depriued by the
Kings sentence from all Ecclesiasticall gouernment, and banished the realme of Castille:
this the King did by the aduice of the Bishops which held against the Abbot who
being dislodged, was soone after followed by all the Monkes, whom the Bishop Roderigo
chased away, not onely aspiring to the Episcopal title of Nagera, which was in this
Monastery, but also to that which did belong vnto the Abbay: who in steed of Monkes,
placed Chanoins at Saint Mary the royal; but the King disliking the violent course of
this Prelat, restored the Monkes to their Monastery: and the Chanonis were remooued
to the church of Saint Dominike which was a signe of the future translation of the Episcopal
sea of Nagera thether, which was the marke whereat the Bishop of Calaorra aymed;
but it was not so soone effected, remayning onely for the present a Colledge of
Chanoins: for the which the Abbot and Monkes of Nagera, commenced sute against
the Bishop of Calaorra, the which continued long.
28 King D. Alphonso, being troubled by the Christians, armed and disarmed, both secular
and Clergie;An. 1197. was also assailed in the yeere 1197. by the Miralmunim Aben Ioseph,
who came and laied siege to Toledo, causing his horsemen Moores, to runne as farre as
Madrid, and Ahala de Henares, who ouer running the country, spoiled Ocagna Vcles
and Cuenca, destroying all they found without the walles of townes and forts; but at
that time the Arabians made other purchase,Moores spoile Toledo and Castille. for seeing the strength of the city, and beeing
aduertised of the great garrison and many Inhabitants which were within it, they
returned into Andalusia by Alcaras, carrying with them an incredible number of Christians,
of cattaile, and other spoiles: wherefore King D. Alphonso seeing himselfe freed
from this daunger, resolued to imploy the Souldiars which hee had gathered together,
and the alliance which hee had with D. Pedro King of Arragon, to bee reuenged of the
Kings of Nauarre and Leon, who had spoiled his country during the troubles and calamiries
which he suffred by the Moores.
Hee therefore led his army first into the territories of Leon,D. Alphonso King of Castille in ^a^es Leon and Nauarre. where hee tooke Bolanos,
Castrouerde, Valence and Carpio, he put many Leonois to the sword, and repulsed
the Moores their allies, who came to succor them: Hauing punished him, hee turned against
Nauarre, but he was forced to leaue that enterprise, to make head against the Miralmunim
Aben Iosephe, who aduanced againe towards Toledo with greater forces then
before, making shew to besiege that city, yet he past by Magueda, where hee did the like,
but finding those places very strong and well fortefied, hee turned to Saint Olalla, the
which hee tooke and razed: hee attempted Talauera in vaine, and past into the territory
of La Vera, where he tooke Plaisance: then beyoud Tayo hee tooke Saint Croix, Montanges,
and Trugillo. Hauing made this spoile and committed horrible cruelties, hee
returned very rich with his army into Andalusia,An. 1198. in the yeere 1198. which was the greatest
persecution which the Christians of Toledo, and other places aboue mentioned,
did euer suffer, since the entry of the Arabians into Spaine, the which grew by the warre
which D. Martin Archbishop of Toledo, had made in Andalusia; wherein it may bee,
God would make it knowne, that hee tooke no pleasure to haue the Pastors of the
church, play the captains and conductors of armies, for the which notwithstanding D.
Martin and his Predecessor. Iean, are much commended by the Spaniards which haue
written the History of that age.

The Kings of Castille and Arragon,Leon. hauing not yet forces sufficient to resist so mighty
an army, as that of Aben Ioseph, kept themselues in the mountaines of Palomera about
Auila, from whence they returned against the King of Leon, hearing that the
Moores were dislodged, from whom they tooke Alba de Liste, and al that was in the
way vnto Astroga, the which hauing ruined, they came and laied siege to Salamanca, but
they tooke it not; only they spoiled and burned the country about it, and that of Alba
de Tormes, carrying away the people, and leauing it desolate: in the end they tooke
Montreal, and returned victors, finding not any one to make head against them. And
such was the desire of King D. Alphonso, to bee reuenged of the Kings of Nauarre and
Leon, as the better to effect his will, hee neglected the iniuries and spoiles hee had receiued
from the Miralmunim, and made a truce with him: whereby hee gaue meanes to
this King of the Moores, to commit horrible cruelties in Portugal, in the yeere of our
Lord 1199.An. 1199.
This Realme of Portugal was at that time visited with many afflictions,Portugal. for besides the
spoiles committed by the Moores, there was an extreame famine, with a great plague,
whereof many died for hunger, and many left their country, especially in the country of
Braga and Porto; besides the Pope did interdict the whole Realme of Portugal, for the
marriage of D. Theresa with the King of Leon her kinsman, the which was concluded
without his dispensation,The Moores spoile portugal. and therefore he would dissolue it. Aben Ioseph hauing made
a truce with the King of Castille, marched towards Portugal, where hee recouered Sylues
in Algarbe and Alcacar de Sal; he ruined Cezimbra and Palmela, with other places,
burning and spoyling all the champian country, and carrying away innumerable
poore Christians prisoners. D. Sancho King of Portugal, could by no meanes resist this
mighty Barbarian King, for beside the Moores forces, hee was prest by the warre of Leon:
yet soone after he reouered Cezimbra and Pamela, and repaired them, but not in
the same estate they had beene. The quarrel hee had with D. Alphonso King of Leon,
was the breaking of the marriage of his sister D. Theresa; In this warre hee had better
successe, it may bee, for that hee did affect it with more vehemency, beeing most commonly
seene, that the hatred betwixt kins-folkes and allies is more violent, then that against
strangers. He tooke by force from the King of Leon (beeing otherwise weake)
the townes of Tuy and Ponteuedra in Gallicia, which hee held for a time. After these
things, the Miralmunim of the Arabians, beeing assured of the King of Castille, by the
truce which hee had made with him, retired to Maroc in Affrike, thinking that the
Moores of Spaine were sufficient to resist all the enterprises which might bee made by
Portugal, Leon and Arragon.


D. Pedro the second of that name the seuenth King
of Arragon, called the Catholike.
29 D. Pedro the new King of Arragon,Arragon tooke possession of his Realme, in the yeere
1196. by the death of his father. Alphonso; hee was surnamed the Catholike,
for that hee was too obedient to the Catholike church of Rome, and gaue much to
Churches and Monasteries already built; hee built the Monastery of Escarpe, vpon the
riuer of Cinca, of the Order of Cisteaux, not farre from Lerida. He had three sisters,
the which were married during his raigne, as hath beene syd. As for his brother D.
Alphonso who had gotten the Earldome of Prouence, hee had to wife D. Mary Neece to
the Earle of Folguaguier, from whom issued D. Raymond Berenger, who was Earle of
Prouence after his father.
There was an other Lady of the house of Folguaguier,Marriages of D. Pedro kings of Arragon. who was married to the King
D. Pedro, by whom hauing one sonne, called. Raymond Berenger, she died soone after,
and her sonne also: after which the King D. Pedro married the daughter of William,
Earle of Montpellier, borne of that Princesse of Greece, which had beene made sure

to D. Alphonso his father. This second wife was called Mary; and for that shee was not
very faire, he was so one wearie, and would haue put her away: but Pope Innocent the
third then raigning, would not yeeld vnto it, for hee was a strickt obseruer and defender
of the Ecclesiastical lawes. For this cause D. Pedro went to Rome, where the Pope did
him great honour, and crowned him in the church of Saint Pancrace, with a crowne of
gold, garnished with pearles and precious stones of great valour: where they say hee renounced
vnto the Pope, the right of Patronge to the churches of his Realme, the which
his predecessors had enioyed; and did so much forger himselfe, as to acknowledge his
Kingdome to hold of the Pope, and to binde himselfe, and promise for himselfe and his
successors Kings,Submission of D Pedro King of Portugal to the Pope. to pay him a yeerely tribute of two hundred and fifty peeces of gold,
called the Mahozemutins, of the name of the Miralmunim Aben Ioseph Mahozemut,
vnder whose coine they were stamped: these peeces were about six ryals, then current,
to which acknowledgement the Noblemen of Arragon did not consent. The King
being returned into his country he beganne to leade a dissolute life, and contemning his
wife, he sought for those that were faire and pleasing vnto him, wherein hee wanted not
men to follow his licentious appetite: wherefore the Queene his wife, who was verie
holy, seeing that her husband offended God, and that, not accompanying with her, it
was to bee feared the Estates of Arragon and Montpellier would fall to a stranger, for
want of issue borne of them, shee found means to abuse him with a commendable deceite:
for vnderstanding by a groome of his chamber, called Pedro Flauian (who was
sometimes a Minister of the Kings loue) that the next nigh he should bring him one of
his Mistresses,A commendable deceite of Queene Mary of Hongary. shee wrought so with him, as hee brought her into the Kings chamber, in
the concubines place, so as the King (in this opinion) spent the night with her, but perceiuing
it in the morning, he was much displeased: yet considering the holy zeale of his
Queene, and of those which had serued her in this action, hee was pacified, and tooke it
in good part.
Soone after the Queene found her selfe with child, and at her time was brought in
bed at Montpellier of a sonne, called D. Iaime, which they cal Diego in Castille, and
Iaques in French, who was heire of Arragon and Montpellier, notwithstanding that
Queene Mary had one brother by the fathers side, called William, who contended for the
Earldome of Montpellier, and did often attempt to kill the Infant D. Iaime. This matter
was long in question in the court at Rome, whether this Princesse went in person, as
wel to oppose her selfe against her brother, as to end the processe which remained yet
vndecided betwixt her and the King her husband, who sought stil to bee seperated from
her by Hugo Tarrogia his Ambassador. There by the sentence of Pope Innocent, William
was declared a bastard, and vncapable to succeed in the Earledome of Montpellier.
After this sentence,Death of Queene Mary of Arragon. the Queene thinking to returne into Arragon, fel sicke, and died at
Rome, where she was buried, at the Vatican, in Saint Peters church, neere vnto the to be
of Saint Petronilla, daughter to Saint Peter as Authors write, and was put in the Catalogue
of Saints. This Princesse had beene first married to the Earle of Cominges, by
whom she had two daughters Mathilde and Petronilla.
In the beginning of the raigne of this King D. Pedro, hee had a great quarrel with the
Queene D. Sanch^ his mother, aunt to the Kings of Castille and Leon, for that the Kings
Officers and Courtiers did not regard her as was fit, wherevpon shee seized vpon some
townes belonging to her dowry. And for that it might breed great inconueniences,
. Alphonso the Noble, King of Castille, labored to reconcile them, for the which he and
the King D. Pedro met in the towne of Ariza, where an accord was made betwixt the
mother and the sonne, so as euer after they liued in peace. By this accord the townes
of Ariza, Epila and Ambite, with their castles, were giuen by the Queere Douager, vnto
the King her sonne, and hee gaue vnto the Queene the townes of Torrtose and Vzcon,
with some other places in the principality of Cattelogne. There came to this assembly
D. Pedro d' Asagro, Lord of Albarrasin, who had beene much hated by the Kings of
Castille and Arragon, but was then reconciled, of whom we haue made mention, this was
in the yeere of our Lord 1200,An. 1200. at what time the marriage of D. Alphonso of Leon, and of
D. Theresa of Portugal was dissolued by the decree of Pope Innocent the third, for that

they were kin^^ folkes in a degree which was prohibited by the church of Rome.
30 The house of Nauarre approching neere it's end, for want of heires males,Nauarre. it is fit
we should prepare the Readers to the accesse which the descendants from women which
are issued from it, haue had vnto that crowne, speaking some thing of the house of
Champagne, into the which D. Blanche, daughter to D. Sancho the wife, and sister to
this King D. Sancho the strong was married.Descendants of the house of Champagne. The Earles of Champagne haue beene
of great possessions in France, of an ancient and noble familie, as well of the house,
as by their alliances and marriages with the greatest houses of Europe. In the nine
hundred and ninth yeere, mention is made of Odon first Earle of Champagne, Brie,
Blois, Chartres and Tourame, who was a turbulent man, and had great quarrels with
Richard Duke of Normandy, whose daughter notwithstanding he tooke in the end to
his second wife: he made warre against Rodolphe or Ralphe, the last King of Bourgogne,
and was the cause why hee resigned his Scepter and crowne, to Conrade the Emperour,
whose daughter Odon had taken to his first wife, and had Stephen and others
by her.
This Stephen was Earle of Champagne, in the yeere of our Lord 1032. (after the decease
of his father) and Lord of his other Estates by the succession of his brethren.
Hee died in the holie warre in Syria, hauing begotten of his wife Alis or Adela, daughter
to William the conqueror, Duke of Normandie, and King of England, Thyba^d
and other children.
Thybaud surnamed the great, was Earle of Champagne, in the yeere of our Lord
1101. hee did also enioy the Earledomes of Brie, Blois and Chartres, and was called
the father of the poore; hee had to wife Mihault a Princesse of Germany of a great
house, by whom he had Henry who was Earle of Champagne and Bry after him, in the
yeere of our Lord 1151. besides other children.
This Henry surnamed the Big, the fourth Earle of Champagne, was in Asia with King
Lewis the yong, and afterwards with Philip Augustus, where hee did great seruice to the
cause; hee married Mary of France, daughter to Lewis the seuenth called the young, by
his first wife Elenor, Dutchesse of Guienne and Contesse of Poictiers: of this marriage issued
Henry and Thibaud, who were successiuely Earles of Champagne one after an other.
Henry went to the warre of Asia, and marrying with the daughter of Almerit
King of Ierusalem, widow to Conrad Marquis of Montferrat, was made King of Ierusalem,
but returning into France, hee died without issue male. Wherefore his brother
Thibaud the second of that name, seized vpon the country of Champagne, in the yeere
of our Lord 1196. to the preiudice of the two daughters of the deceased Cont Henry:
and was the sixth Cont Palatin thereof. It was this Thibaud which married D. Blanche,
daughter to D. Sancho the wise, King of Nauarre, who had one sonne after the death of
her husband, about the yeere of our Lord 1201. called Thibaud, as the father, who was
Earle of Champagne and Brie, notwithstanding the pretensions of a sister, which was
borne in their fathers life time, who contended for this succession, but in vaine. Moreouer
by the death of D. Sancho the strong (of whom wee now intreate) without children,
hee came to the crowne of Nauarre, by his mothers succession: A Prince
greatly allied to the houses of France and England, whereof wee will treate more
at large. But let vs returne to D. Sancho the strong, raigning at this time in
Nauarre.
This Prince married with a French Lady, daughter to Raymond Earle of Tolouse the
fourth of that name, who was called D. Clemence: they hold that hee had not any children
by her, wherefore, according vnto some Authors, hee left her, and married the
daughter of the Emperour Frederic Barbarousse: notwithstanding this second marriage
is doubtful: but as for the first, Garcia d' Eugui, bishop of Bayone, hath left in writing,
that hee had one sonne named D. Ferdinand Calabasa, vvho died in his fathers life time,
VVith a fall of a horse, running after a Beare, and vvas buried in the Collegial church of
Tudele. Hee had no other lavvfull children, but mention is made of one bastard sonne,
called William.
31 The ancient league of Castille and Arragon beeing renevved, betvvixt the Kings

D. Alphonso the Noble and D. Pedro, they did arme to annoy the King of Nauarre, aboat
the yeere of our Lord 1200. the which he foreseeing, he sought to be supported by
forraine Princes, and proceeded so farre, as hee did sollicit Aben Ioseph Mazemut, to
breake the truce which he had made for ten yeeres,A Mahumetan Prince keepes his faith religiously. with the King of Castille; some Authors
affrming that D. Sancho went himselfe in person, into Affrike, to treat of the businesse
with this Mahumetan Prince: who notwithstanding that he would not breake his
faith, yet hee presented him with a great summe of money and many rich Iewels. During
his absence, the confederate Kings, entred by diuers waies into Nauarre (where
hee had left for his Lieutenant General, a knight called Alphonso Fernandes of
Guendulain) and tooke Ayuar and the valley of Roncal, which fell to the King of Arragon,
and on the other side Miranda, and Insura, or Inzula, which places the King of
Castille kept for himselfe, these two confederate Kings hauing agreed to diuide the
conquest of Nauarre betwixt them: this was all they did for that yeere. As for the
King D. Sancho, hee fel sicke on the waie of a pestilent feuer, the which in the end fell to
be a canker in one of his feete, which continued with him all his life.
This indisposition beeing knowne in Spaine, it gaue courage to the King of Castille
to pursue his good fortune, and to trie all meanes possible to ioyne that Estate to his,
presuming that the King D. Sancho (who had no children) could not liue long, and that
he beeing dead, there should be no great opposition against him, for that D. Ramir, one
of his brethren, was of the church, the other was young and absent, and the Earle of
Champaigne his brother in law, was either dead, or gone to the holy Land, but howsoeuer,
hee was so farre off, as before hee should returne into France, to debate his title
to the Kingdome of Nauarre, wherevnto hee had right, hee did hope to bee in possession.
Vpon this deseigne hee leauied a new army,The King of Castille inuades Nauarre. entred into Alaua, and ouerrunne
all that Prouince, where in the end hee besieged the Towne of Victoria, the which
was valiantly defended by D. Alphonso Fernandes of Guendulayn, who had
put himselfe into it with many good souldiers of Alaua and Nauarre, and maintained
the siege long, without any succors, or newes from the King D. Sancho, vntil that
their victuals beganne to faile them. During this siege the Deputies of the Prouince
of Guipuscoa, came to D. Alphonso King of Castille, making offer that if he would goe
thether in person, they would yeeld vnto him, hauing long desired to bee vnited to the
crowne of Castille, for that they were ouercharged by the Kings of Nauarre, whose fortunes
they had followed seuentie seuen yeeres. This offer was very pleasing vnto D.
Alphonso, as a matter of great aduantage; wherefore leauing D. Diego Lopes de Haro to
continue the siege of Victoria, he went in person to Guipuscoa, which Prouince put it
selfe vnder his protection,Guipuscoa yeelded to the King of Castille. and of the Kings of Castille vpon certaine conditions, and deliuered
into his hands the forts of Saint Sebastien and Fontaraby, with the castle of Veloaga,
which is in the valley of Ojarcun, which frontierd vpon France, a fit place to assure
him a passage, if need were, into Guienne, which was then held by the English, for
that hee had married a Princesse of England. Besides these places they gaue him the
castle of Athau, vpon the frontiers of Nauarre, which is now ruined, the castle of Achoros,
Val du L'eniz, and the castle of Arrasate, called at this present Mondragon, vpon
the frontiers of Biscay, with the fort which was then built vpon the mountaine of Helosua,
the ruines whereof are to bee seene at this day, which mountaine is in the iurisdiction
of the towne of Vergara, and is otherwise called Arizona. This D. Alphonso
King of Castille, obtained this prouince of Guipuscoa, without force, and so returned
wonderfully content to the siege of Victoria, which continued stil, the besieged
hauing spent al their victuals; who by daily messengers, did sollicit D. Sancho their King,
aduertising him of their extremity, whereby they should be forced to fall into their enemies
hands, if hee did not preuent it, but hee beeing ignorant of all that had past in his
country, beeing absent, ill disposed, and without good councell, aduised them to yeeld
vnto the King of Castille, vpon the best conditions they could.
Hauing receiued this answere, the besieged held out senenteene daies longer, attending
if the King had not taken some better aduice, but seeing there came nothing from

him whereby they might hope of releefe,Victoria taken by the King, of Castille. beeing extremely prest with hunger and want
of all things they yeelded the towne, the which for the scituation and fortification was
held impregnable. By the taking of Victoria, the King of Castille was maister of that
other Prouince of Alaua; the country of Araya yeelded vnto him; he tooke Irrurita,
Maragnon, Saint Croix and all the valley of Campeso. King D. Alphonso made this
goodly conquest in the yeere 1200. part by force, and part by a voluntary yeelding, and
did greatly diminish the realme of Nauarre, although that some places submitted themselues
againe vnder the obedience of the King D. Sancho, neither did the Prouince of Alaua
euer receiue any law from Castille, except Victoria and Treuigno. To assure himselfe
the better of the Guipuscoans, and to gralifie them also, the King of Castille caused
to bee re-edefied vpon the sea coast of that Prouince, the townes of Guetario and
Motrico, the which hee did fortifie, and indow with great preuiledges: after all these
things, the King of Nauarre arriued at Carthagena, and slipt through Arragon into his
country, bringing great treasure with him out of affrike, at what time D. Alphonso had
newly besieged Estella, the which was freed from siege vpon the bruite of his comming,
(so great power and reputation hath the name of a king that is present) but if he had staied
longer in Affrike his country of Nauarre had beene wholy lost:Nauarre sends Ambassadors to Castille. hauing visibly seene
the great harme which the King D. Alphonso had done him, hee sent Ambassadors vnto
him, to desire him to restore him that which hee had taken from him in his absence, against
al law and iustice, and against the accustomed manner of making warre in that
age full of loyalty: but the King of Castille entertained him with delaies and doubtfull
answeres.
32. Whilst that D.Ca^^^^ Sancho considers of his losses, and of the best meanes to repaire
them, the King of Castille great, mighty, and redoubted, being allied to him of Arragon,
and hauing a truce for many yeeres with Aben Ioseph, hee beganne to repaire the ruines
which the Arabians had made: he restored the city of Plaisance, Bejar and other places
of the country ruined: he did the like to Mirabel, Segura de la Serra, Monfredo, Moya,
and many other places of the realme of Toledo: hee also built Aquilar del Campe in
Castille: and moreouer in Guipuscoa, he built the towne of Castro d' Ordiales, Laredo,
Saint Ander and Saint Vincent de la Barquera.
About the yeere 1201.An. 1201. there was a peace treated of betwixt Iohn, successor to Richard
King of England, and King Philip Augustus of France, at Boutauant in Normandy, by
the which amongst other Articles, a marriage was concluded betwixt the Infanta D.
Blanche the daughter of D. Alphonso King of Castille,Marriage betwixt Lewis of France and D. Blanche of Castille. and Queene Elenor, sister to the
King of England, with Lewis eldest sonne to Philip, and heire of the realme of France:
for the which, Ambassadors were sent from both Kings into Castille, and they were made
sure by a Deputy for Lewis, in the city of Burgos, with great feasting and state, and the
Infanta was conducted by the King her father, and other Noblemen of Castille vnto the
frontiers of Guienne, where the Deputies for the French King did receiue her, for whose
dowry there was assigned by King Iohn her vncle, all the places which were in question
betwixt him and the French King, whereof the sayd French King was in possession, in
the Dutchies of Normandy, Brittaine and Aniou.
At the same time D. Alphonso King of Leon, seperated by the authority of Pope Innocent,
from D. Theresa of Portugal his wife, sent to demande D. Berenguela, the King of
Castilles other daughter: whereof (by reason of the discords which were betwixt these
two Kings) the father made some difficulty; yet vanquished by the perswasions and intreaty
of Queene Elenor, who desired as much to see her daughter weare a crowne, as a
peace betwixt Castille and Leon, he yeelded vnto it, and these two Princes meeting to
that effect in the towne of Vailledo it, the marriage was celebrated, assigning her for her
dowry, the lands taken the yeere before from the king of Leon, except Carpio and Monreal,
which remained to Castille. Of this marriage was borne the Infant D. Fernand, who
succeded in the Realmes of Castille and Leon. Thinke that the Popes dispensation was
not obtained for this marriage: for being cousin germains remoued, children of the vncle
and nephew, Pope Innocent the third, did seperate them.
In the yeere 1202.Casfille. and 1203, the ancient preuiledges granted by the Kings of Nauar,

vnto Saint Sebastian and Fontarabie, townes of Guipuscoa, were confirmed and augmented
by the Kings of Castille, and their iurisdictions lymited, especially of Fontaraby,
by the riuers of Oriacun and Vidaso, which diuides that Prouince from FrAnce, and by the
mountaine Pegnadaya, by Lecaca, by Belfa and the sea, and by Hirun vrancu, which is at
this present a great Bourg, at which time Queene Elenor was deliuered to her last son,
who was called D. Henry, by reason of his grand-father by the mothers side.
To these contents was added a truce betwixt this King. Alphonso the Noble,Nauarre. and D.
Sancho the strong, King of Nauarre, for the concluding whereof, D. Sancho came in person,
vpon assurance, to Guadalajara in Castille, there it was agreed there should be a cessation
of armes betwixt the two Kingdomes, for fiue yeeres, with restitution of some of
those places which the King of Castille had taken in Nauarre, and for the keeping of
the truce, there were deliuered into the hands of certaine knights, named by both parties,
the castles of Abuseio, Clauijo and Iuvera, for Castille; and Irureta, Inzula and
Saint Adrian for the King of Nauarre: and for that the warre betwixt Nauarre and Arragon
continued stil, the King of Castille tooke vpon him to reconcile them, and in the
meane time caused al acts of hostility to cease.
These foure Princes being at peace,Leon. he of Leon mooued new troubles against D. Vrraca
Lopes, his mother in law, with whom hee could neuer agree, seeking to frustrate her
of her doury. And she for her part did neuer cease practising against D. Alphonso, seeking
to depose him from the royal throne of Leon, and to aduance the Infant D. Sancho her
sonne; for the which she did continually importune her brother, D. Diego Lopes de Haro,
Lord of Biscay,VVarre betwixt the King of Leon and his mother in law. intreating him to imbrace this businesse, the which he had deferred
vntil that time, when as hee went to field to aide the Queene his sister: but he was not
the strongest, for D. Alphonso King of Leon, being assisted by the King of Castille, his father
in law, chased him into Nauarre, from whence hee made roades into the territories
of Castille, which made the two vnited Kings to goe and seeke him in his owne strength,
where they defeated him in battaile, neere vnto Estella, where hee was forced to saue
himselfe, which towne was inuested and, as it were, besieged by the armies of Castille
and Leon, yet they could not take it. Vpon this occasion the foure Kings of Castille,
Leon, Nauarre and Arragon met together in Alfaro, whether also came D. Sancha, Douager
of Arragon, mother to the King D. Pedro, by the which the reconciliations and
accords of these Princes were confirmed. D. Lopes being destitute of all meanes, hee retired
in despight vnto the Moores pay at Valencia, and from thence to Maroc,
where hee was accused to the councell of the Miralmumin, that hee had mounted D
Pedro, King of Arragon, on horse-backe, being ouerthrowne in an incounter, which he
had against the Moores of Valencia, vnder whose pay D. Diego made warre, yet hee was
absolued.
The pittifull death of the Infant D. Fernand,Nauarre. brother to D. Sancho King of Nauarre, a
Prince well beloued of the Nauarrois,An. 1207. ought to bee registred amongst the calamities
which fell vpon that realme in those daies. The feast of Saint Nicholas being celebrated
with superfluous bankers and sports, in the yeere 1207. in the towne of Tudele, according
to the custome of Christians,Death of D. Fernand of Nauarre. as this generous Prince did runne on horse-backe
armed, doing some exercises which hee had inuented, a hog passing through his horse
legges, made him to fall, in such manner, as he brused his head against a piller of stoane
whereof hee died, thirteene daies after, beeing thirty yeeres old. Of this Prince,
whom the Authors commend for a braue and valiant Knight, there is no mention
made in the warre betwixt Castille and Nauarre: wherefore it is to be presumed that
the King his brother, doubting least hee should attempt some thing to his preiudice,
during his absence, had led him with him into Affrike, although hee loued him deerely.
Thus are the affaires of this world mingled with pleasure and griefe, loue and
iealousie.
Of the marriage which had beene made the yeere before,Portugal. betwixt D. Alphonso Infant
of Portugal, son to the King D. Sancho, then raigning, and D. Vrraca daughter to D. Alphonso
King of Castille, was this yeere 1207. a son borne called D. Sancho,, as his grandfather
by the fathers side, in whose life time this Lady was deliuered of an other

sonne, who was named D. Alphonso, the which were Kings of Portugal successiuely.
Aben Ioseph Miralmumin of the Arabians Almohades,Moores. being dead in Affrike, whilest
these things past in Spaine, there succeeded in his place his sonne called Aben Mahomad,
surnamed the Greene, the fourth King of that Fect, ouer the Moores of Affrike and
Spaine: this surname was giuen him, for that hee carried a Miter, or some such Ornament
on his head, of a greene collour. In his raigne the truce expired, made betwixt the
King of Castille, and his predecessor Aben Ioseph, when as they fell more cruelly to
armes them ouer.
33 Betwixt both,Castille. D. Martin Archbishop of Toledo died, to whom succeed Roderigo
Ximenes, borne in Nauarre, the Author of the History of Spaine which wee read at
this day. A prelate of great authority, and much commended by the Spaniards: about
the time of his death the riuer of Tayo did rise so high, as it was fiue foote aboue
the port of Almofala in that city. This was about the end of December, and the yeere
before there was so great an Ecclipse of the Sunne, as the day was darkned for the space
of sixe houres. At that time King D. Alphonso did two remarkable workes in the city of
Burgos in Castille: which were the Monastery of Saint Mary the royal, of that citty,
called de las Huelgas, for the daughters of noble houses, according to the Order of the
Cisteaux: and ioyning to this Monastery, hee caused the Hospital royal to bee built, indowing
both the one and the other with great reuenues: for the third, which is no lesse
to be esteemed, hee erected an vniuersity in the towne of Palencia, which was the first in
Castille, since the comming of the Moores, and drew many learned men in al faculties
thether,(...) of (...). from France, England and other places, assigning large pensions to the professors:
and as he was a warlike Prince, and could not liue long in quiet, the quarrels reuiuing
betwixt the French and English, about the yeere 1209. hee made a voyage into
Guienne,An. 1209. for that hee had an interest therein, yet hee returned without doing any thing
memorable. Returning by the Prouince of Guipuscoa, hee gaue preuiledges to the
towne of Guetaria, the which he restored, granting the like vnto Saint Sebastian. This
towne hath a good hauen, couered from al windes, by a little Island which is before it,
rysing in such manner,Iohn Sebastizan del^ano, the famous Pilot Boracat Guetaria. as it defends the ships from all stormes, and giues them free entry
and passage with any winde: that famous pilote Iohn Sebastian del Cano, was borne at
Guetaria, who in the time of the Emperor Charles the fifth did co^passe the whole world
by sea, D. Alphonso did also giue the like priuiledges to Motrico as to Guetaria.
The same yeere a peace was fully concluded,Arragon. betwixt D. Pedro King of Arragon, and
D. Sancho the strong, king of Nauarre, by the mediation of D. Alphonso of Castille, and
the Prelats and Noblemen of al the Kingdomes of Spaine, wherein the endeauors of D.
Roderigo Ximenes Archbishop of Toledo, were very great this peace was made, the two
kings being in field about Mallen: among other particularities which the Spaniards write
of this accord, the King of Nauar lent vnto him of Arragon 20000. Marauidis of gold,
for the which were giuen in pawne the castles of Gallur, Pitilla, Pina and Esco, the
which were deliuered for sixe monthes into the hands of D. Ximeno de Rada, a Knight,
at the end whereof, if the King of Arragon did not pay the money, the places should bee
deliuered vnto the King of Nauarre, to hold them vntil he were satisfied. The dissention
and warre which had continued betwixt Nauarre and Arragon, for the space of sixty
fiue yeeres, was then ended, and there was a good and durable peace concluded betwixt
those two Estates: after which it did behoue the King D. Pedro to passe into Prouence,
by reason of the death of the Earle D. Alphonso his brother, whose daughters they of
Beziers had married into France, without the consent of the King of Arragon, and had
beene too busie in the gouernment of that Earldome, wherevpon hee came armed into
Prouence, tooke Beziers and ruined it, and hauing wasted the country about Marseilles,
he returned into Spaine, hauing setled his Nephew Raymond Berenger in his fathers succession:
The towne of Tortose, was giuen by this King, to the Knights of the Temple,
whereof Peter of Montague was Maister in the yeere 1210.
The yeere 1210. beeing come,Castille. and the truce betwixt the Moores and Christians expired,An. 1210.
D. Alphonso the noble sent an army vnto the frontiers of Toledo vnder the conduct
of his sonne D. Fernand, knowing that King Aben Mahumad was past out of

Affrike into Spaine with great forces of Moores Almohades, and other his subiects.
This young Prince D. Fernand impatient of idlenesse, began to ouerrunne the Moores
country, about Baeca, Andujar and Iaen: but for all this, the Moore did not leaue to
besiege and to take within the third month the towne of Saluatierra,Saluatierra taken by the Moores. with great slaughter
of the inhabitants, carrying away them that remained for slaues. The King of
Castille had drawne his forces together at Talauera, to diuert him, but not able to come
in time bee retired, and so one after lost his sonne D. Fernand, in Madrid, by sicknesse,
whereat hee was wonderfully greeued, his bodie was carried to Burgos, to the new Monasterie
of Las Huelgas, D. Roderigo the Archbishop accompanying it, with many
other Prelats and Knights,Death of the InFant D. Fernand. yea D. Berenguela Queene of Leon, beeing seperated from
her husband by the Popes authority, who would not allow of the marriage, although
hee had children by her. It is strange these Princes were no better aduised in the
marriage of their daughters, seeing they obaled the Popes restraints.
This warre begunne did much trouble the King of Castille,Parliament at Toledo for the Moores warve. wherefore hauing called
a Parliament of the Lords, Prelats and Deputies of the townes of his realme at Toledo,
he resolued to invite al Christian Princes to his succour, and to demaund of Pope
Clement the Indulgences and pardons of a Croisado, for this holy warre, to the end
he might draw vnto it more Knights and souldiers, for this cause hee sent (by the election
of the whole assembly) D. Roderigo to Rome; and for that necessity did force him to
reforme the excesse and superfluities of his Realmes, there were orders set downe for
feasts, apparel, and other things. There were also publike processions enioyned, with
fasting, praying, and giuing of almes to pacifie the wrath of God.
In the end commandement was giuing to all his vassals and men of warre, to bee
redie with horse and armes, for the yeere following. The like prouision was made
by the Moores in Spaine, euery one preparing for the warre: that is, those of Extremadura
Andalusia, Algarbes, Granado, Murcia and Valencia, and other lands which they
held yet in the territory of Toledo; sollyciting moreouer their King and Miralmumin
of Affrike, to repasse into Spaine, with the forces of those great Prouinces, which hee
did hold in that part of the world.
Whilest these great preparations were making, the King of Castille came to Cuenca,
where finding himselfe accompanied with good troupes of souldiers, hee made a
road into the Moores country by the riuer of Xucar, to exercise his souldiers, and tooke
from them the sort of Alcala, Las Cueuas of Algarande, and Tubas, and spoiled some
Bourges in the territory of Valencia, and then hee returned to Cuenca, when the King
of Arragon came vnto him, and offered to succour him with all the forces of his
realme, in this warre; the King of Nauarre in like manner sent to make him the like
offers.
In Italie the Archbishop D. Roderigo,Croisadoe preached against the Moores. vsed great dilligence, and obtained from Pope
Innocent the third a bountifull grant of his spirituall treasors, of indulgences and pardons,
to all those that should crosse themselues for this warre, the which was proclaimed
in all places, and the Croisadoe preached, especially by the Archbishop of Toledo,
in all places as hee returned, with such efficacy, as there came out of Italy, Germany
France and England an infinite number of souldiers into Spaine, who vowed their
liues to defend the Christian religion, and to repulse the persecutors thereof: so as
hee assembled at Toledo an army (besides the forces of Castille,Great army aganist the Moores in Spaine. Arragon and Portugal)
of aboue a hundred strangers, bearing armes, which number is by some
augmented, and by others diminished: for there are some Authors which mention,
one hundred thousand foote, and tenne thousand horse, others restraine it to fifty
thousand foote, and twelue thousand horse, some more, some lesse; but howsoeuer,
there was a great and mightie army, the which was lodged neere vnto the city, in the
most fertil places of the riuer of Tayo. The King of Arragon came thether, as the
Authors of the Arragon History write with twenty thousand foote, and 3500. horse, the
number of footemen of Castille, and other countries of the King D. Alphonsos dominions
was vncertaine, but they say there were 14000. horse, amongst the which were aboue
fifteen hundred Knights nobly descended. Of them of Portugal the number is not

set downe. All these souldiars, were entertained, lodged and bountifully rewarded
by the King D. Alphonso, according to euery mans ranke and dignity, giuing pay to all
in general: to euery footman sixe pence a day, and to euery horse-man two shillings,
which were worth a Marauidis and one third part of the money which was then currant,
and the boyes and women of these souldiars had pay accordingly, saith Garibay:
the number of cartes to carry their baggage is made excessiue, by the Archbishop
Roderigo, reporting them to bee 60000. the which by others is reduced to the like
number of beasts of burthen, and not of cartes. What soeuer it were, this army was
one of the greatest which had beene seene in many ages, wherein the vnion and concord
was admirable, seeing it consisted of so many nations, of sundry languages and
humors.An. 1212. This armie parted in Iune, in the yeere of our Lord 1212. the conduct of
the vltramontany, or beyond the mountaines (for so they called the strangers) was giuen
to Diego Lopes de Haro Lord of Biscay, who was now reconciled to the King of Castille,
generall of the whole armie; they came to lodge at Malagon, about fourteene
leagues from Toledo, the third daie; the place (beeing ill defended by the Arabians)
was forced,Exploits of the Christians armies against the Moores. and the garrison cut in peeces. From thence the Christian Kings aduanced
to Calatraua, which was come into the Moores power, and past the riuer of
Guadiana.
Many were of opinion, that they should not spend their time in the sieges of townes,
where most commonly the best men are lost: notwithstanding the towne of Calatraua
was battred, and so prest, as the captaine of the garrison, called Aben-Abir, or according
vnto others; Aben Calis, after that hee had valiantly defended himselfe, yeelded
vpon composition to haue their liues saued, the which was duly obserued by the
Kings of Castille and Arragon, contrary to the strangers wil, who would haue had them
all put to the sword. The Earle D. Diego Lopes de Hara, had the charge to conduct
them to a place of safety, according to the composition. The towne was spoiled by
the strangers and Arragonois, and then deliuered to the Knights of the Calatraua: at
which place there grew some discontentment, by reason that their victuals for so great
a multitude grew short, as it often happens, and therefore the greatest armies are not
euer of greatest effect; for in an excessiue multitude, there is euer confusion and disobedience,
and it is impossible to prouide for all necessities,Great multituds in armies, are not euer of greatest effect. so as often times many great
preparations haue gone to smoake by these defects, and haue lost goodly occasions of
gallant exploites: but God prouided for it, for a great number of strangers, vpon this
cause, returned into their countries, whereby the Spaniards purchased the more honor.
The Archbishop of Narbonne with some of the nobility of his country and of the
county of Poictou staied stil.
The army parted from Calatraua, and came and camped at Alarcos, which place,
being found abandoned, was manned with a good garrison; there D. Sancho King of
Nauarre came and ioyned with the Kings of Castille and Arragon, bringing with him
great troupes of souldiers, both of his owne subiects, and of other nations, especially
of French, leauied by him,D. Sancho king of Nauarre comes to aide the King of Castille. and voluntaries, beeing desirous to see this warre, hoping to
winne honour and wealth if they liued, or dying to bee in the ranke of Martires, and to
winne Paradice. The Histories make mention of D. Gomes Garces d' Agoncilo, standard-bearer
of Nauarre, D. Garcia Almorauid, D. Pedro Martines de Leet, D. Pedro
Garces d' Aronis, D. Sancho Fernandes of Montagudo, D. Pedro Martines of Subica, D.
Martin of Milagro, D. Garcia Ximines of Varriz, D. William Roldouyn, D. Garcia Garces
of Aoyz, D. Pedro Ximenes of Oilleta, and D. Ximenes d' Aybuar, chiefe Knights of Nauarre,
which accompanied the King of Nauarre to this warre, many forts and places
which were held by the Moores in that countrie, were taken by the Christian Princes,
who marched against Saluatierra, where they tooke a vew of their army, the which they
lodged vnder the mountaine called Sierra Morena, at Guadalfajar: Aben Mahomad,
who had succeeded his father Aben Ioseph Mahozemut, in the Empire of the Almohades
of Affrike, beeing aduertised of this great preparation which the Christians
made against him, and his sect, was past into Spaine, with great troupes both of horse
and foote, beeing followed by other forces which came dayly out of Affrike into

Andalusia; so as hee had gathered together about Iaen, one of the greatest armies that
had beene euer seene since the first entry of the Moores, whilest that the Christian armie
was imployed to recouer the country which lies betwixt Toledo, and the mountaine
which bounds Andalusia: the which the Moores seeing to bee lost they resolued
to attend the Christians army in a place of aduantage, and to flie the plaines,
so as marching to Baeca, they seized vpon the passage of Losa, in the fieldes of
Tolousa.
The Christians (as it was the will of God) whilest their enemies were doubtful what
course to take, past ouer the mountaine called Sierra Muradel, by safe and vnknowne
waies, being guided by a huntsman and shepheard (whose Image is to bee seene in the
great chappel of the Cathedral church of Toledo, cut in stone) and chased away some
Moores which were in the castle of Ferral, neere vnto the rocke of Loca, from whence
after many difficulties and councels, they made choise of a place fit to put themselues in
battaile, as the Moores did in like manner. King Aben Mahumad, who lodged vpon a
hill, where he might view his whole army, diuided into many squadrons; in that where
the Kings person was were the most valiant Moores of the whole army, and they say hee
caused that battailion to be compassed about with stakes, tied together with chaines, that
taking from them al hope of flight, they might be forced to fight with more resolution,
hee himselfe was seated in a high throne vnder a rich pauilion, and in this equipage hee
proudly offred battaile to the confederate Kings, the which (for that their men were
weary with the rough and vneasie passage of the mountaine) they would not accept that
day; which the barbarous King tooke for his aduantage, as if feare had kept the Christians
from fighting; writing to the chiefe townes of his dominions, that were neere, that
he held the victory in his hands, and that within three daies hee should haue the three
Kings his aduersaries at his command, notwithstanding that many of his captaines did
assure him, that the Christians made shew rather to fight then to flie. The day following
the Moores presented themselues againe in battaile, but the Christians kept themselues,
within their forts and trenches:Batta^^e memorable of Muradal, and deseat of the Moore^. The 3. day which was the 16. of Iuly, both armies ioyned
in battaile, where there was a furious fight, battailon against battailon, and squadron
against squadron, with such obstinacy, as the victory was for many houres doubtful,
euery one, both captaines and souldiers, striuing to doe well, being seene and obserued
by their Kings, and by the principal men of both parties; but in the end the Moores
beganne to recoyle, and to goe to route. Then did the Christians presse them so furiously
as they put them to a shameful and lamentable, flight and made an incredible slaughter.
King Aben Mahumad (beeing perswaded by his brother Aben Zeit) retired with
great griefe, towards the towne of Iaen, there beeing no meanes to gather his troupes againe
together.Number of the dead. The Authors of the Spanish History write (wherein it may be they exceed)
that there were 200000. Moores slaine vpon the place, and many prisoners taken,
among the which they number aboue 35000. horse. Great was the riches they found in
their campe, of tapistry, siluer plate, armes, horses, moyles, camels, gold and siluer coyned,
and other things of great price. Of the Christians, according to the Archbishop Roderigo,
there died but 25. others say 115. but Beuter and other affirme, there were 25000.
slaine of the Christians side; the which is not vnlikely, considering the resistance the
Moores made, and the long time the fight continued. But it is a thing worthy obseruation,
that notwithstanding the great multitude of dead bodies, which lying one vpon an
other, were like hils, after they had beene spoiled by the horse-boyes and peasants, there
was little bloud seene vpon the ground: the which is to be imputed to the dry constitution
of the Arabians and Affricans, Sotherne people, who (besides that they are dried vp
with the heate of the sun in that region) eate those things which are of smal norrishme^t;
and drinke nothing but water, so as they engender little bloud, the which is pale and discolloured.
The Kings performed the parts, not only of wise and circomspect captaines,
but also of valiant soldiers. The constancy of King D. Alphonso was great, who was neuer
seene to change collour, nor the countenance of an assured captaine, notwithstanding
the diuers euents which we may thinke were represented vnto him in so dangerous a
battaile; great was his valour and resolution, to expose himself to a shower of arrowes

which fel vpon his men,Valour of D. Alphonso the noble King of Castile. and to thrust himselfe into the presse, where hee saw they gaue
backe, to succour them: so as the Lords and Prelats which were in armes that day, had
great labor to keepe him back, D. Pedro King of Arragon had his cuirasse peirced to the
quicke, with a lance, but God preserued him. The King of Nauarre did also carry himselfe
worthily; but there was a Chanoine Chanter of the church of Toledo, called Domingo
Pascal, who carried the crosse before the Archbishop D. Roderigo (as it is the customes
to carry before Primates) which did wonders: for hee past and re-past, and ranne
through the squadrons of the Moores with his crosse, and had no harme. The tombe
of this Chanoine is to bee seene at this day, in Saint Lucies chappel, in the great church
of Toledo. It is a pittie the Authors of these histories, haue not beene more iust vnto
those valiant men which imployed themselues that daie, to maintaine the Christians
estate in Spaine, and haue not written many particularities which happened during the
fight, which should redound to the honour of families, and their posterities, and should
serue as a spurre to generous mindes; wherein the Archbishop D. Roderigo, is chiefly to
be blamed, hauing beene present at that battaile. The victorious army pursued them that
fled vntil night, and then they went to lodge in the enemies campe, where they found
tents victuals, armes and other riches in great aboundance, and there they past the night,
giuing thankes vnto God for such an important victory.
Then the King D. Alphonso thought it fit to diuide the spoiles,Diuision of the spoiles after the battaile of Mura^al. and to doe publicke honor,
after the manner of the ancients, to those great personages, which had carried them
valiantly in the battaile. He named for Iudge and distributer of these things, D. Diego
Lopes de Haro, a Nobleman very expert in matters of warre: by whom the tent of the
Miralmumin of the Arabians was giuen to D. Pedro King of Arragon, the which was
exceeding rich, yet others say it was alotted to the King of Nauarre for his part; to
whom (for that hee with his men had first broken the fortification made with chaines,
about the squadron where the great Miralmumins person was in battaile) was adiudged
all the bootie taken within the sayd circuit,Armories of Nauarre, as the Spaniards report. in the which were many camels with their
burthens; for which consideration some say, that the Kings of Nauarre carrie in their
armes, chaines of gold in a field gueules. Of the rest of the spoiles which were fou^d without
this fortification, there was a good part thereof giuen to the King of Arragon. D.
Diego Lopes did adiudge vnto D. Alphonso for his part, the honour of the victorie, and
to the other captaines, knights and souldiers, what they could get. This diuision was allowed
by the Kings and all the rest. Many haue thought that by reason of this victory
King D. Alphonso tooke a castle Or, in a field gueules, which are the armes of Castille at
this daie, inferring thereby, that the realme of Castille was a fort and assured rampar against
the Moores, and Infidels their enemies, in whose bloud the Tower seemes to bee
planted, but there are priuileges found in the treasury of Saint Dominike of Calsada
(the which Garibay reports that he hath seen) more ancient then this battaile, granted
by this king, hauing a seale of lead like vnto the Popes, the which hath on the one side a
castle, and on the other, the picture of a king on horsebacke, the which doth witnesse
that before the battaile of Muradal, or Tolouse, they vsed this deuise, or blason in their
armes; it is like that this King D. Alphonso vsed it first in his armes, but vpon what consideration,
it is neither easie nor safe to iudge. The Christian Princes making vse of this
happy victory, whilst the Moores were amazed and weake, tooke Bicles, Castro Feral,
Bagnos and Tolouse: then they came to Baeca, which they found abandoned, the inhabitants
hauing carried their wiues, children, and all they had to Vbeda, except some
which were fortified in the Megida, the which they burned.
Then they matrched to Vbeda, and tooke it by force, putting many of the Inhabitants
to the sword, and making slaues of the rest, by the instigations of some Prelats which sollowed
the army, the spoile where-of was giuen to the soldiars; the honor of the taking of
Vbeda, is giuen to D. Lope Ferencio de Luna, an Arragonois: as they went on stil conquering
vpon this sect of Mahumetists, it pleased God to stay the Christians army: for
it began to be ful of diseases, the which in the end were contagious: wherfore these kings
were forced to returne with their campe, and re-passing the mountaine, or Sierra Morena,
by the same mount of Muradal, they came to Calatraua, where they found the

Duke of Austria, whose name was Thiband sonne to Leopold, who beeing desirous to bee
at this bartell, was come into Spaine with two hundred Knights, but it was too late: wherfore
he returned into Germany by Arragon: there the Kings parted with great shewes of
loue. He of Arragon meaning to entertaine the peace with Don Sancho of Nauarre, with
all sinceritie, he restored vnto him fourteene castels and places of Strength which he had
taken from him. The King D. Alphonso beeing come to Toledo, where hee was receiued
with great triumph by the Arch-bishop Don Roderigo, it was ordained, that from that
time the memorie of that great victorie obtained against the Moores,Feas of Triumphus crucis in Spaine, a monument of the victorie of Muradal. in the playnes of
Tholousa, should be euery yeare celebrated on the sixteenth day of Iuly, vnder the title of
Triumphus crucis, the which is obserued at this day, especially at Toledo; whereas they
hang vp and display that day in the great Church, many Guidons, Ensignes and Standards
of the Moores, which had beene taken then, or others which do represent them. The
chiefe men which did accompany the King in this battaile, were Don Roderigo Ximenes
Arch-bishop of Toledo, and Primate of Spaine, Don Roderigo of Siguenca, D. Tello of
Palenca, D. Mendo of Osma, D. Pedro of Auila, D. Domingo of Plaisance, all Bishoppes,
with other Prelates, all which did serue, either for counsell or for armes. D. Pedro Arias,
or Aua, Master of the Order of Saint Iames, D. Roderigo Diaz, master of the Galatraua,
D. Gomes Ramires Prior of the Templers, D. Guttiere or Iohn Gelmirido Prior of S. Iohn,
with many Commanders and Knights of their Orders. Of Secular men, D. Diego Lopes de
Haro, and his eldest sonne D. Lope Diaz de Haro, of whom it is written, that hauing some
feeling, for that his father had absented himselfe out of Castile, after that he had fought
at Estella against the king D. Alphonso, and also for that the losse of the battaile of Alarcos
was imputed vnto him, he came and cast himselfe at his feet, a little before the battel,
beseeching him to carry himselfe so well, according to the hope which hee had of him,
that he might not be hereafter called the sonne of a traytor: where with the father beeing
incensed, sayed vnto him: It is more to be feared, thou wilt be called the son of a whore:
for no man will call thee the fonne of a traytor: which answer the father made vnto the
sonne, as the Earle D. Pedro sonne to D. Denis king of Portugal writes in his booke of the
Genealogies of Spaine, for that the mother of Don Lope Diaz, a woman of a weake
brayne, beeing fallen in loue with a man of Burgos, which, they say, had beene a blackesmith,
or Lock-smith, went out of Spain, and wandred through the world with this man,
in a disguised habit. With D. Diego Lopes was also D. Pero Diaz his other sonne, D. Sancho
Fernandes de Canamero, D. Martin Nugnes de Hinojoca, and Don Inigo de Mendosa,
kinsmen or allyed to the house of Haro: moreouer, the Earles D. Fernand de Lara, D. Aluar
Nugnes de Lara, Don Goncalo Nugnes, D. Lope Diaz de los Cameros, Ruy Diaz de los
Camer^s, and his brother Don Aluar Diaz, Don Pedro Aria of Toledo, Gonies Peres the
Afturien, D. Garcia Ordognes, Iohn Goncalo of Vzero, D. Goncalo Gomes, D. Gomes Manriques,
D. Gil Manriques, D. Alphonso Telles de Meneses, and his brethren, Fernand and
Ruy Garcia, D. Roderigo Peres d' Auila, William Ginez, D. Willyam Pe^es and his brethren,
Nugno Peres de Gusman, Goncalo ^uanes of Quintana, who was afterward master of the
Calatraua, Don Iohn Goncales, and Don Goncalo Ruis and his brethren, Don Ruy Peres of
Villalobos, Suero Tellez, Don Fernand Garcia, and many others of the Realmes of Castile
and Toledo. Those which accorrpanied Don Pedro king of Arragon of greatest Nobilitie,
were, Don Garcia Frontin Bishop of Tarassone, and Don Berenger elect of Barcelone,
with other Clergie men: and of Knights, Don Garcia Romeu, Standard bearer royal
or Arragon, Don Kimen Cornel, Aznar Pardo, Don Willyam of Peralta, Don Michel of
Luezca, D. Sancho Earle of Rossillon, vncle to the King, and Don Nugno Sanches his son,
Don Lope Ferrench de Luna, Arnaud of Alascon, or Artal of Alagon, William Aguillon of
Tarragona, Don VVillyam of Ceruera, Berenger of Petra Mola, Don VVilliam of Catdona,
Raymond Poulcques Earle of Ampurias, Don Pedro Ahones, Don Roderige of Licana,
Don Pedro Maca, Don Artorella, and Don Artal de Foees. The Arch-bishop of Bourdeaux
came out of France, and the Bishop of Nantes from Briitanie, D. Rerald Arch-bishop
of Narbone, and Thibaud of Blazon, Bishop of Poicton, issued out of Castile. These
were many Noblemen and valiant Knights out of Leon and Portugal. Don Alphonso of king
of Castile did reward the Nobilitie of his countrie with honours and liuings, according

to euery mans degree. As for Aben Mahomad, King of the Moores Almohades, aster this
notable losse, he cared no more for the affaires of Spaine, but passed sodenly into Affricke,
fearing that the brute of his defeate would breed some innouation in his kingdom
of Maroc, beeing not yet so well assured, but there remayned some feeling of the Almorauides
gouernement: wherefore knowing how much a route or losse of a battaile may
preiudice the reputation of a King, with a nation that is desirous of change, as the Arabians,
he poasted speedily into Affricke to preuent it.
36 D. Sancho king of Portugall,Portugal, Death of Don Sancho king of Portugal. whilest these things past betwixt the Christian Princes
and the Moores, died in his kingdome, the which he had held 27. yeares, beeing 58.
yeares old, more broken with trauell then with age: a wise and well aduised Prince, but
much crost with aduersities, notwithstanding he gathered together great treasures, and
therefore is somewhat taxed of couetousnesse, which is the greatest cause of the ruine
and dishonour of kings. They write, that he had at the time of his death in the castell of
Lisbone, and in the Monasterie of Alcabaca, Saint Croix of Coimbra, and other places
where his treasure lay, abouee 500000. Markes of gold (it may be they should say Marauidis
of gold) and a thousand foure hundred markes in siluer coyned, besides many other
Iewels: and yet his expence was great. Drawing neere his end, hee disposed thereof, giuing
by his testament vnto his eldest sonne 200000. Marauidis of gold, and to either of
his other three children 10000. Marauidis of gold, and 250. Markes of siluer, to his Bastards
7000. Marauidis of gold, and certaine Markes of siluer. The rest he ordained shold
be employed to charitable vses, as to build and indow Monasteries and Hospitals, to redeeme
captiues, and to make Chalices, Crosses, and such like ornaments. He also ordained
to haue the bridge of Coimbra, and the house of Saint Ladre built, neither did hee
forget the Apostolike Romaine Sea, for he did bequeath vnto Pope Innocent the third,
an hundred Markes of gold, and there was not any Church in his Kingdom, but tasted
of his bountie. He was interred in the chappell of Saint Croix of Coimbra, neere vnto
the Queene Donna Aldoncia his wife, from whence he was afterwards remoued into the
Arch of the great chappell. In the same Monastery are buried D. Henry, D. Sancha, Donna
Blanca, D. Berenguela, and D. Constance his children.


D. Alphonso the 2. of that name, the third King
of Portugall.
AFter him D. Alphonso his son held the scepter of Portugal, who was then about 27.
yeares old,1212. Gencalogic of Portugall. and was crowned in the citty of Coimbra. And for that he was big, fat,
and vnweldie of his person, they surnamed him the Grosse: he was alreadie father of two
children, D. Sancho, and D. Alphonso, whereof the second married Matilda, heire to the
Earle of Bologne in France: besides these he had by his wife D. Vrraca of Castile, Don
Fernand, who was Lord of Serpa, and married to the daughter of the Earle D. Frenand
of Lara, of Castile, called D. Sancha Fernandes, from whom issued a daughter, which was
Queene of Denmarke; into which Realme D. Elenor daughter to this king D. Alphonso
was first married. Besides these lawfull children, the king had company with a Moore, of
whome he begot D. Alphonso Martines. D. Alphonso at his first entrance, had great lars
with his sisters, for the hee would haue taken from them the lands which his father had
giuen them for their portions: whose quarrell D. Alphonso king of Leon did imbrace, and
sent his sonne D. Fernand, accompanied by D. Martin Sanches (brother to these Ladies)
for his guide, being very young, with an armie, who took from the king of Portugal, Valencia
of Minio, Melgacon, Hulgoso, Frexo and other places: this war was afterwards
ended by the commandement of Pope Innocent, who threatened to censure the kings of
Portugal and Leon, if they made not a peace, to take armes against the Mores, who were
enemies to the true Catholike Religion: from whom, about that time, and as the armie
of Castile was dissolued after the battell of Muradal, D. Pedro king of Arragon tooke Castelfabid
and Ademus, which are in the Realme of Valencia.
37 Wee haue sayd before,Arragon. that this king had a sonne by his wife, vnthought of, who
was called Iaime, this Infant was much enuied, and his life sought by his Vncles

of either side, who wished there had issued no heire from Don Pedro and Donna Mary
Countesse of Montpellier, that they might haue succeeded to their Estates: a murtherous
and couetous desire, which did chiefly possesse Don Fernand Abbot of Montarragon.
Wherefore they did breed vp Don Iayme carefully, and as much as they could out of
danger: the king his father was aduised to send him into France, to bee kept by some Noble
man his friend, where hee might be more safe then in Spaine: wherefore hee gaue
him to Simon Earle of Montfort to bring vp, in whome he had great confidence, but hee
abused him: for warre beeing attempted against the Albigeois, in the which the Earles of
Tholousa were ingaged, Don Pedro king of Arragon, and the Earle of Montfort grew enemies,
and were in armes one against another; the Earle beeing made Generall against
them of Albi, and their adherents: and the king Don Pedro fauouring the Earles of Tholousa,
father and sonne, who had married his sisters. The euent was, as the Histories of
Spaine report, that the Earle of Montfort (who had conceiued a great hatred against the
Earles of Tholousa) hauing then great forces from the French king, vnder colour of making
warre against the Albigeois, which were fallen from the Church of Rome, hee entred
in hostile manner into the Earles countrie, whereof the king of Arragon beeing aduertised
by his brother-in-law, hauing vntill then taken part with the Earle of Monfort,
in this quarrell of the Albigeois he turned against him, hauing first aduised him, but in
vaine, and caused the Pope to admonish him, that vnder the pretext of warre against the
Albigeois, who were declared Heretickes, he should not reuenge his priuate quarrels. D.
Pedro beeing passed into France, and meaning to beseege Symon of Montfort in the castle
of Muret, which place he meant to abandon, there happened a furious skirmish among
them, where as the king of Arragon was slaine vpon the place, and with him Don
Aznar,,D. Pedro king of Arragon slain in France 1213. and Pedro Pardo, father and sonne, Don Games de Luna, Don Michel Luesia,
Michel Rada, and many other Noblemen of Arragon: the Earle of Montfort retired safe
with his men. Such was the pittifull end of this King Don Pedro, in September 1213. hauing
raigned happily, and in great reputation, eighteene yeares, three moneths, and 20.
dayes: his bodie has carried to the Monasterie of Sixena, founded by the Queene his
mother. The Albigeois warre continued, the end whereof you may see in the Histories
of France. They were people which opposed themselues against the Popes Supremacie,
and hunane inuentions, brought in to the Christian Religion, taught first by one called
Amaulry in the towne of Alby, and thereabouts; against whom the Pope incensed
Christian Princes.
In this action Dominicke a Chanoine of Osma did great seruice to the Romish
Church,Dominicke of Osma author of the Order of lacobins. beeing brought into France, by D. Diego his Bishop, whom the Pope did send
his Legat for the effect. The Vniuersitie of Paris did also condemne the opinion of the
Albigeois: but Dominick relying not much vppon disputations and reasons, perswaded
all Princes and their subiects to armes, as beeing the most expedient meanes, for the
which he was canonized, and put in the catalogue of Saints. It was he which brought in
the Order of preaching Friars. Our French Histories say, that Don Pedro fauoured the
Albigeois; and yet those of Spaine giue him the title of Catholike. In his time beganne
the Impost for Beeues and other cattell in Cattelogne, which was after his returne from
the battaile of Muradal, as well by reason of the great expences of the warre, as for the
great summes disbursed, for the marriages of Don Pedro's three sisters.


Don Iames the first of that name, the eighth
King of Arragon.
38 DOn Iames, or Iaime his sonne was then in the power of the Earle of Montfort in
the towne of Carcassone, the which did much trouble the Arragonois and Castellans;
who laboured all they could to haue their Prince, but it auayled little: wherefore
Pope Innocent, the third was forced, at the sute and instance of the Estates of Arragon and
Cattelogne, to send a Cardinall, called Peter of Beneuent, into Languedoc, to whome

the young king was deliuered, and led by him into his Countrie, where hee was receiued
and crowned at Moncon, and then tooke and receiued the oath at Lerida. It was ordayned
in these assemblies of Moncon and Lerida, that Don Sancho Earle of Rossillon should
gouerne the realme during the kings minoritie, but they gaue him limitation. The kings
person was recommended to Friar William of Monredon,VVillyam of Monredon, and Raymond of Pegnafort or Roch^fort, Gouernors of the kings person. Master of the Templers, to
whom was giuen for an Assistant, Friar Raymond of Pegnafort, a Castellan, he that compiled
the books of the Decretals, and did write arguments in cases of conscience, whereof
there shall be more ample mention made. Don Sancho Earle of Rossillon of a Regent,
became a tyrant, and did in time much trouble the king Don Iames. These things past in
this manner in Arragon, the yeare after the victory of Muradal, or Tholousa.
In Nauarre,Nauarre* Pampelone in sedition. the king D. Sancho the Strong, at his returne from Castile, found great disorders
and mutinies among his subiects, especially in the citty of Pampelone, which
grew by the young maydens of the towne, who had iniuried one another: and as oftentimes
a small coale kindles a great fire, which burnes a house, yea a whole cittie, so these
petty brabbles made all the Inhabitants fall into factions, those of the Bourg of Saint
Sernin, and Saint Michel, to defend the female kind, fell to blowes and murthers, the
which could not be preuented in the Kings absence, who by his presence pacified and reconciled
them for a time: but beeing afterwards retired to his castell of Tudele, where he
would not see any man, by reason that the incurable griefe in his foot increased daily, the
young men of Pampelone reuiued their insolencies and quarrels, so as one day those of
Saint Sernin and Saint Michel falling to armes, their fury and rage was such, as there
were aboue 800. slaine vpon the place, both men, wiues, and virgins, and many houses
were burnt: such was their furious rage one against another, the which caused the King
Don Sancho to leaue his voluntarie prison, to pacifie it, as he did.
39 Among other remedies which might serue hereafter, hee found that peace could
not continue long among a people, where there was a multitude of idle youth, and that
of necessitie there must grow daily quarrels among them, if there were not meanes found
out to employ them Seeing then that his subiects were giuen to armes, more then to any
other exercise, he resolued, seeing there was no warre with his neighbors, to make a garrison
vpon the Moores frontiers, whether the young men of the countrie should be sent,
to be trained vp in martiall discipline, and to practise armes honorably against the enemies
of Christ: for this cause he intreated the king D. Iames, or those which did then gouerne
his Realme of Arragon, to sell him the fruites and possession of the townes of Ademus,
Castel^abib, Ferreta, Ferrelon, and Calamator, for his life, to make them a schole
for armes: the which hee obtained, confirming also by the same mediators the peace
which had beene concluded betwixt the kings Don Sancho, and Don Pedro, some yeares
before, the which began to be troubled betwixt these two estates.
D. Alphonso king of Castille,Castile. Exploits against the Moores. hauing suffered his soldiers to rest some time in their houses,
drew his army againe together, in the yeare 1213. and recouered the Castell of Duegnas,
which herestored to the Order of Calatraua: he also tooke the Castle of Ezna Vexor,
the which the gaue to the Order of Saint Iames: from thence hee came and planted
his campe before the towne of Alcarras, seated vpon a very high and rough part of the
mountaine called Sierra Morena, the which hee tooke without any great difficulty, the
Moores beeing yet amazed at the defeate they had the yeare before, and then hauing
seazed vppon many other places with the like ease, hee returned to Toledo, where the
Queenes D. Elenor his wife, and D. Berenguela his daughter, with the Infant Don
Henry attended him. There was a great famine that yeare in Spaine, when as Don Roderigo
Ximenes the Arch-bishop, did much good by his preaching, perswading the rich to
releeue the poore: for which consideration the King did afterwards giue many places to
him and his successors Arch-bishops, the which did much augment the reuenues of that
Sea; honouring moreouer the sayd Don Roderigo, and his successors Arch-bishops, with
the title of High Chancelors of Castile.
The Kings of Castile and LeonLeon. had beene no very good friends, vppon diuers occasions,
but now lately by reason of the diuorce betwixt the King of Leon and his wife D.
Berenguela, daughter of Castile, the which was partly the cause why the king of Leon was

not at the battell of Muradal: but this yeare (all hatred forgotten) the two kings had an
interview in the towne of Vailledolit, whereas it was agreed, that Carpio and Montreall
should be restored to the King of Leon, vpon condition, that he should raze them, and
that he should make warre against the Moores:Reconciliation of the Kings of Castille and Leon. for the execution whereof D. Diego Lopes
de Haro was sent to accompany Don Alphonso king of Leon, with a good number
of souldiers. The places beeing ruined, the king of Leon went against the Moores of Alcantara
vppon the riuer of Tayo, on the confines of Portugall, the which hee tooke:
whereas since he did institute an Order of Knights,Order of the Kn^ghts of Alcantara. like vnto that of Calatraua. This king
D. Alphonso of Leon, is numbred the tenth of that name by them that mingle the kings
of Castile and Leon together. We haue sayd before that he had two wiues, the one was
daughter to Don Sancho the first king of Portugall, called Donna Theresa; of which marriage
issued Don Fernand, who died before his father, Donna Sancha, and D. Dulce: being
afterwards separated by the Popes authoritie, for that they were cousins in the third
degree: he married to his second wife Donna Berenguela, daughter to Don Alphonso the
Noble, king of Castile, of whom was borne Don Fernand, who was King of Castile and
Leon, and Don Alphonso who came to be Lord of Molina,Gentalogie of Leon. and had moreouer two daughters
by this Lady Donna Constance, a Nunne in las Huelgas of Burgos, and Donna Berenguela,
who married with the Earle Iohn de Brenne, whom they termed king of Ierusalem.
This second marriage was also dissolued, for that Donna Berenguela was daughter
to her husbands cousin^germaine, and therefore Don Alphonso had a friend, which brought
him a bastard, called Don Roderigo Alphonso of Leon.
After the taking of Alcantara,Castile. Don Diego Lopes de Haro came vnto the king of Castile,
who beeing entred into Andalusia beseeged Baeca, which the Moores had rampared:
but by reason of the great dearth, he raised the seege, and returned to Calatraua,
where hauing left Don Roderigo the Arch-bishop, to order all things vpon the fronter, he
came to Burgos. The Arch-bishop began to build the new towne of Milagro, where the
worke-men were charged by the Moores, who made a great slaughter of them, and of
many of the people which began to inhabit it: for the which the Arch-bishop prouided
as well as he could, and made a truce with the enemie in the Kings name. Beeing returned
to the king to Burgos he resolued to make a voiage into Guienne, where hee had some
pretensions, in the right of Queene Elenor his wife. Before his departure, hee would conferre
with Don Alphonso king of Portugal, his sonne-in-law, sending to intreate him to
meete him at Plaisance, on a certaine day: but beeing vppon the way he fell sicke in Garci
Mugnos a Bourg of Areualo, where he was forced to stay: then did his griefe increase,
by the answer he receiued from the King of Portugall,Death of Don Alphonso the Noble King of Castile. who sent him word, he would not
passe the limits of his kingdome, by reason whereof hee was so much mooued with choller,
as he dyed, in the yeare 1214. the fiue and fiftith yeare of his raigne, and the nine and
fiftith of his age: his body was carried to Burgos, whereas his funerals were made, and it
interred in the Monasterie of las Huelgas, with the teares and griefe of all Spaine.


D. Henry the first of that name, the eighth
King of Castile.
41 IN his place raigned his sonne D. Henry the first of that name in Castile and Toledo,
who was but eleuen yeares old: whereupon the Prelats, Nobles and Commons assembled
at Burgos, where hauing declared him king, and taken the oath, they made the
Queene Donna Eleonora his mother, Gouernesse of his person and Realmes: but she suruiued
her husband but 25. dayes,D Berenguela queene of Leon gouernesse of Castile. and was interred in the same Monasterie. By her decree
Donna Berenguela the kings sister gouerned both him and his Realmes, who carried herselfe
vprightly to the contentment of all the Estates, during her administration. She was
Ladie of Vailledolit, Mugnon, Curiel, Gormas, Saint Stephen, of the castell of Burgos,
and other places and rents assigned by Don Alphonso her father. During her regency
the Councell of Latran was celebrated at Rome, vnder Pope Innocent the third with a

great concourse of Prelates from all parts of Christendome. Whither there went D. Roderigo
Ximenes Arch-bishop of Toledo and Primate of Spaine: the Arch-bishop of Braga,Councell of S. Iohn de Latran vnder Innoce^t the third.
the Bishop of Vic, and other Prelates of Spain. There were aboue 300. at this assembly,
which did exercise chiefe dignities in the church, besides others innumerable of all
estates, they did chiefely treate of the meanes how to vphold the Christians estate in Palestina,
or the holy Land: then of the rights of Patronage and reception of fruites and
reuenewes of Churches by lay men. The Archbishoppe Don Roderigo preached with the
Popes leaue, in the assembly, very learnedly in Latin, according vnto those times: and
for that that language was not well vnderstood by all that were there present, he expounded
the substance of his Sermon in Italian, Germaine, French, English, Castillan, and
Biscain,Processe for the Primacie of Spaine. or Nauarrois which was his naturall tongue, for the which he was much commended
and esteemed, as Garybay saith, next to Doctor Blaz Ortiz, which done, and the
Councell freed of the affaires which touched the generall of Christendome: the Arch-bishop
D. Roderigo complayned of the contumacie and disobedience of the Arch-bishops
of Narbone, Tarragone, Braga, and Saint Iames, who would not acknowledge the Primacie
of Toledo: to proue the which he produced many priuiledges of the holy Apostolike
sea, especially of these Popes, Vrbain, Gelasius, and Honorius the 2. Lucius the 3. Adrian
the 4. and Innocent the 2. granted to the Church of Toledo, and the Prelates therof, as
Primates of Spaine. He alledged many ancient Councels celebrated in Spaine, and iustified
the equitie of his cause, by many ancient Histories and authenticall Records. The
Pope desired to heare the parties interressed: wherefore the Archbishop of Braga beeing
present, answered for himselfe: for him of Tarragone who was absent, the Bishop of Vic,
one of his Suffragans presented himselfe, both which denyed the Primacie. They of Narbonne
and Saint Iames were excused, beeing absent. And for that the Archbishop D. Roderigo
Ximenes was prest to returne into Spaine, the processe remained for that time vndecided,
yet he obtained from the Pope many great prouisions, which were both profitable
and honorable, as to be Legate of Spaine for ten yeares, with power to make legitimate
to the number of three hundred, with other ample faculties: right to choose and
establish Bishops in all the townes which should come into the Christians power, and
that the Church of Seuile in that case should acknowledge the Primacie of Toledo, without
any sute: and that the Arch-bishop thereof should dispose of all other Ecclesiasticall
dignities, in places conquered, or to be conquered. This Archbishop D. Roderigo Ximenes,
hath written the Historie of Spaine in Latine vnto his time, and in like manner that
of the Moores or Arabians since Mahumet.
The end of the tenth Booke




SEMPER EADEMTHE ELEVENTH BOOKE
of the Historie of Spaine.

The Contents.
1 TRoubles for the gouernment of Castile, during the minority of the King D. Henry the first. Insolencies of the Lord of Lara.
2 Pretensions of the house of France to the Crowne of Castile.
3 D. Fernand the third of that name, ninth king of Castile, who was also the 30. of Leon.
4 Moores in Spaine fall from the Miralmumins, or kings of Affricke, diuers petty Potentates
of that Sect erected in Spaine.
5 Warre betwixt the king of Leon, and him of Castile father and sonne.
6 The Order of Monkes of S. Dominicke: the first planting of them in Spaine.
7 Separation of the Knights of Alcantara, from them of Calatraua, and their habit.
8 D. Raymond Berenger Earle of Prouence, of the house of Cattelogne, his marriages and
children.
9 Order of Merced, instituted in Arragon.
10 Order Seraphique of the Monkes of S. Francis.
11 Peopling of Monkes of this Order in Portugall, S. Anthonie of Padoua a Portuguez.
12 D. Sancho Capello, the fourth king of Portugall, second of that name.
13 Warre of the Castillans against the Moores.
14 Aben Mahumet king of Seuile.
15 Conquest of the Ilands Baleares, by D. Iames king of Arragon, the first of that name.
16 Re-union of Leon with Castile, by the death of D. Alphonso the ninth, vnder Don Fernand
his sonne aboue-mentioned.
17 Title of the Kings of Ierusalem, vsurped by the Kings of Naples, and why.
18 Impatience of Thibaud Earle of Champagne, by the which D. Sancho king of Nauarre, his
grandfather, is mooued to make an vniust accord with the King of Arragon.
19 Thibault the first of that name, 22. King of Nauarre.
20 Zeit Aben Zeit King of Valencia, becomes a Christian.
21 Expedition of Don Iames King of Arragon, against Zael Tyrant of Valencia a Moore.
22 Exemption of Cattelogne, from the Soueraigntie of France, by accord.
23 Exploits of the Castillans against the Moores of Andalusia, and the taking of Cordoua.
24 Beginning of the Realme of Granado, by Mahumet Aben Alamacar.
25 Raigne of Thibault King of Nauarre, his marriages and manners, his voyages into Affricke.
26 Conquest of Valencia by D. Iames King of Arragon.
27 Vniuersitie of Salamanca instituted by Don Fernand king of Castile
28 Realme of Murcia gotten by the King Don Fernand the third, and his other exploites against
the Moores.

29 Raigne of D. Sancho Capello, King of Portugall, and the receiuing of his brother Don
Alphonso Earle of Boullen.
30 Learned men first admitted into the Councell of Castile, the bookes of the law, called las
siete partidas, Chanceries, and courts of Parlament established.
31 Seege of Seuile, and taking thereof, death of the King D. Fernand.
32 Death of D. Thibault king of Nauarre.

The Continuance and Descents of the Kings of Spaine
mentioned in the eleuenth booke.

Castile and Leon.
9. D. Fernand. 3-30.
vnited the 2. Realmes.
Portugal.
4. D. Sancho.
Capello 2.
Nauarre.
22 Thibauld 1.
Granado and the beginning
vnder
1. Mahumet Abe^ Alhamar.

THE Arch-bishop D. Roderigo Ximenes beeing returned into Castile,
found the affaires wonderfully troubled by the practises of D.
Fernand Nugnes de Lara, D. Aluar Nugnes, and D. Goncalo Nugnes,
his breethren, sonnes the Earle D. Nugno de Lara, who (as
their fathers and Vncles had done during the Nonnage of the king
D. Alphonso the Noble) would haue the person of the young king
Henry in their custodie, by which meanes they should haue all authoritie
and prerogatiue in the gouernement of the state. These
Noblemen, who were great and mightie,Troubles during the minority of D. Henry king of Castile. wrought so, as they had what they pretended,
by the meanes of Garcia Laurens, who had the gouernement of the Prince, and in whom
the Queene Regent did rely much. They corrupted him by gifts and promises, so as hee
counselled the Queene D. Berenguela, and caused the Prelates, and other Noblemen of
the Realme to allow thereof, that the king should be put into the hands of these Noblemen
of the house of Lara: whereunto Don Roderigo Ximenes the Arch-bishop did also
consent, so as they did homage, and did sweare faith and loyaltie in the hands of the Q.
Regent, not to attempt nor change any thing in matter of State, were it in peace or war,
without her counsell and consent, whom they should honor and respect, as it was fit: they
should defend her, her estates and goods in all occasions, vpon paine to be held guiltie of
high treason. These promises beeing made by the Lords of Lara, the king D. Henry was
deliuered into the hands of the Earle D. Aluar Nugnes:The young king deliuered into the ^ands of them of Lara. but they did not performe what
they had promised, for as soone as they saw themselues seazed of the Kings person, and
therefore reuerenced and seared, they began to pursue many great personages and rich
men with all violence, so as some were forced to flie. Moreouer, falling vppon the liberties,
goods, and reuenues of the Clergie, they made their profit of them: whereuppon
they were excommunicated by Don Roderigo Deane of Toledo, Vice-gerent or Substitute
to the Arch-bishop, the which did reclaime them from these insolencies, especially
against the Clergie and Churches, whereof they promised to become Protectors.

But for that it is a hard matter to restraine great men, when they are once giuen to tyranny,
these Earles of Lara turned against lay-men, which enioyed spirituall liuings,
whom they did vexe and spoile of their reuenues, so as they grew odius to all sorts of
men, and they began to be mooued, and to repine much at their excesse. D. Aluar who
had beene newly made Earle of Auila,Factions in Castile. called an assembly of the Estates in the Kings
name at Vailledolit, whither came certaine of his confederates, great men of Castile: but
D. Lope Diaz de Haro, sonne to D. Diego Lord of Biscay, D. Goncal Ruis Giron, and his
breethren, D. Roderigo Ruis, D. Aluar D^az de los Cameros; and Don Alphonso Teles de los
Meneses, with many other Noblemen of the Kingdome* detesting this tyrannie, exhorted
the Queene to complaine of the extorsions, miseries and calamities, which the people
and whole Realme suffered by their meanes: according to which aduice, she did write
to the Earle Don Aluar Nugnes,D. Alur de Lara spoyles D. Berenguela the Queene Regent of her authority and estate. putting him in mind of the faith and homage which hee
had sworne to her, and admonishing him to gouerne better: wherewith D. Aluar beeing
incensed, he did all the wrong he could vnto the Queene, and in the end dispossest her of
all that the King her father had left for her portion, yea he grew so insolent, as he commanded
her to depart the Court; the which this poore Princesse was forced to do, retiring
with her sister D. Elenor, who was yet a mayd, to Oteilla, where they remayned vntill
the death of D. Henry their brother. This violent contempt was not concealed from
the young King, who began to complaine, demanding to be deliuered againe vnto the
Queene D. Berenguela his sister, but it was in vaine: for he himselfe beeing forced and resisting
all he could, was led from place to place, as it pleased the Earle Don Aluaro: and
which was more, he was forced by him to marry D. Malfada Infanta of Portugal, daughter
to the King D. Sancho, without imparting it to the Prince, nor to the Princesses of the
bloud;Marriage for^ced of the K. D. Henry. not to any but to his owne faction: which marriage hee beganne to broach at Palencia,
where they were made sure; and suddenly beeing come to Medina del campo, hee
caused them to lye together: whereat the Queene D. Berenguela was so mooued (beeing
not made acquainted with this treaty) as she wrote vnto Pope Innocent the third, aduertising
him that the married couple were so neere akin, as according to the ordonances of
the Church, they could not be ioyned together without scandall, by whose meanes the
Pope did separate them: whereupon D. Malfada (who was a very faire Princesse) returned
into Portugal very much discontented, as well for the breach of the marriage, as for that
Don Aluaro would presume to marrie her, the king D. Henry being an infant. They were
cousins in the fourth degree by an vnequall line, wherof the Infanta had the better. Some
Authors report it after this manner, that Queene D. Berenguela hauing sent one to
Maqueda, where the king was, to carry him newes of his Estate, the Earles of Lara hauing
intelligence thereof, caused him to be apprehended and put in prison, and hauing counterfeitted
letters, to some priuate men of base condition, from the Queene, as if she would
haue procured them to poyson the king, they caused this prisoner processe to bee made,
who was for that cause hanged: yet not any one did beleeue, that euer the Queene D. Berenguela,
would practise such a trecherie; but held it to be a fraud, deuised by the Earle D.
Nugno, and D. Aluar his soone. Wherefore the Inhabitants of Maqueda beganne to mutine,
which made the King and his Gouernors to go to Hue^e: where beeing arriued, a
Knight called Rederigo Goncales of Valuerde, who had charge from the Queene D. Berenguela,
to steale away the king. Don Fernand de Lara layed hold of him, and carryed him
prisoner to Alarcon.
This made the Earles of Lara to keepe a more streight guard about the King,Ciuill warre in Castile. whome
they conducted to Vailledolit, and there beganne the warre against them, which held
the Queenes partie. Montalegre in the which Don Suer Teles Gir^n remayned, was beseeged
and taken: and then ouer running and spoyling the countrey, Don Aluaro de
Lara, chiefe of this warre, came to Carrion, then to Villana of Alcor, who hauing suddenly
surprized Don Alphonso Teles de Meneses, without the fort, beeing ill accompanied,
his men vnhorsed and disarmed some of Don Alphonsos troupe, and thought to
take him prisoner, but he fled into the fort beeing wounded, where hee was beseeged by
the King in person, and the Earle Don Aluaro, but not able to take it, they retired to Palencia,
where the king was lodged in the bishops Pallace.

All things (say they) past before the marriage, which was then concluded in Palence.
It beeing accompanied, the king would go against D. Lope Diaz de Haro, and passing by
Burgos, whereas his sister the Queene D. Berenguela was, he went on, and did not see her,
and so came to Calaorra, which fort was taken by Garcia Zapata, from Ruis Diaz de los
Cameros, and his brother Aluaro Diaz. The king beeing afterwards returned to Burgos,
the Queene his sister began to write, and to sollicite the Pope to dissolue this marriage,
which was the cause why D. Aluaro dispossest her of her lands and reuenues, vnder the kings
name and authoritie, which she could not resist. Moreouer, the Historians say, that Don
Aluaro did pursue a second marriage for the King D. Henry, with Donna Sancha Infanta
of Leon, daughter to Don Alphonso by his first wife D. Theresa, by the which it was agreed
that after the death of the king D. Alphonso, the king D. Henry should succeed him in the
Realme of Leon, and in the meane time he should giue vnto his father-in-law, the vse and
possession of Saint Iohn de la Mota, whereof a Knight called Sancho Fernandes should bee
Gouernor, and answerable for it: the Earle D. Aluaro thinking to fortifie himselfe with
the support and fauour of the king Don Alphonso, by the granting of this place, although
he repented him afterwards, giuing him in exchange Tiedra in stead of S. Iohn,
and aboue 10000. Marauidis of gold, all to annoy the Queene D. Berenguela, and to disinherit
the Infant D. Fernand of Leon his sonne and heire to the Realme, who was with
her: for Tiedra did belong vnto the Queene, who was constrained to giue the place vnto
the king Don Henry her brother, who demanded it. And then she sent the Infant D. Fernand
vnto the king of Leon his father,: which done, she retired to Oteilla, and the king to
Palence, from whence D. Goncalo Nugnes de Lara, brother to the Earle D. Aluaro, was
sent with good troupes of horse and foot, against D. Lope Diaz de Haro, who was towards
Miranda of Ebro well accompanied: but as they were readie to fight, certaine religious
men came betwixt them and parted them: so as the Earle D. Goncalo returned to the king
and D. Lope vnto the Queene; who was soone after beseeged by the king her brother, and
the Earle of Lara in Oteilla, but not able to take it, they left it to go to Frechilla, where
they razed the houses of D. Roderigo Goncales Giron, and then they returned to Palence.
The Queene had in the meane time sent to demand succors, from the king of Leon, somtimes
her husband, the which he granted, but the seege beeing raised, there was no neede
to send any. These things are written by many Authors very doubtfully and diuersly: how
soeuer it were, the realmes of Castile and Toledo did indure much miserie by the wicked
and tyrannous gouernement of the Earles of Lara, the which had an end by the suddaine
and miserable death of the king D. Henry, whom they held in their power, and whose authoritie
they did abuse impudently. This young Prince beeing at Palenca, lodged in the
bishops pallace, as they suffered him to play with certain young children of Noble houses,
who serued him and were about the same age, sporting with them freely, and more
inconsideratly then was fit for one of his quality: one of them whom they hold to bee of
the house of Mendoca, cast a tyle from the top of a tower, which falling vpon the couering
of an house, beat downe another, the which fell vpon the kings head, wherewith hee
was so grieuously hurt,Death of D. H^nry king of Castile. as he dyed the eleuenth day after, in the yeare 1217. hauing raigned
two yeares, nine moneths, and 15. daies, in great trouble: his bodie carryed to Burgos
and layed in the Monasterie of las Huelgas, neere to his brother D. Fernand, where they
do euery yeare vnto this day, make an aniuersarie for his soule. Such was the end of D.
Henry, by the which D. Berenguela recouered her authoritie, and raigned with her sonne
D. Fernand, the which she had by Don Alphonso king of Leon, by the diligence and foresight
of the Noblemen of Castile, fearing lest the French should seaze vpon the Realme,
by reason of the pretensions of the Infanta D. Blanche,Interest of the king of France to t^e crowne of Casti^te. the eldest daughter of Castile, maried
into France, to Lewis sonne to Philip Augustus, who was mother to the king Saint
Lewis.


D. Fernand called the Holy, the ninth king of
Castile, and third of that name.
3 THe death of the King Don Henry, was very grieuous to the Earles of Lara, who
sought to keepe it secret for some dayes, but it was in vaine: for the Queene D. Berenguela
was presently aduertised, who instantly dispatched D. Diego Lope de Haro, and D.
Goncalo Ruis, to Toro in the countrie of Leon, to bring the Infant Don Fernand, who
was there with the King his father. And for that she feared lest the King Don Alphonso of
Leon, beeing aduertised of this death, should attempt something vppon the Realme of
Castile, the Ambassadors had charge to conceale it, and to faine that the Queene was stil
molested, and readie to be beseeged by her enemies, vpon which pretext they should demaund
the Infant her sonne with some succors of souldiers, the which the Ambassadours
did wisely effect, bringing D. Fernand to Oteilla, where hee was proclaimed king of Castile,
Toledo, and Nagera in the open field, vnder an Elme, by the Noblemen which were
there present: and presently marched towards Palencia,Fernand the third proclaimed king of Castile. where as the King, the Queen his
mother, with their whole traine, were receiued with great honour by Don Tello the Bishop.
From thence they came to Duegnas, which place they were constrained to force,
so as the warre began to grow hote: which the Prelates and Noble-men of the countrie
laboured to preuent, but in vaine: the Earle D. Aluar refusing to quit his authoritie, and
to lay downe armes, vntill he had the person of the new King Don Fernand in his power,
as he had had that of D. Henry: but the memorie of his bad gouernment distasted euery
man: so as they were so farre from satisfying his desire, as they were all ashamed to haue
beene so ill aduised, to giue the authoritie and gouernement of the Realme, to such violent
persons as them of Lara: wherefore they sought how to haue the king obeyed by
Armes, to the great ruine of the countrey. The King and Queene-mother past on with
their troupes to Vailledolit, and so to the riuer of Duero: from thence they went to Coca,
where they shut the gates against them: wherefore they came to Saint Iust, where
they receiued two aduertisements: the one was, that they should not go to Auila nor Segouia:
the other, that the Infant Don Sancho Fernandes, brother to Don Alphonso king
of Leon, borne of D. Vrraca Lopes was comming against them with a mightie army:
whereupon they turned backe towards Vailledolit, where they found some alterations
against the Queene and her sonne, practised by them of Lara, whom by her wisedome she
pacified* There hauing a^^embled the Noblemen which had charges and dignities within
the Realme, she intreated them to aduise what was fit for the peace and publike quiet, offering
to do any thing which they should councell her. They who knew her to be a wise
and discreet woman, were of opinion, that she should raigne as lawfull heire of Castile:
but she desiring more the good and greatnesse of her sonne, then her owne, renounced
the royaltie, in the presence of them all, and resigned it wholly vnto her fon Don Fernand,
the which was a worthy act, and commended of all men. Whereupon the King was conducted
vnto the Church of Saint Mary the great, and there with a generall applause and
consent was confirmed King, and the oath taken of either side, the King being scarce seuenteene
yeares, whose raigne was happie and full of all good.
4 The Moores of Spaine,Moores. subiect to Aben Mahomad, Miralmumin of Affricke, seeing
themselues destitute of his ayde and support, after the losse of the Battaile of Muradal, (as
it doth often happen after such inconueniences and losses) grew to haue a bad conceite
of their King Mahomad, and did beleeue, or made shew to beleeue, that the battaile was
lost by his fault: wherefore all such a^The Arabians in Spain re^ect the Miralmumins of Africk. had any charges and gouernements reuolted and
erected many petty Kingdomes in Spaine. Among them, the first and chiefe was the Miralmumims
owne brother called Zeit Aben-Zeit, who by others is called Zeita Buzeit,
who seazed vpon the towne of Valencia, and the Iurisdictions therof. A cousin of his called
Aben Mahomad, when as the Christians army, infected with the plague, returned into

Castile, seazed vpon Baeca, who had the cittie of Cordoua also at his deuotion, with many
other places in Andalusia, and on the confines of Toledo; whom many Moores followed,
for that he was descended by masculine line from Abdelmon, the first king of the
Almohades, and came of Abdalla one of his sonnes: these two had yet some colour to
hold that which their grandfather had conquered in Spaine. But at Seuille there did rise
a mightie Moore, called Aben Lalle, vnder whose power the townes of Eccia, Carmona,
Xeres,Gouernours Moores make thems^lues Lords of their gouernements. and others of Andalusia did subiect themselues. In Murcia and Granado, there was
one named Aben^Hut, made himselfe King, beeing of the race of those Moores which
had raigned in Sarragossa. In this sort the other Moores made themselues masters of
townes and Prouinces in Spaine, where they had beene set for Gouernors, all which did
enter into league with the aboue-named as the mightiest, giuing an end in Spaine to the
Empire of the Almohades, and Kings of Maroc, two and fiftie yeares after the passage
of king Abdelmon. This was the last diuision betwixt the Moores of Spaine and Affricke,
the which were neuer more vnited vnder one Crowne, notwithstanding that there haue
many times troupes and armies past out of Africke into Spaine against the Christians,
to succor those pettie Kings of the Moores which raigned there, whereas the Kings of
Maroc might hold some sea-townes and forts giuen them by the Kings of Granado, to fauour
their descents: yet they neuer after had any great power not Empire there. From
these new erected estates, which were not yet very well vnited, the King of Castile (as we
haue sayd) had taken the strong citty of Alcaraz, and he of Leon, that of Alcantara, in
the yeare 1213. Since a truce beeing made betwixt the Christians and Moores for some
yeares, these Infidels had leysure to settle themselues, and to fortifie their places.
In the yeare 1217.1217. Don Mathew Bishop of Lisbone, beeing leader of the armie of
Portugal, tooke from them Alcacar de Sal, beeing assisted by strangers, which were going
into Syria, and by the Prior of the Templers, and Prior of Saint Iohn. These strangers
were English, French, and Flemings, hauing a fleet of an hundred sayle, beeing mooued
thereunto by the admonitions and decrees of the Councell of Saint Iohn de Latran, held
by Pope Innocent the third, which was the fifth expedition made by publike decree and
Councell, by the which Andrew king of Hungarie was named Generall of the Christians
armie in the West, notwithstanding Iohn Earle of Brenne went in his place.
5 Returning to Castile,Castile. the young king Don Fernand, his mother, and and all the
Castillans, were much troubled after they had chosen him, for that the King D. Alphonso
his father, beeing discontented that D. Berenguela had by policy gorten away his sonne,
and seemed to distrust him, and withall being desirous to vnite that realme to his of Leon
and to be called Emperour of Spaine, he came into Spaine with a mightie armie: whereupon
they sent Don Maurice Bishop of Burgos, and Don Domingo bishop of Auila to
beseech the King not to disquiet his sonnes Realme,The King of Leon enters with an armie into Castile against his son D. Fernand. of whose good he should bee rather
glad then sorrie: but he was thereby incensed the more. King Don Alphonso marching on
as farre as Burgos, spoyling all where he past, found the citty well garded by Don Lope
Diaz de Haro and other Noblemen, who were well accompanied: wherefore seeing there
was no meanes to enter, he returned, doing all the harme he could. About this time the
Queene D. Berenguela, parting from Vailledolit came to Palencia, whereas the Noblemen
about Segobia and Auila came to offer her their seruice. The Castillans beeing
freed from the feare of King Don Alphonso, the new Kings army was ledde to Mugnon,
where the battery was begun: during the which the Queen returned to Burgos, to the funerals
of her brother Don Henry, the which by her Order were very stately. Mugnon beeing
taken, and the Queene come to the campe, with the souldiers which were at Burgos,
they marched against Lerma and Lara, which places were taken by force. Beeing returned
to Burgos, the army was led along the riuer of Oja, whereas the townes of Villorado,
Nagera,D. Aluaro de Lara taken whereof followed a peace (...) Castile. and Nauarret yeelded vnto the King, but not their castels. In the meane time
the Lords of Lara, laboured to make a generall rebellion against the king* so as the Princesse
being forced to return to Palencia, there was an incounter vpon the way, where D.
Aluaro was taken and led prisoner to Burgos, who was afterwards deliuered vpon condition
that he should yeeld vnto the King, all the places and garrisons which were held and
maintained by his men at arms, belonging to the Crowne, especially Amaya, Tariego,

Cerezo, Villafranca of the Mountaines of Oca, the tower of Vilhorado, with the castles
of Nauarret, Nagera and Pancoruo, the which was done: D. Fernand his brother did also
yeeld Castroxeris, and Orcejon. By this meanes there was a peace betwixt the king
and the Noblemen his subiects whom hee receiued into fauour, suffring them to hold
their Offices and Gouernments: but it was a peace of sixe monthes onely, for seeing
themselues out of credit, they rebelled againe, against whom the king sent some troupes,
which forced them to retire to Leon. By reason whereof the warre reuiued betwixt
Castille and Leon, but not too hotly: for there was presently a truce made, the Earle
D. Aluaro falling sicke, whereof hee died at Toro,Death of D. Aluar and D. Fernand de Lara. hauing first made a vow to take vpon
him the habit and order of Saint Iames; wherefore they buried him at V^les. Presently
after D. Fernand de Lara his brother retired into Affrike, where hee was well entertained
in the court of the King of Maroc; but hee died soone after, hauing caused himselfe
to be carried to a Bourge inhabited by Christians, called Elbora, neere vnto the city of
Maroc. Drawing neere his end, he tooke vpon him the habit of the Order of Hospitaliers,
thinking it would serue to mitigate his offence, in which habit his bodie was carried
into Castille, and buried in the Commanderie of Pont de Hitero, in the Bishoprike
of Palencia, by the care of Donna Major his wife, D. Fernand and D. Aluar his
sonnes.
6 This age brought forth new Orders of religion,Order of preaching friars. contrary to the precedent Orders
of Monkes; for whereas these could not bee satisfied with temporal wealth, which was
giuen them by Kings and Noblemen, as it were in emulation one of an other, those reiected
all riches, making profession to be poore, and not to possesse any thing. The first
was that of the preaching friars, which are called Iacobins in France, the Author whereof
was that Chanoine of Osma, which came out of Spaine into France, with his Bishop,
to maintaine the authority of the church of Rome, against the Albigeois and their adherents,
beeing pronounced heretikes by Pope Innocent the third, as wee haue sayd: the
vow and profession of this Order was, to preach against those which should stray
from the faith. The Order was allowed and confirmed by Pope H^norius the third. Dominike
was borne at Calaruega, and not at Calaroga, nor Calahorra; it is a Bourg in
the Diocese of Osma, betwixt Aranda of Duero, and Saint Domingo of Silos, and is at
this day a Monastery of Nunnes of that Order, the which was built by King D. Alphonso
the eleuenth, or last of that name, where they doe shew his fathers house and the font
where he was baptized.
The confirmation of his Order was presented by him,An. 1218. in the yeere 1218. vnto the King
D. Fernand, hee himselfe hauing obtained it at Rome; and in truth the sea of Rome is
much bound to these preaching friers,Conuents of the Order of Saint Dominike built by the King D. Fernand the 3. who haue beene one of the chiefe suppotters
thereof, the King D. Fernand as an obedient sonne to the Pope, receiued the Order and
the Author with great reuerence, and caused the Monasteries of Saint Croix of Segobia,
and of Saint Domingo the royal at Madrid, to bee built. Dominike dying some time
after at Bolonia, Pope Gregory the ninth, did canonize him, in the yeere 1223.
there were other friars of this Order Canonized by Popes, as one Manes, ^il, Anselme,
Pelagius and Michel.
7 At the same time the Knights of the Order of Alcantara were diuided from that
of Calatraua, beeing alike, and subiect vnto it, from which time they had their distinct
maisters. D. Alphonso King of Leon, who had instituted this order, was a meanes that
Alcantara, with all that this order did hold in the realme of Leon, was giuen to Saint Iulian
del Pereiro of Portugal, which was of the same order of Cisteaux, vpon condition
that the maister and Order of Pereiro and his successors should remaine vnder the obedience,
and be subiect to the^ site of the Maisters of Calatraua. So in the yeere of our
Lord 1219. this order had it's beginning and distinct maisters.An. 1219. Their habit was first a
hood, and the Nouices at this day carry a hood of white serge or stamine, and when as
they receiue the communion,Ha^^t of the Knights of Alcantara. euery one weares a white cloake. Since they haue taken
a greene crosse, in fauour and at the instance of D. Fernand Infant of Castille, sonne to
Iohn the first, who was afterwards King of Arragon, in the yeere 1411. as shalbe sayd.
Such was the deuotion of that age, fertil of such things.

D. Fernand King of Castille, beeing freed from D. Aluaro, and D. Fernand Nugnes de
Lara, which did trouble his realme, he began to raigne in peace; and beeing now of age
fit to be married, the Queene D. Berenguela his mother, with the aduice of such as shee
knew to be faithful, began to treat a marriage in Germany, with Beatrix, daughter to the
Emperour Philip, and cousine to the Emperour Frederic the second King of Naples and
Sicile. The Germains say, that she had beene married to Otton Duke of Saxony, who
was Emperor after Philip; so as she must of necessity haue beene a widow. To this effect
D. Maurice Bishop of Burgos, and D. Pedro Abbot of the Monastery of Saint Peter
of Arlanca,D. Ferdinand King of Castille merries the Emperor of Germanies daughter. with the Prior of the Order of Saint Iohn were sent Ambassadors wel attended,
who concluded this marriage, notwithstanding that they held them foure
monthes without any resolution: this Princesse was sent into Spaine through France,
whereas Philip Augustus, then raigning, did her much honour throughout his whole
realme, causing her to bee conducted vnto Guipus^oa, from whence the Noblemen of
Spaine which were deputed to receiue her, conducted her to Victoria, whereas the
Queene D. Berengula met her, and did accompany her to Burgos: this Princesse did
please D. Fernand, for she was exceeding faire. Three daies after her arriual, the King was
made Knight, and did arme himselfe in the Monastery of Las Huelgas, and then he married
D. Beatrix the last of December 1220.An. 1220. Of this marriage issued many children,
whereof the eldest was Alphonso, who succeeded in the two Realmes of Castille and
Leon: the second was D. Frederic, the third D. Fernand, the fourth D. Henry, the
fifth D. Philip the sixth D. Sancho, the seuenth and last D. Manuel. Hee had also two
daughters, D. Elenor, who died and Infant, an D. Berenguela a Nunne in the Monastery
of Las Huelgas.
The yeere following 1221. the marriage was concluded betwixt D. Elenor, the King
of Castilles aunt, and D. Iames King of Arragon,Arragon. who was then but thirteene yeeres
old, which argues falshood in some which haue written that this King before hee married
this Princesse, had contracted a secret marriage with D. Theresa Gil of Bidaura,
daughter of D. Iohn of Bidaura, of whom hee begot two sonnes, the one called D. Pedro,
who was Lord of Aierbe, and the other D. Iaime Lord of Xerica, the which hath no
great ground in nature, considering the King was very yong, and we must beleeue that
the acquintance he had with this Lady, either as a spouse or a friend, was ten yeeres after,
when he was diuorced from D. Elenor. He was in a manner constrained to make this
alliance with Castille, hauing need of D. Fernands assistance, by reason of the troubles
he had in his country, which grew through the bad and tyranous gouernment and ambition
of his vncles: the which wee must relate and fetch farther off. This Prince had
beene drawne, as wee haue sayd, out of the hands of Symon Earle of Montfort, and conducted
into his realme of Arragon, where there was great contention betwixt the Estates,Contentions in Arragon.
and the Earles of Roussillon, the father, and sonne to D. Fernand, and the Abbot
of Montarragon, the Kings vncles, who in stead of gouerning the realme, would haue
wrested it from him: notwithstanding by the fidelity of the Estates and their authority,
together with the dilligence of the Cardinal of Beneuent the Legat, right preuailed,
and the Infant D. Iames was ackowledged for lawfull King at Lerida, as I haue sayd,
where the Princes contending did not appeere.Raymond Berenger Earle of ^rouence father to fiue Queenes. 8 There were three Gouernors appointed,
two in Arragon, which were D. Pedro d' Ahones, and D. Pedro Fernandes d' Acagra,
whose Gouernments were distinct by the riuer of Ebro, and the third in Cattelog^e.
Ouer all the which D. Sancho, Earle of Roussillon, was appointed superintendent. There
it was also concluded, that D. Raymond Berenger, Earle of Prouence, a young Prince of
nine yeeres of age, sonne to D. Alphonso, should be with the King, vnder the same tutors
aboue mentioned, the which was put in execution: but the Earle soone after, about the
yeere of our Lord 1216. escaped from them, and retired into Prouence, where hee married
the daughter of Thomas Earle of Morienne, named Beatrix, who was mother of
fiue Queenes.
To preuent the continual practises of the Earles of Roussillon, and of D. Fernand,
vncles to the young King, it was resolued, about the yeere 1217. that hee should bee declared
of full age, being then but tenne yeeres old, according vnto some, the which the

Earle of Rousillon did wonderfully contradict: yet after great contention, he quit the
Regency, in the yeere 1218. by the authority of the Estates assembled to that end at Tarragone,
whereas the Earle receiued certaine places in fee of the King. At this time the
authority of the Magistrate (called the Iustice of Arragon) was great, for the defence of
the publike liberty.
The yeere following 1219. all the continent of Spaine was afflicted with a great
drought (wherevnto it is very much subiect) as well through want of raine, as for that the
springs were dried vp; so as there followed a great dearth, and pestilent diseases. These
calamities were accompanied with troubles and ciuill seditions, by the rebellion of D.
Roderigo Lizana, a man of great authority and power, who being incensed for some pretended
wrongs against Lope d' Albero, hee surprized him in his house, and shut him vp in
a fort of his, from whence the King deliuered him by force; his commandements, nor
the decrees of his councel preuailing nothing. D. Roderigo despayring to finde grace
with the King, retired to Albarrazin, to D. Pedro Fernandes de Acagra, whether they
sen^troupes of souldiers to besiege them, who could not force the place, beeing strong
both by nature and art: notwithstanding D. Roderigo and D. Pedro Fernandes, acknowledging
their fault, obtained pardon of the King. In these sieges they vsed an Engine of
battery made at Huesca, which did cast great stones, making one hundred and fifty shot
in a day and a night, with great ruine.
These things happened in the yeere 1221. whilest they treated of the marriage of the
sayd King D. Iames, with D. Elenor of Castille, the Mediators whereof were D. Symon
Cornel, William Ceruera, and William Raymond of Moncade, hee which married Garsinde,
the heire of the country of Berne: for the accomplishing wherof, the parties met at Agreda,
where they were made sure, and the contract of marriage drawne, greatly to the
Queenes aduantage, from whence they went to marry in the city of Tarrassone. Of
this marriage D. Alphonso was borne, who died before the father: This marriage was
not firme, for being made without a dispensation from the Pope, being cousins in a prohibited
degree, it was dissolued by Pope Honorius the second after some yeeres, and the
Infanta sent home into Castille; yet some say that shee professed herselfe in the Monastery
of Saint Mary de la Vega.
9 A little before this, King D. Iaime, had instituted the Order which they call our Lady
of the redemption of prisoners, otherwise de la Merced,Order of Merced. by the councel of his confessor
friat Raymond of Pegnafort, or Rochefort, who set downe the rules for the religious
of this Order, vnder that of Saint Augustine. Their profession and chiefe vow was to
goe into the Moores country, to redeeme Christians that were prisoners, and if any
one for want of money could not redeeme a Christian slaue out of the hands of an Infidel,
and did see him by ill vsage in despaire or otherwise in danger to renounce the
Christian faith, they were bound to put themselues in the slaues place, and to serue for
him vntill they had paied his Maister the price agreed vpon, which was a rare charity.
The first brother of this Order, was Peter Nolasco of Barcelona, or Francis according vnto
some; who receiued the habit in the chiefe church of that towne, with great solemnity,
in the yeere 1218. by the hands of friar Raymond the maister thereof, the King D.
Iames being present. This habit was white, as they carry it at this day, with the armes
of Arragon and Cattelog^e, which are, a crosse argent, and foure bends gueules in a
field Or. The Order was since confirmed, in the yeere 1230. at the request of the King
D. Iame and pursute of the master, D. Raymond of Rochfort, by Pope Gregory the ninth,
he who confirmed the Order of the friars Mineurs, instituted after that of the preaching
friers, by the Seraphicall father Saint Francis vnder the Order of Saint Augustin,(...). but
somewhat changed: the Author of this Order was wonderfully persecuted by the enemy
of mankinde, enuious (say the Spanish Authors) of the great good which should
come vnto the Catholike church of Rome, by the erudition and piety of the religious of
that Order. This father of Franciscan friars, came into Spaine, during the raigne of
D. Fernand King of Castille, of whom wee write, who receiued him with great reuerence,
and did build many goodly conuents of that Order, and by his example other
Kings did the like.

11 Fiue of the Brethren of this Order,Portugal. not yet allowed nor confirmed by the Pope
(the which notwithstanding florished in Portugal, in the latter time of king D. Alphonso
the grosse) were desirous to passe to Maroc, there to preach the faith of Christ, but they
prospered not; for the King of the Arabians, offended with the habit, countenances,
and importunity of these friars, slue them all with his owne hand, by reason whereof
they were put in the ranke of blessed Martires, according to their Legend. Of this
cruel execution was an eye witnesse D. Pedro of Portugal, brother to the King, who caused
their bodies to bee brought to Coimbra, where they were buried in the Monastery
of Saint Croix.
They say that these Monkes partting from Portugal, had prophecied to the Queene
D. Vrraca, that shee should die in the yeere of our Lord 1220. as it happened. In the
time of the same King D. Alphonso florished that religious man whom they call Saint
Anthony of Padoua, who notwithstanding was borne at Lisbone; and for his great
knowledge, according to the time, was called the arke of the holy Scripture. Hee being
a Chanoine of Saint Croix at Coimbra, had so great a feruency to serue God, as
he became a friar of the Order of Saint Francis, changing his name, which was Fernand
into that of Anthony; hee was a Doctor and a professor in diuinity, and did read in the
vniuersities of Tolousa, Bolonia and Padoua, where he died; of whom Portugal and all
Spaine glory much. As for King D. Alphonso surnamed the grosse, hee hath not ministred
much matter to write of his actions: for his raigne was short, and himselfe in disposed
of his person. Hee died in the yeere of our Lord 1223. beeing but eight and
thirty yeeres old, whereof hee raigned eleuen. His body lies in Alcouaca, neere vnto
that of the Queene his wife.


D. Sancho Capello the second of that name,
the fourth King of Portugal.
12 D. Sancho his sonne,Surname of Capello, called Capello, raigned after him. He was sixteene yeeres old
when he began to raigne, and was crowned in the city of Coimbra. His surname
of Capello came by reason of the habits which hee ware wide and long, like a Clergy
man. It may bee hee ware some great cap or hat, as the Portugals doe at this day, who
will haue all their apparel very wide and easie, euen their buskins of Spanish leather,
which are ruffled downe to their heeles, saying that it doth not become a gentleman to
carry them straight and smooth.
This Prince was more courteous, affable, and a louer of peace then was fit for a
commander that will keepe his subiects in awe. Wherefore hee was contemned by
his subiects, and held for a couard and base minded, so as they attempted many things
insolently and audatiously, against all right or reason, without respect of Prince, or
Iustice, the which was ill administred in his time, his basenesse yeelding to the malice
of his subiects. Hee married with D. Mencia Lope de Haro daughter to the Earle D.
Lope Diaz de Haro,Marriage of the King D. Sancho. Lord of Biscay the fourth of that name: a Lady of great beauty and
an excellent spirit, but not much pleasing to the Portugals, for the King tooke her,
beeing a widow against their likings, and besides shee bare him no children: wherefore
they vsed great meanes in the court of Rome to dissolue this marriage.
Amongst all the Kings of Portugal, as well those which went before, as which
followed, hee onely was childlesse, for hee neither had lawfull children, nor bastards.
D. Mencia Lopes did gouerne him in such sort, as no respect of the publike good of
the Realme, nor the exhortations, intreaties, nor admonitions, made vnto him by
the Noblemen, and religious persons, who were then much respected, neither yet any
other meanes whatsoeuer, could mooue him to bee diuorced from her, wherefore
they spake it publikely, that shee had bewitch'd him, what happened you shall vnderstand
hereafter.

Returning to the affaires of Castille, the King D. Fernand hauing solemnized his
aunts marriage, after all the feasts and sports he found himselfe ingaged in new troubles,
procured by D. Fernand Ruiz Dias de los Cameros,Fernand Ruiz Diaz de l^s Cameros, a co^cus^ionar and a rebel. who had newly crost himselfe to passe
into Syria, to the holy warre; for the performing of which voiage, it may bee his purse
was not very well furnished, wherefore hee beganne to taxe and spoile the Kings country,
which was vnder his command, for these concussions hee was cited to appeere in
court, at Vailledolit, where he did in some sort iustifie himselfe.
Afterwards being pricked in conscience for these outrages, beeing also by nature in
constant, feareful, and with all ill aduised, hee absented himselfe, wherefore the King seized
vpon all his goods. D. Fernand Ruiz seeing that they proceeded against him with
all rigour, fortefied himselfe in certaine castles, from the which hee did much trouble
the Kings affaires, so as in the end hee was forced to compound with him and to giue
him money.
By this accord,D. Gonsalo Peres Lord of Molina, and D Gons^l Nugnes de Lara rebel in Castille. hee yeelded vp the places which hee held, and receiued foureteene
thousand peeces of gold. After him Gencalo Peres, Lord of Molina did rebel, beeing
mooued therevnto by D. Goncalo Nugnes de Lara, who beganne to ouerrunne and
spoile those parts which lay neere his houses, like an enemy; not ceasing, for any admonitions
or threats made vnto him in the Kings name, vntill that hee was forced to goe
and besiege him in Molina; notwithstanding by the means of D. Berenguela the Queene
mother, hee was restored to the Kings fauor, and the souldiers were drawne from before
Molina, But D. Goncalo Nugnes de Lara, who for feare of punishment was retired
into the Moores country, demanding pardon also could not obtaine it: wherefore
hee liued the remainder of his daies, which were but short, at Baeca in Andalusia,
where hee died miserably, as his brethren D. Aluaro and D. Fernand had done, worthy
in truth of great punishments, for their rash and seditious enterprises, beeing greater
and more eminent then all the other Noblemen of the realme. The King beeing
freed from this care, and the realme in some quiet, D. Maurice Bishop of Burgos, an
English man borne, beganne in the yeere of our Lord 1222. to set his hand to the building
of the great church of that city,An. 1222 according to the fashion wee see it at this day, the
which was finished in his time. The Episcopal seat was before at Saint Laurence. The
Archbiship D. Roderigo caused them also this yeere to worke about the building of the
chiefe Church of Talauera, the which was indowed with foure dignities, and twelue
Chanoi^s, and at the same time the Churches of Vailledolit and Osma were built by a
Bishop of Osma, who had beene Secretary to the King D. Fernand. The church of Padron,
the Bishops lodging, and the bridge which is vpon Minio were also then built, by
the care and charge of D. Laurence Bishop of that place.
It was also about the beginning of this yeere 1222. that D. Ramir Infant of Nauarre,Nauarre.
brother the King D. Sancho the retired, was made Bishop of Pampelone, of whose
charity Authors write with admiration, that hee gaue all he had vnto the poore, and the
more his riches did abound, the more he gaue.
In all the time after the marriage of the King D. Iames,Arrago^^ and D. Elenor of Castille, vnto
the yeere 1228. when as the warre of Majorca was attempted, the realme of Arragon
was troubled with continual seditions, procured by the Infant D. Fernand, the Kings
vncle, beeing exceeding ambitious, who hauing entred into League, with D. Nugno
of Arragon his cousin, sonne to D. Sancho Earle of Rosillon, D. William of Moncada
(a little before enemies, but now growne friends, vpon this occasion) Pedro d' Ahones
and others, tooke vpon him againe the Regency of the realme, by force, in the yeere
1223. and distributed amongst his fauourers and confederats the chiefe dignities of the
realme, holding the King and Queene, in his power: but a while after the King escaped
from Tortosa, and retired to Huc^ra or Horta, where hauing conferted with the Nobility,
hee raised an armie, with the which hee entred the territories of the Moores of Valencia
and Murcia beeing tired with ciuill tumults, so as hee forced Azebut or Zeit
King of Valencia to promise him tribut, and in like manner him of Murcia, which was
the fi^th penny of their imposts. In this warre many commaunders of the League,
intermedled, contrarie to the Kings liking. Amongst others, D. Pedro d' Ahones

discontented that the King had made a truce with the Moores, sought to breake it, and
did often lead troupes of souldiars into the territory of Valencia, spoyling all he found:
so as the King hauing often aduised and intreated him to conteine himselfe, but in
vaine hee commanded they should take him prisoner,D. Pedro de Ahones (...). but D. Pedro seeking to defend
himselfe, being pursued by the King and others, was slaine by D. Sancho Martines de Luna,
with a lance: the which did put all the townes of Arragon (beeing already infected)
into open rebellion against the King: who marched presently with his army into the
countries of Sobrarbre, and Ribagorca, whereas the houses, lands and subiects of D. Pedro
were, the which he wasted al he could.
The townes of Saragossa, Huesca and all the rest, except Calatajub, followed the Infant
D. Fernand, and the Noblemen of his faction, as defenders (sayd they) of the publike
liberty, the chiefe of the Saragossans, was their Bishop D. Sancho d' Ahones: brother
to D. Pedro, that was slaine. On the other side the Kings army was led by D. Blasco Alagon,
and Artal de Luna, who did much annoy them of Saragossa and others. In the end,
the mildnesse, patience and dissimulation of the King D. Iames, surmounted al these alterations
and mutinies, who could so winne the Princes and Noblemen, beeing much
troubled to maintaine this warre, as they all submitted themselues vnto him; by whose
example the townes were quiet, yet the citties of Saragossa, Huesca and Iacca made a
league amonst themselues, for the defence of their lands and iurisdictions against
theeues and robbers, and remainders of ciuil dissentions, and erected a Magistrate, holding
a forme of Iustice, like vnto that which they call Hermandades in Castille, yet without
any preiudice to the Kings royal preogatiue.
13 In Castille whilest that the King D. Fernand was busie to suppresse his owne subiects,
and to dispose of the affaires of old Castille,Moores. the Inhabitants of Cuenca, Huete,
Alarcon and Moja, beeing gathered together, made a roade into the territories of Valencia,
from whence they brought a great booty. This was an aduice giuen by D. Berenguela
the Queene mother, and the prelates of Castille, to the end they might breake
the truce which was betwixt her sonne and the petty Kings of the Moores, thinking it
high time the King should goe to the warre, and that it was the dutie of a Catholike
Prince to pursue these infidels,Fernand King of Castille e^^ers Andalusia. with what right soeuer. Wherefore the King animated
by this councel, gathered his army together, and marched into Andalusia, where at his
first entry, Aben Mahomad, King of Baeca, made himselfe his vassal, sending to meet
the Christians army, when it was at the passage of the mountaine called Puerto del
Muradal. Afterwards they came to Quesada, whereas many Moores were slaine, and
many taken, the townes of Lacra, Teua and Palhes were abandoned by the Moores, the
castles of Esnader, Escamel and Espulei were razed, whereof the two last were yeelded
by composition. From thence D. Lope Dias de Haro, was sent with D. Fernand Coci,
Maister of the Order of Saint Iames, and D. Goncal Tuannes, maister of Calatraua, to Biuoras,
whereas there were certaine bands of Arabians of Affrike, whom they defeated,
bringing away many prisoners. D. Roderigo Ximenes the Archbishop and Primat did accompany
the King in this expedition, who after these happy exploits, returned to Toledo,
whereas the Queenes attended him.
In the meane time D. Iames King of Arragon,Arragon. being discontented that the Castillans
had attempted to inuade the Moores vpon the marches of his conquest, according to
the diuision which had beene made by the Popes order, entred into Castille by his fronter,
where he did some spoile towards Soria, and therefore the peace was like to breake
betwixt these two Kingdomes: yet the King D. Fernand beeing come to Cuenca, the
two Kings were reconciled, and had a friendly enterview there, yet the King of Castille,
to the preiudice of Arragon, had receiued Zeit Abenzit King of Valencia to fealty
and homage, as his vassal, who beeing terrified with the great power of the Christians,
and mooued by the example of the King of Baeca was come to the King D. Fernand
to Cuenca.
In the yeere 1224. there was a new army raised,M^^res. and led into Andalusia,An. 1224. which committed
great spoiles, and tooke Andujar and Mortos, with many forts and castles of smal
fame, finding no resistance in field.

And in the yeere 1225. the Christians army was lead againe into the Marches of Andalusia,
being drawn thether by their good successe, the King affecting nothing more then
this Moorish warre, wherein he tooke exceeding delight. In which expedition Xadar
was taken, and other inestimable harmes done vnto the Infidels. Of the fruits of this war
the Knights of Calatraua, had Martos, for them and their successors: then was there in
Spaine, Legat for Pope Honorius the third, Iohn Abbatis Villa, Bishop, Cardinal Sabina
who perswaded the King of Castille,An. 1226. not to suffer the Moores in quiet, but to presse
them whilst they were wauering: wherefore in the yeere 1226. the army of Castille assembled
at Toledo, was lead into Andalusia, where they tooke from the Moores Saint
Esteuan, Exnatoraphe, and the Tower of Albep, or Albezo, and be^ieged Iaen, which
they could not take,Christians in pay with the Morres against the King of Castile. for the towne was great, and well fortified with men, and all things
necessary for the warre. In it was D. Aluar Perez de Castro, a banished man of Castille,
with 160. horse Christians.
Wherfore the king D. Fernand, raysing his siege went to Priego, where there were many
knights of the Almohades lodged,Exploits of the Christians against the Moores. who were very rich; the town was taken by assault, and
soone after the castle yeelded by co^position. After which, the Christians tooke Loxa, and
hauing taken great spoiles, and many prisoners in those places, they came and camped
at Alhambra, which was a strong place, seated vpon a steepe rocke: but the Moores
were so amazed, as without any resistance they abandoned their goods and fled to Granado:
whereby it seemes, that that part of the fort of Granado, which is called Alhambra
was built and peopled by these Moores;Granada and Alhambra. for after that time the towne of Granado,
began to be wonderfully peopled with Moores, which were chased from such towns and
places as the Christians did win in Andalusia. The fort of Alhambra being spoiled; the
Christian army did ouerrun the champian country of Granado, burning and destroying
al they found, with great slaughter of the Moores, amongst the which there died a famous
captaine, called Harippus, a great enemy to the Christians, and who had done them
much harme the yeeres before. The Christians approched so neere vnto the city of Granado,
as the Moores ^earing to be besieged, or that they wold spoile their goodly building
there abouts, compounded and did homage to the King D. Fernand, deliuering him
1300. Christian captiues, which they held. This composition was treated by Aluaro
Peres de Castro, aboue mentioned, whom the King D. Fernand receiued then into grace.
And thinking he had done ynough, he returned with this victorious army to Toledo. D.
Roderigo Ximenes did not willingly loose any one of these voiages, yet he could not bee
present at this last, by reason of a sicknesse, which surprized him at Guadalfajar, so as hee
gaue his troupes to D. Dominike Bishop of Plaisance, with power to execute his Episcopal
charge in the campe. So did the Prelats in those daies labour in the Lords vineyard,
as many doe also in this age. The Garrisons left by the King at Martos, Andujar, and
other places of the fronter, among the which was D. Aluar Peres the commander, and the
maister of the Order of Calatraua beganne to spoile the territories of Seuile, whereas
there raigned a mighty Moore,Moores of Seuile de^cat^d* called Abullalle or Aben Lalle, who hauing drawne a
great number of soldiars out of Seuile, Xeres, Carmona and Eccia, came and charged
these Christians, who were neither amazed nor weake; wherefore they did not onely
withstand the Moores valiantly, but did wholy defeat them, so as there were 20000.
slaine vpon the place, yet the Moores hauing repaired their forces, besieged the castle
of Garces, and notwithstanding that the Christians, which were nere, did attempt to succor
it, and that the King D. Fernand with D. Lope Dias de Haro, with many other knights,
did aduance to raise the siege, yet the place was taken: wherefore the King D. Fernand
came to Exaldalulla, whether the King of Baeca came vnto him, being accompanied
with 3000. horse Almohades* and Alarabes, and a great number of foote* offring both
himselfe and his men to doe him seruice.14 Aben Mahomad King of Ba^sa^puts ^im selfe vnder the protection of the king of Castille. He was welcome to the King, and entertained
with al signes of friendship. These Princes being together, they made an accord, by the
which the King of Baeca promised to deliuer vnto the King of Castille, the castiles of Saluatierra,
Burgalhimar, and Capilla; vpon condition the King of Castille should take him
and his country into his protection, and defend him against al menifor assurance of the deliuery
of which places, it was agreed that the castle of Baeca shold be presently giuen in

pawne to the King of Castille, the which he should yeeld vp againe, when hee should be
in possession of the sayd three castles. Burgalhimar was presently deliuered; and 15. daies
after Saluatierra (yet with some difficulty) receiued a garrison of Castille: but Capilla, a
place in the Archbishoprike of Toledo, strong by nature, beeing built vpon a rocke,
would not obay, wherfore three months being spent in treaties and parlees, and nothing
concluded, the King returned to Toledo, leauing the fronter well manned; and winter
being past, he came and laied siege to Capilla, being stil seized of the castle of Baeca: this
place was obstinatly defended by the Moores which were rebels to Aben Mahomad, who
furnished the campe with victuals from Cordoua, whether he was retired, shewing him
selfe faithful in al things to the King D. Fernand. In the end Capilla was yeelded, vpon
condition they should depart with ther baggage, and then the King returned to Toledo,
sixe weekes after his departure. Soone after hee had newes that the Moores, subiects
to Aben Mahomad, incensed at the submission which hee had made vnto the King
of Castille, and that hee had sent victuals vnto the campe before Capilla, were rebelled
against him, and had forced him to flie to the castle of Almodauat del Rio, whereas
thinking to enter, he was preuented and slaine by two Moores, who had carried his head
to Aben Lalle,Traytors iustly punished. King of Seuille. These murtherers thinking to haue done an act very
pleasing to this Moorish King, and expecting some good recompence, were deceiued,
for the King of Seuile caused both their heads to bee cut off, and cast vnto the dogges.
This happened in the yeere 1227.An. 1227. at that time died Lewis the eight, the French King,
father to Saint Lewis, and husband to the Queene D. Blanche of Castille. This Lady
by the will of the King her husband, was left Regent of the realme of France, during the
minority of the King her sonne, who was but twelue yeeres old: wherewith many Noblemen
of France being discontented, banded against her, to dispossesse her of the gouernment;
thinking it vnworthy the name of the French, and ominous for their Estate,
to be gouerned by a woman, especially a stranger. The chiefe of the conspirators
were Philip Earle of Bologne the Kings vncle, Peter Duke of Brittan, Hugh de la March,
Robert d' Eureux, RaymondTroubles in France for the Gouernment. of Tolousa, and Thybauld of Champagne, who was King of
Nauarre: but the Queene, who it may bee found they had more regard to their priuate
interests, then to the publike good, resisted them courragiously, beeing supported by other
Noblemen of France, so as from words they fell to armes. Vpon this occasion
the King D. Fernand was sollicited to succor the Queene D. Blanche his aunt, against the
Rebels, whereof he excused himselfe; although hee seemed to be much greeued for her
distresse: But hee was then so ingaged in warre against the Moore, as it was impossible
for him to deuide his forces: but you must obserue that by the right of succession the
realme of Castille did belong vnto her, the which D. Fernand did hold, so as there was
little loue betwixt them. Afterwards all succeeded to the Queenes desire in France, who
made frustrate her enemies deseignes, as the French Histories report, gouerning the
realme, and breeding vp her sonne vnder the discipline of the religious of Saint Dominike
and St. Francis, who were then in great credit. The King of Baeca being slaine as we
haue sayd, new difficulties did arrise for the King of Castille, for the Moores of Baeca
being aduertised thereof,Baesa Castle besieged by the Moores. they presently put themselues in armes, and began to assault
the castle, the which was garded by the maister of the Knights of the Calatraua: who
whilst hee defended himselfe valiantly, aduertised the King of his distresse, who poasted
thither, hauing in his company. D. Aluaro Peres de Castro, and other knights. The brute of
his comming did strike such a terror into these mutinous Moores, as they dislodged before
they saw him, and fled to Grenado, as they also of Martos did: they coniecture that
these did people the Albaycin of Grenado: the King put D. Lope Dias de Haro, Lord of
Biscay,Great church of Toledo built by the Archbishop D. Roderigo. in garrison into Baeca, and into Martos D. Aluaro Peres de Castro, and D. Tell^ Alphonso
de Meneses and others in other places, and so returned to Toledo, whereas that
yeer the Archbishop D. Roderigo Ximenes, began to build the great church, as it is at this
present, different fro^ that form it was of before, when it was a Mosquee for the Moores.
15 In Arragon the expedition of Majorca was decreed 1228.Arragon. this Island was held by
the Moores,An. 1228. and their King Abohibe, whom others call, Retabo^mhe, who did incessantly
spoile the sea, and the coast of Spaine, without any pretext, and did impudently mocke

at the King of Arragon when hee complained of the thefts and robberies committed by
him or his men.Estates of Arragon make warre and peace and al Leagues, Author. H. Surite For this cause, at the Estates assembled at Barcelona, and they consenting
and requiring it, according to the customes and preuiledges of the Arragonois and Cattelans,
a war was resolued against this King of the Moores, and the Majorkins: for the
which there were 155. vessels of al sorts prepared, the which transported the army to Palombara:
the chiefe commanders were, D. Berengaire Palo^x, Bishop of Barcelona, D.
Nugno of Arragon, Earle of Rossillon, William of Moncade; Lord of Berne, William Raymond
of Moncade his cousin, Geoffry of Roccabertin, Oliuer Thermes, William of Saint
Martin, Gerard Ceruillon, Raymond Allemand, William of Clermont, Hugues Mataplane,
William of Saint Vincent, Raymond Belloc, Bernard Centillas, William Palafogi^, Berengaire
of Saint Eugene, and other great and valiant Noblemen of Arragon and Cattelogne:
the first which leaped to land; was one named Bernard Argentone. At their first aboard
the Arragonois were incountred, and sharply repulsed by the Moores, with the losse of
the Lord of Bear^y, of D. Raymond his cousin, Hug^es of Mataplane, and many other
knights and good souldiars which were slaine vpon the place: but when as the whole army
was landed, and had better meanes to discouer both the enemies and the country,
the Moores were beaten backe into their towne, and besieged: the which was
with great dilligence and fury battered and assaulted; notwithstanding the siege was long
and difficult; for it continued fifteene monthes, til in the end after much toile and losse,
the city of Majorca came into the power of the Arragonois,Maiorca taken from the Moores. hauing beene valiantly and
obstinatly defended by the Moores: the King Abohibe, and a son of his, and many Moores
were slaine in this warre, and the city of Majorca forced: the spoile thereof was diuided
by the Bishops of Barcelona and Lerida, by the Earles D. Nugno of Rossillon, D. Ponce
Hug^es of Empurias, D. Pedro Cornel, and Symon Vrrea: but whether they shewed themselues
partial in this diuision, or for some other occasion, the soldiars mutined, and spoiled
the tents and baggage of these Bishops and Noblemen: al the Island being won, except
some mountaines and forests, whether the remainder of the Moores which had escaped
were retired,Nomination of the Bishop of Maiorca. Majorca was made subiect for the spiritualty, to the Bishop of Barcelona,
but in such sort as it should haue a particular bishop, which was then named by
the King: which bishop beeing dead, the nomination should belong to the bishop and
Chapter of Barcelona, who sayd this right had beene long due vnto them. The first that
was named to this dignity, was D. Raymond Torelta: an other son of the King of Majorcas,
was a while after baptized, and was named Iames; he married a lady of the family of
Alagon, daughter to D. Martin Rouland Alagon: from him is descended the house of
Gottorio, so called of the place which was giuen in fee to this Prince of the Moores, by
the King D. Iames; his sonne was Blasco Gottorio, and of him was begotten Michel Peres
Gottorio. They of Minorca being terrefied, by the taking of Majorca, offred tribut to the
King of Arragon; and not long after D. William Mongeri conquered the Island of Yuisa,
sometimes called Ebusus and the Islands of Fromentaria and Cabrera, yeelded also
through feare. They hold that there were in armes in these Islands, during this warre, about
40000. Moores footemen, and 50000 horse. The Earldome of Vrgel hauing beene
long in sute, betwixt William of Moncade, Lord of Bearn, togither with Ponce Cabrera, and
Arembiaxis, daughter to Armingol the last Earle of Vrgel, in the end, sentence was giue^
of her side, who was married to D. Pedro of Portugal, son to the King D. Sancho the first,
to which married couple, the King D. Iames did afterwards giue in exchange of the Earldome
of Vrgel, the Islands of Majorca and Yuisa, to hold them during their liues, and
many places in Cattelogne in propriety. Notwithstanding the county of Vrgel returned
sometime after to D. Ponce de Cabrera, and the Islands Pytieuses, Yuisa and Fromentaria,
were giuen in fee to the Archbishop of Tarragone.
In the same yeere 1228.Moores. D. Tello Alphonso de Meneses, and other captaines Castillans,
commanders of the garrisons vpon the Moores frontiers, went to field, and ouerran the
territory of Seuile about Baena,King of Seuile a Moore, tributary to the King of Castilele. Lucena and Castro del Rio: and Aben Lalle, King of Seuile,
assailed the Christians, towards Biuoras, Baeca and Martos, seeking to diuert them
which forraged his country: the King D. Fernand arriuing, the Moore fainted, and made
himself his tributary, promising to pay him three hundred thousand Marauidis of gold.

The death of Aben Mahomad King of Baeca, gaue way to the raigne of Aben Hut
who was of the race of the Kings of Saragossa, and enemy of the faction of the Almohades:
this King seized vpon the fort of Ricot, in the realme of Murcia, and tooke occasion
of their religion, publishing that that which the Almohades had brought in, was
false,Aben Hut King of Murcia abolisheth the sect of Almohades in Spaine. and inuented by wicked, turbulent and mutinous persons, whose rash impiety the
soueraigne God had shewed was displeasing vnto him, by their vnfortunate euents in
the late warres of Spaine: wherefore they must returne to the simple beliefe of their
auncestors, and reiect that prophane Almohade, with his King Abdelmon, and their followers.
Vpon this quarrel hee intitled himselfe King of Murcia, and beganne to persecute
the sect of the Almohades, so as all hee could get into his hands, he put to a miserable
death; hee caused the Mesquites or Mesgides to bee purified, and washed, with
exorcismes and superstitious ceremonies, as hauing beene poluted and violated, in seruing
the new sect of the Almohades.
So vnder collour of restoring the ancient beliefe and knowledge of the law of Mahomet,
hee was wonderfully followed, and was respected, feared and honoured, as King in
the realme of Murcia and part of Andalusia, the country of Granado, Almery, Cordoua
and Eccia: yet hee found Zael who made head against him, a Moore who had newly
vsurped the realme of Valencia, and chased away Zeit Aben Zeit, for that they sayd hee
had laied a plot with the Pope, and the King of Arragon, to become a Christian, and
that hee had had conference to that end with the King D. Iames at Calatajub, whither
hee had also carried his sonne. This Zael was sonne to Modef and Nephew to King
Lobo: Aben Lalle King of Seuile made the like resistance, yet Aben Hut troubled them
all, and tooke from them a part of their countries, so as hee became the most powerfull
of all the Kings of the Moores in Spaine, beeing otherwise a bountifull Prince, and a
good Iusticer. The new sect of the Almohades was thus rooted out by him, and the
ancient interpretation of their Alphurcan restored in Spaine, eighty and one yeeres after
that Almohad, had past.
Yet the first attempt he made against the Christians,Leon. succeeded but il; for D. Alphonso
King of Leon, being in the country of Extremadura, where he had made warre, whilst
that D. Fernand his sonne did ouerrunne Andalusia and their tooke the townes of badajos,
Caceres and others, this King of the Moores presumed to dislodge him from
Merida, before the which hee was camped, to which end hee came towards him with a
mighty army: King D. Alphonso notwithstanding that hee was very old, gaue him battaile,
and defeated this King of the Moores, forcing him to saue himselfe by flight: and
returning to the siege, he tooke the towne of Merida, in the yeere 1229. which was the
last of his exploits: for being now very old, and much broken, he died soone after, in the
yeere 1230. at Villanoua of Sarrio, hauing raigned forty and foure yeeres in Leon Galicia
and the Asturies: whose body was interred at Saint Iames.
16 The King D. Fernand who was then in Andalusia,Castille and Leon vnited. at the siege of Daralferza, being
aduertized of his fathers death, tooke councell of the Noblemen which were with
him in the army; who were all of opinion, that hee should goe with all speed into the
realme of Leon, which by hereditary right did belong vnto him, before his sisters children
did seize thereon, who pretended an equall right with him: for so had the King D.
Alphonso ordained by his will, to preiudice his sonne D. Fernand, whom hee had alwaies
hated and pursued to the death; yea a little before hee died, hee sought to marry
his daughter Donna Sancha to D. Iames King of Arragon, who by the decree of Pope
Honorius the third, had put away D. Elenor of Castille his wife. Don Alphonso
offring to giue in dowry with the Infanta the Realmes of Leon, Galicia and the
Asturies, after his decease, to depriue the King of Castille his sonne, but his death preuented
the effect:D. Fernand King of Castille takes possession of the realme of Leon. wherefore the king D. Fernand following this good councel, came
to Toledo, to passe from thence into Leon; vpon the way, hee met with the Queene
D. Berenguela, his mother, at Orgaz, who came to hasten him, and returned with
him to Toledo: from thence hee went with speed into the territories of Leon, where
hee was receiued and acknowledged in all places where hee past for their lawfull King,
vnto the city of Toro, which did him all the honour hee could desire, hauing sent their

Deputies to meete him vpon the way, in the which hee was proclaimed King of
Leon.
In the beginning the other towns and castles did not allow of this election of them of
Toro, by reason of the Infants D. Sancha and D. Dulce Douce, who would in the confidence
which they had in their cause, dispute their interest and put it to the triall of law:
but all well considered D. Alphonsos will tooke no effect; for D. Fernand was sonne
and right heire to these realmes before the daughters, who were forced to agree
with their brother, and had 30000. doublons euery yeere during their liues. This accord
betwixt the King Don Fernand and the Infantes of Leon his Sisters; was
wrought and concluded betwixt the Queenes D. Berenguela the Kings mother,
and D. Theresa, mother to the Infants: after that the King had beene crowned in
Leon, the chiefe city of the Kingdome, in the presence of the Bishops D. Iohn of Oueydo,
D. Roderigo of Leon, D. Nugno of Astorga, D. Martin of Salamanca, D. Michel of
Cite Roderigo and D. Sancho of Coria. By this accord the King D. Fernand did peaceably
enioy the Realmes of Leon, Galicia, and the Asturiaes, hauing raigned thirteene yeeres
in Castille, the re-union of which Estates made this yeere, 1230. 73. yeeres after their
last diuision, hath remained firme euer since, without any further seperation. From
Leon, the King came to Beneuent, whereas the Infantaes his sisters met him, and there
did ratifie the accord made by the two Queenes, renouncing all pretensions to the sayd
Realmes, and to the testament made by the King D. Alphonso their father. Then the
King went to visit the Prouinces, Townes and Forts of his Kingdomes, where without
any contradiction he was receiued and intertained with great ioy and acclamation of the
people, as it was fit.
This death of the King of Leon, fell out happely for D. Fernand, to couer his retreat
from Daralferza, with some honourable pretext. In the meane time they made
light skirmishes, with the taking and recouering of castles, vpon the fronters of Toledo
and Andalusia.
In the yeere of our Lord 1231.An. 1231. Quesada was recouered by the Christians, and
for a reward of their valour, in recouering thereof, was giuen to the church of Toledo,
but it was afterwards lost and recouered againe diuers times. The King of Castille
continuing his warre,Adelantamien. to of Casorla giuen to the Church of T^^ledo. there was established vpon that fronter, that which they call
Adelantamiento of Casorla, by the taking of Pilos, Toya, Lacra, Agozino, Font
Iulian, Tour de Lago, Higuera, Maulula, Arcola, Dos Hermanas, Villa Montin,
Niebla, Casorla, Concha and Chelis, all which places were by prodigality
and inconsiderate zeale (altogether vsed in those religious times) giuen (in a religious
acknowledgement to the Apostolike Sea) by the King D. Fernand to the Archbishops
of Toledo, the which the haue enioyed vnto the assumption of the Cardinall
D. Iohn Tauera to the Arch-bishoprike, who gaue this country to the Marquis
of Camaraca, whose successour Don Iohn M^rtine; Silesio Cardinal, had
by reason thereof great and earnest sute against the Church of Toledo; but
notwithstanding that the Church had diuers sentences (by reason of the great sway
the Church of Rome bore at that same time) in its fauour, yet could they neuer
gette possession of any of those places, for certaine speciall reasons which are not
specified.
17 At that time the realmes of Naples and Sicile were held by the Emperour Frederic
the second, who married Yoland, the onely daughter of Iohn de Brenne, who
called himselfe king of Ierusalem (which is the reason why the Kings of Naples and
Sicile haue euer since intitled themselues Kings of Ierusalem) by which alliance they
vnited the titles of Naples, Sicile and Ierusalem, which the descendentes of this Noble
Princesse haue carried.
This Iohn of Brenne beeing chosen chiefe Generall of the Westerne succours,
which by the procurement of the councell of Latran went into the Country of Syria,
and obtained amongst them the first and soueraigne degree, and was called King
of Acre or Ptolemaide: yet hee did neuer hold the city of Ierusalem: but hauing
neede of greater forces to resist the Turkes and enemies of our faith, hee was forced

to returne againe into Europe to sollicit the Christian Princes to assist him. Beeing
arriued into Italie, hee married his daughter as wee haue sayd, and then passed
into Sapine, in the yeere of our Lord 1232. to visit the sepulcher of Saint Iames,
which was a pilgrimage of greatest merit after that of Ierusalem. Passing through
Castille, hee was receiued with great honour by the King D. Fernand, who in confirmation
of their friendship, gaue him D. Berenguela, his sister by father and mother in
marriage.
The Realme of Nauarre was at that time but ill gouerned by reason of the Kings
sollitary life,Nauarre. who was retired and did not speake with any man, but his houshold seruants,
and would not heare of any affaires. This mischiefe was increased by the death
of D. Ramir his brother, Bishop of Pampelone, who by his authority and respect
might something haue restrained them that would haue troubled the state, were
they home-bred or strangers: wherefore about the yeere of our Lord 1231. D. Lope
Diaz. Lord of Biscay, who had some lands in the soueraignty of Nauarre, prouoked
and supported by D. Fernand King of Castille, hee found an occasion to commit some
spoiles in the Kingdome.
18 On the other side Thybauld Earle of Champagne, pretending right to the
sayd realme by his mother D. Blanche,Impatiency of cont ^hybau^d of Champaigne to raigne. daughter to the King D. Sancho the wise, had
secret practises and Intelligences in Nauarre, to bee admitted to the Regency of the
realme, during the life of King D. Sancho the retired: whereof hee being aduertised, after
great negligence, in the end hee beganne to discouer it, to his great preiudice, wherefore
beeing much discontented at these attempts, both of the King of Castille, and of
the Earle of Champaigne, he resolued to frustrat both of their pretentions, and to be reuenged,
especially of the King of Castille; he therefore gaue D. Iames King of Arragon
to vnderstand, that hee had some matters to impart vnto him, which would redound
greatly to his proffit: and therefore he intreated him to come to Tudele, excusing himselfe
that hee had not come vnto him, by reason of the indisposition of his person:
The King of Arragon fayled not to come to Tudele: and for that the King of Nauarre
could not stirre out of his chamber, hee entred into the castle, where they conferred
together.
The King D. Sancho complayning much of D. Fernand King of Castille, that not
content to hold the Lands which his predecessors had wrested from him, had againe
inuaded and spoiled his country, hee demanded his aduice and helpe to bee reuenged:
and hauing in like manner discoursed of the disobedience and little respect of Thybauld
Earle of Champagne, who had attempted to play the King in Nauarre in his life time,
hee concluded, that if hee would make a firme alliance with him, and betwixt Nauarre
and Arragon, to inuade the realme of Castille, and not to cease vntill they had forced
the King D. Fernand to restore the Lands of the riuer of Oja, Bureua, Alaua, and
Guipuscoa, or beeing conquered, to yeeld him the fruits and reuenues thereof, and
to pay the charges of the warre, hee should bee content to harken to a mutuall donation
of both realmes,Vniust accord betwixt the Kings of Nauarre and Arragon. very profitable for the King of Arragon, and his sonne D. Alphonso:
which was, that the suruiuor should inherit both Kingdomes of Nauarre and
Arragon. The King D. Iaime liked well heereof, for hee was in the floure of his age,
and his sonne also likely to liue, whereas the King D. Sancho was aboue threescore and
eight yeeres old, and moreouer hee was so fat, and full of humors, and so tormented
with a canker, as hee expected hourely to leaue this world. This Accord beeing made
betwixt them, they concluded that the troupes of both Realmes should bee ready against
the next yeere, and should meet at the Rendezuous in May. The King D. Sancho
desired nothing more then to recouer the Prouince of Guipuscoa, imagining that
since the separation thereof,The^^a a chief^ commodity to a country. the realme of Nauarre had lost one of the chiefe commodities
which a country may haue that lies vpon the sea.
The Noblemen and chiefe of the King D. Sanchos councell at this accord were
D. Garcia Almora^id, D. Sancho Fernandes of Montague, D. William Baudouin,
and D. William Iustice of Tudele, which is a principall dignitie. These and
other Noblemen, with the Deputies of the Townes of Nauarre, signed the

conuention and accord betwixt these two kings: the which the Noblemen of Arragon,
which held the chiefe charges, did in like manner: among the which are named D. Pedro
Fernandes d' Acagra Lord of Albarazin, Athon de Foces L. Steward, William de Moncade,
Roderigo Liz^nes, Artal de Lune, Simon Vrrea, Blasco Maza, Pedro Peres Iustice Maior of
Arragon, and Pedro Sanches Secretarie of State in Arragon. For the defraying of this
warre, D. Sancho was forced to imploy his treasure, which was very great: for hauing liued
long in this solitarie life, hee might easily gather together, hauing no cause of expence.
He therefore deliuered to the king of Arragon, an hundred thousand solz of gold,
that is to say, Crownes or Ducats, in loane, and aduance, and had in pawne, Herreta, Pegnaretonda,
Ferrelon, and Faxine: and as he was wise and very iudicious in matters of war,
he disposed what should be done in the beginning: but the loue of his treasure spoiled all:
besides at such time as the army was to march against Castile, newes came vnto the king
of Arragon, that the Iland of Maiorca had rebelled: wherefore beeing more carefull to
keepe his owne, then to take from another, he made vse of those souldiers which hee had
leauied for the warre of Castile, and led them into Majorca, so as the king of Nauarre
found himself too weake to attempt any thing against Castile, whereas the Earle D. Lope
d' Haro was in armes to fight with him at the passage. He was of opinion that the King
D. Iames had mocked him, so as falling into a great rage, he wold breake the accord which
they had made. King Iames was aduertized of all that he sayd and did, by some Knights of
Nauarre, which were false vnto their Prince, and discontented with this strange and disdainfull
manner of liuing, of the which D. Pedro Ximenes of Valtierra was one. The warre
of Majorca beeing soone ended, the king Don Iames returned to Tudele to excuse himselfe,
and to offer satisfaction hereafter, yea to furnish 2000. horse, with other forces
for the warre of Castile, but the King Don Sancho would by no meanes enter into conference
with him. Moreouer, Don Garcia Almorauid and Don Iohn Peres de Barzan, captaines
of the armie, which was vppon the frontiers of Castile, beeing in sight of the enemie,
were reduced to th^t extremitie by Don Lope Diaz de Haro,Spies in the Kings Councell as they feared euery day
they should be forced to fight, he neglected both them and all they did: and they write,
that a Gentleman beeing sent from them to acquaint the king with the estate of their affaires,
and to demand two hundred horse of Supply, with the which they should be able
to giue battell vnto the Castillans, he attended foure dayes, and could neither haue entry
nor audience.Strange beh^uior of Don Sancho the Grosse in his age. This strange and disdainfull behaniour caused the king Don Iames to returne
into Arragon much discontented, whereupon the Castillans spoyled Nauarre, the
which he might easily haue preuented, whereuppon he grew wayward, and insupportable
euen to his houshold seruants, who could not please him. This waywardnesse and distemperature,
together with the burthen of a repleate and ill-disposed bodie, his long incurable
disease,1234. together with his many yeares, brought him to his graue, in the yeare 1234.
hauing raigned nine and thirty yeares, nine moneths, and ten dayes. He was buried in the
royall Monasterie of the Chanoins of Saint Mary of Ronceuaux, the which hee himselfe
had caused to be built.


D. Thibault first of that name, the 22. King
of Nauarre.
1^ THe Nauarrois sent into France to Thibault Earle of Champagne, the sonne of D.
Blanche, sister to the deceased king, to aduertise him of this succession, and to aduise
him to make hast, before that Don Iames King of Arragon should seaze thereon, in vertue
of the pretended rights, by reason of the mutuall donation past betwixt the two kings
at Tudele, and also by meanes of the intelligences which he had within the Countrey:
wherein the Earle was nothing slouthfull, for hauing many partizans in Nauarre, who
had aduertised him of all that had past betwixt the two kings, and in the end of the death
of his vncle. The Ambassadors found him alreadie in order, and readie to march towards
Nauarre, where he arriued happily, for the well effecting of his desfeigne, by reason of

some lets which restrained the King Don Iames, the which were more fitting for him to
care for, then to pursue the donation made vnto him in preiudice of the right heire of
that Crowne, without any reason or proportion, by a king troubled with violent passions
both of body and mind. But it is very certaine, that the king of Arragon did little respect
it: yea some haue written, that without any difficulty, he discharged the Nauarrois (they
requiring it) of the oath, fealty and homage, which they had sworne, when as the contract
betwixt him and the deceased king D. Sancho, was past at Tudele: others say, that afterwards
he gaue all his pretensions and right to D. Pedro his sonne,Thibault Earle of Champaine obtaines the Realme of Nauarre. to pursue it when oportunitie
did serue, as a matter whereof there was but small hope. Thus D. Thibault Earl
of Champagne, was receiued, proclaimed, and crowned King of Nauarre, to the great
ioy and content of all good Nauarrois.
The king of Arragon was then by the aduice of all his faithfull Councellers,Arragon. entred into
the conquest of the Realme of Valencia, hauing a fit oportunity offered, by reason of
the diuisions which were in the kingdome, betwixt the factions of Zeit Aben Zeit, and
Zael or Zaen, which were both strong. This Zeit Aben Zeit seeing himselfe pursued, hee
made open declaration of that which he had long before desseigned,Zeit King of Valence baptized. and making himself
vassal to the king Don Iames, he became a Christian, and was called D. Vincent de Belluis.
He afterwards married a Lady called Dominick Lopes of Sarragossa, of which mariage was
borne a daughter called Alda Fernandes, who was married to Blaice Ximenes d' Arenos.
21 The warre of Valentia beeing resolued, the Generall of the army vnder the king
was D. Blasco Alagon, by whose valour and diligence Morelia was taken; a place which
was held impregnable:VVarre in Valence against the Moo^es. Buriane was also beseeged, and with great difficulty taken: Peniscola,
Chiuert, Ceruera, Polpes, Alcalatena, Albufera, Almenata, Vxo, Noles, Castro,
Alfandecho, Paterna, Bulla and other places, some by force, some by composition, and
partly by the meanes and intelligences which king Zeit had, and by the fauour of such as
held his partie, came into the power of the king D. Iames, so as by degrees hee enuironed
the citty it selfe, cutting off their victuals and all other commodities. In these expugnations
they did then vse rammes, moouing towers with many stages, and other sorts of engins.
The resistance of the Moores which held Zaens partie was very great: neither were
they abandoned of their friends, nor of the kings raigning in Affricke, for twelue gallies,
and sixe vessels called Zabres of Tunez, shewed themselues often, as if they would land,
or assayle the places held by the Arragonois along the coast, but without any effect. The
Estates of Arragon and Cattelogne were assembled at Moncon in the yeare 1236.An. 1236. for the
continuance of this warre,Estates at Mon son for the war of Val^nce. and the conquest of Valencia; without the which it was not
lawfull for the king to vndertake any matter of importance. The President at these estates
was Pedro Perez Iustice maior of Arragon, where there assisted D. William of Montgrin,
co-adiutor to the Arch-bishop of Tarragone, the Bishops of Barcelona, Saragossa, Vic,
and Tortosa, the Master and Prior of the Templers and Hospitaliers, Friar Raymond of
Pegnafort, a most famous Iacobin, Roger Bernard Earle of Foix, and Don Fernand the
kings vncle, D. Ponce Cabrera Earle tutelarie of Vrgel, D. Pedro Vgo Earle of Ampurias,
D. Nugno Sanches Earle of Rossillon, D. Gerard Vicount of Cabrera, D. William of Cardona,
D. William, and Pedro of Moncada, Berenger Pucuert, William and Berenger' Anglesol,
Bernard Portella, Hugues Mataplan, sonne to Hugues, Galserand Pinos, William of
Laquila, Raymond of Peralta, Peter Vicount of Villemuir, Raymond VVilliam Odeua, Berenger
Erille, and William Ceruera, all Knights and Noblemen of Cattelogne. And of the
realme of Arragon, D. Pedro Cornel Lord Steward, Bernard William, Garci Romeo, Symon
Vrrea, Artorella, Artal de Lune, Blasco Alagon, Roderigo Lizana, Blasco Maza B^renger,
Gombald Entenza, Symon de Foces, Assalit Gudalis, Fortun Verga, Simon Lueza and others.
The meanes to defray this warre, besides the Croisados, pardons and indulgences, were
ordayned to be leuied vpon the people, by the Imposition of a custome called Morabetine
and the exaction of the Impost for cattell. In this assembly it was decreed, that all peeces
of gold and siluer coyned, should be of one goodnes and weight, in Arragon and Cattelogne:
to the obseruation of which Edict for coynes, all were bound to sweare, that were
aboue 14. yeares old. During the seege of Valenci^ many Noblemen, and common souldiers
strangers, French and Englsh came to D. Iames his campe.

The Authors of the Arragon Historie write, that the Kings army, at the hottest of the
siege, might bee 60000. foot, and a thousand horse, (meaning Knights and Masters) followed
according vnto the Order and Discipline of warre in those dayes, by their vassalls,
besides the forces at sea, This warre was long, and the seege troublesome: yet it was attempted,
battered and assaulted, and the Moores within it brought to so great extremity,
as Zaen the Vsurper of that Principalitie, beeing not yet well setled nor assured of the
peoples wils,Val^ncia tak^n by the Arragonois. abandoned it, and retired to Denia. The cittie was yeelded the 28. of September,
1238.
The King Don Iames had in the yeare 1232. beene diuorced from D. Elenor of Castile
his wife, and yet had declared D. Alphonso their son, the lawfull heire of the realmes
of Arragon and Maiorca, the lands of Cattelogne, Vrgeil, Montpellier, and others: appointing
for Gouernors of his youth, the Bishop of Tarragone, the Masters or Priors of
the Templers and Hospitaliers, and William Ceruera: ordayning, that he should be bredde
vp at Moncon: and if he should chance to die, then did he substitute vnto his Realmes
and Seigneuries, Don Fernand of Arragon his vncle, and Don Raymond Berenger Earle
of Prouence his cousin. Notwithstanding the king Don Pedro during this warre of Valencia
contracted a new marriage with the daughter of Andrew king of Hungary, named
Violant,Genealogie of Arragon. by whom he had a sonne called D. Pedro, who was king, after him, of Arragon and
Valencia, and Prince of Cattelogne: he had moreouer the Infant Don Iaime, who was
king of Maiorca and Minorca, and Earle of Rossillon and Montpellier, and a third called
Don Sancho, who was Arch-bishop of Toledo, and Primate of Spaine. Hee had also fiue
daughters by her: D. Isabell married to Philip the third King of France, sonne to Saint
Lewis: D. Violant who was Queene of Castile and Leon, wife to D. Alphonso the ninth:
D. Constance married to Don Manuell brother to the sayd D. Alphonso, King of Castile,
D. Mary and D. Elenor who dyed young. The dowrie of Queene Yolant or Violant, as Surites
writes, was ten thousand Markes of siluer, and two hundred of gold, for her mothers
rights,Dowry of Q. Yolant. for the which the Duke of Austria became answerable. Moreouer, a portion of
the County of Namur in Flanders, and the lands and rights which her Predecessors had
enioyed in France, with certaine places which she did then possesse in Hongarie, and others
that were fallen to her in Bourgogne, by her mothers right and succession. This
Princesse was conducted to Barcelona in the yeare 1235. by the Bishop of the fiue Churches,
and a kinsman of his called Cont Denis, who remained in Arragon, and was the
Author of the noble family of Denis, which is vnited to that of Vrrez, hee had two sonnes
Amour and Gabriel Denis. Don Pedro the eldest son of Queene Yolant, was married young
to Constance, daughter to Manfroy, bastard to the Emperour Frederick the second, whom
they called Prince of Tarentum, which was a degree to attaine vnto the succession of the
Realmes of Naples and Sicily,Cattelogne freed from the Soueraignty of France. and by the marriage of his daughter Isabel with Philip the 
Hardy, sonne to Saint Lewis the French king, the Kings of Arragon obtayned (as the histories
of Spain report) a full freedome of the Principalitie of Cattelogne, and Earldome
of Barcelona, to enioy it from that time in full proprietie and Soueraignty, without acknowledging
themselues any more vassals to the Kings of France: the which was done
at Clermont in Auuergne, whereas both Kings met in the yeare 1260. In recompence
the King of Arragon did also quit for his part the rights of Soueraigntie which he pretended
to Carcassone, Rhodes, Beziers, Locate, Albi, Amillaire, Nismes, Saint Giles, and
other lands in France,Dowry of Q. Isabell. the which he assigned in dowrie to his daughter D. Isabel, with the
reuenues of Carcassone and Beziers: and moreouer, he quit all right which he could pretend
to the Earledome of Prouence, Folquaquier, Arles, Auignon and Marseilles, in fauour
of Queene Marguerite of France.
The death of D. Sancho king of Nauarre, the beginning of the warre of Valencia, and
the second marriage of D. Iames King of Arragon, happened all in the yeare 1234. by reason
whereof,Accord betwixt the kings of Castile and Arragon for the diuor^e of Q. Elenor. and to giue order for the affaires of the Infanta D. Elenor, whom he had put
away, by reason of the strict allyance which was betwixt them, according to the Popes
decree, there was an interview of this King of Arragon, and of Don Fernand king of Castile,
in the Monasterie of Huerta, vpon the confines of Castile; where it was accorded,
that the Infant Don Alphonso, whom Don Iames had by Donna Elenor, named King of

Arragon, if he had liued, should remaine in the custodie of the Queene his mother, to
whom for an increase of her dowrie,The King of Arragon ask^^^ pard^n of the Pope. the towne of Hariza was giuen, to enioy it during
her life, but in case shee should marry againe, then should it returne to Arragon. These
and other things being friendly accorded betwixt the two kings, they parted with great
loue, to make warre against the Moores, euery one apart. Some haue left in writing, that
D. Theresa of Bidaure, with whom the King D. Iames had had familiar acquaintance, before
he married the Queene D. Yolant, and had children by her, sued him vppon a promise
of marriage before the Pope, where she lost it for want of proofes, and D. Yolant
was declared his lawfull wife. There the Bishop of Girone then the kings Confessor (hauing
vnderstood by his confession of this matrimoniall promise) had reuealed it vnto
Pope Innocent the fourth, but to what end he did it, it is vncertaine: but his testimonie
alone was not allowed. The king beeing wonderfully incensed against the Bishop, hauing
sent for him into his chamber, caused his toung to be cut out. For this outrage committed
vpon the Bishop, notwithstanding that he were faultie, hauing reuealed the Kings
confession, the Pope made great complaints, being at the Councell of Lyons, and in the
end did interdict all the Realme of Arragon, and excommunicate the king D. Iames. To
free them from this interdiction, and to get absolution, the king sent the Bishop of Valencia
vnto the Pope to carry his excuse, and to make an humble petition, wherewith the
Pope beeing somewhat pacified, he yeelded to send two Legates into Arragon with full
power. Hauing assembled a Synode of Bishops at Lerida, they caused the king to come
thither, who confessed his fault vppon his knees before these Fathers, with great submission
and teares: who gaue him absolution, vpon condition, that he should cause the Monastery
of Bienface, neere vnto Tortosa to be built, (the which hath beene since a Conuent
of Chartrous Monkes) and to indow it with and hundred and forty pounds of siluer
of annuall rent. And moreouer, that he should endow the hospitall of Saint Vincent of
Valencia, with foure hundred pounds waight of siluer by the yeare for the nourishment
of the poore: and that he should giue a Prebendarie to the great Church of Girone, for
the maintenance of a Masse-priest: Then fell he to the loue of this ladie againe, and entertayned
her during the life of his Queene D. Violant.
23 As for the king D. Fernand,Castile and Moores. he was affronted with the power of king Aben-Hut,
who was mightie: but seeing his forces increased by the succession of the Realmes of
Leon, which were fallen vnto him, he was in hope to effect his desseignes. Wherefore he
assayled him towards Baeca which he held, and went and layed seege to Vbeda, a neere
towne, strong, and well fortified, yet he prest them in such sort, as the Garrison compounded
to depart with their liues: into the which the king D. Fernand entred the same
yeare 1234. in the which his fortunes were seasoned with some bitternesse, according to
the condition of humane things: for he lost the Queene D. Beatrix his wife, who died in
Toro in the kingdome of Leon: her body was carryed to the Monasterie of las Huelgas
of Burgos, and buried neere vnto the king D. Henry. Vpon this subiect the king D. Fernand
came into the territories of Leon: during his absence the garrisons vppon the fronter
tooke certaine Moores Almogaueres (for so they call their Mortepaiez) of the cittie
of Cordoua:Cordoua surprised by the Christians. and for that they were in quarrell with the Inhabitants thereof, they were
easily corrupted, promising to giue entry to the Christians into the cittie of Cordoua.
The plot be^ing layd, and all things disposed accordingly, there came a good troupe of
Christians in the night with ladders, the which they planted vnto the wall neere vnto the
tower and Bourg, called Axarquia, where by the helpe and fauor of those Moores whom
they had wonne, Aluaro, Colodro, and Benoist of Bagnos entred first, beeing well followed
by their companions, without any discouerie of them of the towne, who slept
without feare or apprehension vntill the morning, when as they saw the Christians had
seazed vpon the tower, and there did fortifie themselues, attending succors from Don
Aluar Perez, whom they had sent vnto beeing at Martos, vppon their entry: and as men
expecting some great resistance, they had also sent to aduertise the King Don Fernand of
their enterprize and happie successe, to the end he should approch neere to fauour them.
The Moores of Cordoua seeing themselues surprized, went to armes, and beseeged the
Christians in this tower, where they defended themselues: the combate was furious, and

often renewed, euery one doing his best indeauour, wherein they spent some dayes, yet
could they not chase the Christians out of the tower, which they had intrenched from
the rest of the towne. In the meane time, the king D. Fernand aduanced with all speed, giuing
order for the rest of his forces to follow, and passing by Extremadura, neere vnto
Bienguerencia, the Gouernor a Moore, furnished the kings armie with victuals as it past,
yet beeing summoned to deliuer the fort vnto the king, he made answer, that when he had
taken Cordoua, it should be at his commandement, and in the meane time he would keep
it: Wherefore the king of Castile passed on, and arriuing at Cordoua, hee found that D.
Aluaro Perez de Castro, and other Captaines and souldiers in great numbers, were already
come to succour his men. King Aben Hut beeing aduertised of all these things, and
of D. Fernands arriuall with small forces, although there came great troupes afterwards,
thought it fit to preuent him, if he could, or at the least to strike some terror into the Christians,
and force them to retire from this seege. He had in his armie which lay about Eccia,
a Christian Knight,D. Laurence Suarez betrays king Aben Hut who had entertained him in his exile. a banished man called D. Laurens Suares. Hauing imparted his
desseigne vnto him, he resolued to send him one night vnto the campe, vnder colour of
seeking to recouer the kings fauour: but it was to espie, and to discouer vnto him the true
estate of the Christians armie. This Knight hauing obtained a pasport, came vnto the
campe, and spake vnto the king, doing the contrarie to that which he had in charge: for
he discouered vnto the King D. Fernand, all the Moores desseignes, and what forces hee
had: wherefore beeing assured from the king, of his grace and fauour, he retired to Aben
Hut, to whom he concealed what he had seene and vnderstood, telling him that the Christians
army was much stronger then it was indeed. Wherefore king Aben Hut durst not
attempt that which he had resolued, and thinking that they of Cordoua wold hold good
for a time, he resolued to employ his forces to succour king Zaen, who was prest by the
king of Arragon towards Valencia, thinking after that he had repulsed the Arragonois,
to returne fortified with Zaens forces, and cause the Christians to retire from before
Cordoua. Beeing arriued at Almery, to imbarke his army, a vassall of his, whom hee did
much esteeme, called Aben Arramin, inuited him to supper, where he so feasted him, as
beeing drunke, he cast him into a great vessell full of water, and there drowned him: wherupon
the army disbanded, and D. Laurence Suarez whom king Aben Hut had ledde with
him, retired to the king of Castile, who receiued him graciously, notwithstanding that he
had betrayed him who had entertayned him during his exile. This death of this Moorish
king,Cordoua yelded 1236. beeing generally knowne, especially at Cordoua, the beseeged despayred of succors,
so as they yeelded the cittie vnto the king of Castile, the sixt moneth of the seege, in the
yeare 1236, which was 522. yeares after that it had beene first taken by the Moores. The
king Don Fernand caused a crosse to be set vppon the tower of the great Mesquide, in token
of our redemption, and neere vnto it the standard of Castile, which Mesquide was
purified (beeing one of the goodliest buildings in Spaine) and made the Cathedrall
Church,D Lope de Hitero first Bishop of Cordoua of the which Don Lope de Hitero of Picuerga was made bishop. The king did
indow it with rents and reuenues like the rest, and so did the Arch-bishop Don Roderigo
in his returne from Rome, where he had beene during the seege, and was not at the taking
thereof, of his great griefe, but affaires of greater Importance had kept him absent: in
the meane time Don Iohn Bishop of Osma was his Vice-gerent and Chancelor to the
King. There the bells of Saint Iames were found, which the Alhagib Almancor had taken
away in the yeare 975. and placed them in this great Mosquee, making them to serue for
lampes, which the king Don Fernand caused to be transported to their auncient mansion.
The affaires of this great cittie, which had beene the chiefe of the Moores estate,
were ordered by the king, both for religion (...) Iustice, and for the guard and safety therof,
with great care. Don Tello Alphonso de M^neses, was made Gouernor of the citty, and
Don Aluar Perez de Castro of the whole fronter.



The kingdome of Granado.
BY the losse of Cordoua and the death of king Aben Hut, the Moores were wonderfully
dismayed and voyd of Councell: wherefore they returned to their old course euery
one respecting his priuate interest: so as the Infidels estate was dismembred into many
parts. Aben Hudiel among others, seazed vpon the Realme of Murcia, Zeit and Zaen being
yet in warre, and contending for the realme of Valencia. In the country of Algarbe,
whereof Niebla was the chiefe citty, Aben Iafon raigned, who had for his successor Aben
Amarin, and then another called Aben Mofad. Those of Seuile would haue no king, but
 onely a Gouernor:Beginning of Granado. where one Axataf was in great authoritie, and it was he which lost it.
But aboue all the power of Mahomad Alienalagmar or Aben Alamar was great; so called
for that he had a red face: who from a shepheard hauing followed armes, had attained to
the chiefe places of honour, and was in such credit by reason of his valour, force, and stature,
as in these tumults, the Inhabitants of Arjona, where he was borne, chose him for
their king, and then other people submitted themselues vnder him especially the townes
of Iaen, Bacca, which was ill garded, and Guadix, and in the end the citty of Granado,
which he afterwards made his royall seate, and the chiefe of all his country and Seigneuries.
This was the first king of Granado, whereas vntill that time there was no kingdome:
it was erected at such time as Cordoua the chiefe cittie of all the Moores Estate in Spain
was made subiect vnto the Christians.
25 Whilest that the king Don Fernand is busie at this honorable enterprize of Cordoua,
and D. Iaime or Iames king of Arragon, at that of Valencia, which was nothing inferior,^auarre.
Thibaud the new king of Nauarre had meanes of settle his affaires without any difficultie,
for he found all the Estates of the Kingdome willing to obey him. At his reception
he did sweare and confirme the liberties and priuiledges of the country, the which he
did also augment. This was the beginning of the second masculine line of the Kings of
Nauarre,(...). the first ending in D. Sancho, the which since D. Garcia Ximenes had continued
518. yeares. Successions of States and Soueraignties falling to women against all lawe
and presidents of well ordered kingdomes, in the first ages, is the cause that strange and
vnknowne Princes, of diuers humors, come to raigne ouer Nations, which sometimes
haue succeeded well, but very often great troubles and inconueniences haue followed. At
this time the Nauarrois were not vnfortunate, to haue a king of the French nation, who
was a meanes to augment the power and dignitie of that Crowne, by many accessories
from France: his mother D. Blanche daughter to the king D. Sancho the Wise, and sister
to the last Sancho, was the first which brought the succession of women into Nauarre, although
she did not raigne, beeing dead before the king Don Sancho the Strong her brother.
D. Pedro Ramires of Pedrola, Bishop of Pampelone, among others did faithfully
maintaine the rights of this king Thibaud, who was called the Elder, to distinguish him
from his sonne and successor, being also of the same name: of whose deedes wee haue no
great instructions out of histories, onely we haue gathered out of some writings and records
tending to other ends,(...). that which we shall relate of him. He was thrice married, as
the Spaniards write. First, he had to wife a Lady of Lorraine, daughter to an Earle of
Metz, fro^ whom he was diuorced by the Popes authoritie hauing no children. His second
wife was daughter to Guichard Lord of Beaujeu, who it may be was the 3. of that name:
from which marriage issued Blanche, who (...) married to Iohn Duke of Brittaine, surnamed
thered. Thirdly, he married Marguerite daughter to Archembaud one of the Earles
of Foix (it may be there is some error in the name, for there is no mention made in the
Histories of that time, of any Archembaud of Foix) of whom he begot Thibaud and Henry,
who succeeded one after another in the Realme of Nauarre, and one daughter called
Donna Leonora, and Don Pedro Lord of the house of Murucabal (which is now ruined)
neere vnto Mendegerria, so called in the Biscaine tongue, which significs a redde mountaine.

All these marriages, or at the least the two first, were before his comming to the crowne
of Nauarre, which was in the 33. yeare of his age. The manners of this Prince are commended
by the Spaniards, saying, That he was liberal, modest, a great builder, louing musicke,
curious of matters belonging to tillage,Disp^sion of King (...). by reason whereof he planted his country
of Nauarre with many sorts of vnknowne frutes, the which he caused to bee brought out
of France: so as there is yet a kind of Peare of Nauarre, which they call Thibuatinas, or
Thibaudines: he was a great catholike, and zealous of the Romish Religion: the castell
of Treuas was of his building.
In his time there was a great sute ended betwixt the blacke Monkes Benedictines, and
those of Cisteaux, for that the deceased king D. Sancho, would haue changed the ancient
Monkes of Saint Sauueur of Leyre, and placed them of the Order of Cisteaux there, the
which he could not effect, being violently oppugned by the Benedictins: who during the
raigne of king Thibaud lost their cause: but notwithstanding that they were condemned
and dipossessed, yet they gaue it not ouer, vntill they were restored to their auncient possession;
the which was after the death of Thibaud the second, Henry his brother raigning,
to whom they bound themselues to pay 600. charges of corne yearely, vntill they had deliuered
the summe of 8500. Marauidis of gold. Finally, to end the new instances which
were daily made by the one or the other, D. Sancho Archb. of Toledo, Infant of Arragon,
and he of Tarragone, hauing authority from the Apostolike sea of Rome, commanded
the Monkes of S. Benet to perpetuall silence, and restored them of Cisteaux to the possession:
and after the death of the king D. Henry, the Gouernor of Nauarre freed the Monks
of this tribute, for the discharge of the Kings conscience, as an excessiue and vniust Impost.
Thus the Cistercian Monkes of S. Bernard, remained in quiet possession of the Monastery
of S. Sauu^ur of Leyre. By reason of the contentions of these Monks, there were many
letters, remembrances, and records of this Monasterie lost, the which did serue much in
those times for the illustrating of matters of Nauarre. The Christian affaires in Syria being
ill managed,Th^baud the^. king (...) goes into (...). and their estate in those parts declining much, Pope Gregory the 9. cau^ed
a Croysado to be preached throughout all Christendome, by the Monkes of the Orders
of S. Dominick and S. Francis: wherefore many Princes and great Personages of France
and other countries inrolled themselues, of which expedition Thibaud king of Nauarre
was the chiefe. The Noblemen and Knights Christians, desiring to passe their troupes by
sea, could not be accommodated by the Commonweales of Genoa and Pisa, who were
then very strong in shipping, by reason of the mutuall warre they had together, to the
great preiudice of Christendome. The Venetians in like manner troubled with the affairs
of the Empire of Greece, gaue them no meanes to performe this voyage. Wherfore king
Thibaud and his troupe were forced to take their way by land into Syria, where beeing atriued
at Antioch, after infinit toyle, hauing to incounter with hunger, diseases, and want
of all things, besides the enemy, who had seazed vpon the passages in the streights of
Mou^t Taurus, he found that two parts of his souldiers which had come out of France,
Nauarre, and the fronters of Germany, were wanting, beeing either dead by the way, or
slaine by the Turks: the remainders of these poore Christians arriued at Acre, which is the
ancient Ptolemaide, where they began to make war against the Turks with small suc^^sse.
A litle before this expedition,Vanity of the (...) Freder^^ke the 2. the Emperor Frederick the 2. had bin in Palestina: and as if
he had had no other occasion to make this voyage, but ambitiously to seeke to ioyne the
vaine tide of king of Ierusalem, to the rest which he carried of many kingdomes, he entred
the citty of Ierusalem without any resistance, hauing purchased the fauor of Corradin Sultan
of Egypt: and hauing caused himselfe to be crowned there, he returned presently into
Italy, hauing made a truce with the Infidels. (...) left some Germane souldiers in those contries
to supply the garrisons, who had no good correspondency with the king of Nauarre
nor his men, neither could they euer draw any succors from them, for that they held
the French to be affected to the Pope, with whom their Emperor had had great quarrels:
wherfore they were forced to make war alone. And the more to crosse K. Thibauds good
fortune, it fell out that many Noblemen which came in his company disbanded, and returned
home, among the which was the Duke of Brittany: so as the king D. Thibaud, after
many vnfortunate Incounters, was forced to returne by sea into the west.

Beeing arriued in France, he made some abode there to visit his lands, and then he past
into Nauarre. Don Thibaud king of Nauarre made not this voyage in the company of
Saint Lewis the French king, as some write: but some yeares before, beeing in the yeere
1238. where as that of S. Lewis was ten yeares after, or twelue, as some affirme, as it appeares
by the histories of France.
26 In the same yeare 1238.1238. Arragon. the citty of Valencia, hauing beene long beseeged by Don
Iaime King of Arragon, and reduced to great necessitie, was yeelded vnto him by Zaen
the Moore, who had vsurped that Principalitie, who retiring to Denia, left it without
men or goods,Valence taken Peopling of Va^ence. leading with him aboue 50000. Moores, who carried with them (according
to the composition) their gold siluer, armes and all their mooueables: so as that citie
which was held one of the richest and most stately of all Spaine, was to be peopled anew,
if they would keepe it: wherefore there were chiefe men appointed by the king D.
Iames, to distribute the houses and buildings, lands, and possessions to the new Colonie,
which was sent out of the countries of Cattelogne and Arragon. These were D. Berenger
Palatiol Bishop of Barcelone, D. Vidal Canelia Bishop of Huesca, Don Pedro Fernandes
d' Acagra, and Don Symon d' Vrraca, knights: who disposed of the places vnto those that
should people this great citty, according vnto euery mans ranke, dignity, and merit.
There were 380. heads of families, among other men of marke, or old souldiers,
(hauing faithfully and valiantly carried armes, as well at this seege, as in former warres)
then to this effect inrolled, to hold the first place and prerogatiue among the Inhabitants
thereof, and there were pri^ate lawes made for them of Valencia: yet the Gentlemen of
Arragon, who were appointed for this new Colony, did insist, that they and their inheritors
might enioy the priuiledges of Arragon, the which did afterwards breed trobles and
dissentions betwixt them and the rest of the people. The Episcopall sea was restored to
this citty, and D. Ferrier of S Martin was the first bishop, being made subiect to the Arch
bishop of Tarragone: notwithstanding that in the Goths time, that church did acknowledge
the Metropolitan of Toledo. D. Roderigo Lizana was made^the first Viceroy of Valencia,
by the king D. Iames: there were many Christian families found in it, who did exercise
their religion in the church of S. Sepulcher, called at this day S Bartholomew. It was
then of a round forme, and but weakly walled, at this day it is enlarged and made square,
and hath 12. gates, where as it had but 4. The chiefe citty of this realme beeing now in the
power of the king of Arragon, he soone recouered all the other places and forts, which
was a goodly conquest, and a great increase to his other Estates. The other places continued
peopled with the ancient inhabitants, who were contented to liue vnder the king of
Arragon, enioying their religion.
The affaires of Spain being in this estate,Castile. D. Fernand king of Castile, after the death
of D. Beatrix his wife, married a French Lady called Ieanne, daughter to Symon Earle of
Ponthieu, who was somewhat allyed to the house of Castile, by the mothers side; for that
her mother, wife to Cont Symon, called Mary, was daughter to Adella Countesse of Ponth^eu,
grand-child to king Lewis the 7. and D. Isabella of Castile, daughter to the Emperor
D. Alphonso.(...). This Lady was very mild, and greatly beloued and honored of the Spaniards.
The king had by her the Infant D. Fernand, surnamed of Ponthieu, one daughter called D.
Leonora, and another son, whose name was D. Louis. The marriage being consumated, the
king led his new spouse through the townes of Castile and Leon, whereas great honours
were done vnto her. In the meane time he disposed of all necessarie prouisions vpon the
Mores fronters, where they were continually annoyed by their incursions, to preuent the
which, the Gouernor D. Aluaro Perez de Castro, a wise and politick Captaine, omitted not
any thing that might concerne the duty (...) charge. The Mores were so insolent vnder
their new king Mahomad Aben-Alhamar, as D. Aluaro Perez was forced to come in person
to confer with the king at Aillon, and to acquaint him with the affaires of that fronter:
where the Mores were the stronger, and had a little before his departure, beseeged
Marto^, the which (without the succors which D. Tello Alphonso de Meneses brought) had
bin taken, and in it his wife, whom he had left there. Wherupon the king commanded he
should be supplyed with all things that were needfull: but as this knight returned into Andalusia,
he dyed at Orgas, in the yeare 1239. whose losse was great: and at the same time

there dyed also D. Lope Diaz de Haro, another valiant and wise knight, leauing one sonne,
heire of the ^eigneurie of Biscay and other lands, called D. Diego Lopes the 3. of that name.
The good successe which the kings of Spaine had in their conquests, made them and their
subiects the more superstitio^s. They of Arragon shewed great deuotin at that time, to
an image which was found during the war of Valence, to the which there was a Monastery
built at Puig, and it recommended to the Monks, called de la Merced. Then was the Episcopall
seate of Calaorra remooued to S. Dominick de la Calcada, by the procurement
of D. Iohn Perez the bishop, who spared not his paines to go to Rome, where he obtained
wh^t he pretended from Pope Gregory the 9. the holy Father prouiding, and giuing power
vnto the Bishop to taxe his Diocesses, for the defraying of his charges. If this touched
the glory of God, or the edification of his church, let the wise iudge: b^t this did not
hold, for some yeares after the church of Calaorra was restored to her former dignitie,
and yet that of ^. Dominick remained a Cathedral, being in former time but a Collegial,
yet one bishop holding both vnto ourtime. At that time there liued a Doctor called
Hugues Candido a lacobin, of whom Spaine makes great account. After the death of
D. Aluaro de Castro, the king of Castile, hauing led an army in person into Andalusia, and
giuen order for the safe keeping of the citty of Cordoua, he tooke partly by force, pa^tly
by feare,Townes and castels taken fro^ the Mores and partly by accord, the citty of Eccia, and the townes of Estepa, Almodoual del
Rio, Siettefilla, Lucena, Luque, Porcuna, Cote, Moron, Castellar, Marchena, Coeros, Cabra,
Osuna, Baena, Monraquilar, Tenexir, Ballar, Bute Morgu, Pardal, Cafra, Ornachuelos,
Mirabel, Fuentecumel, Moratilla, and S. Ella, most of which places the knights of Calatraua,
they of S. Iames, and the Prelates obtained from the king, and was giuen to the Noblemen
and knights. The kings affairs were much aduanced by the taking of a Moore Almohade,
who had past out of Affrick into Spaine, to challenge that which the kings of his
race had enioyed there. Caid Arrax then raigned at Maroc, beeing grand child to Aben-Mahomad
the Greene, borne at Bufax, who dyed while his father liued.
In the yeare 1240. a truce was made betwixt the king of Castile, and Mahomad Aben-Alamar
of Arjona, who raigned in Granado. Vntill this time Don Roderigo the Archbishop
and Primate hath written the historie or Chronicle of Spaine. The title which Don
Fernand king of Castile gaue himselfe at that time, was, king of Castile, Toledo, Leon, Galicia,
Cordoua, and Baeca, leauing that of Nagera, and other small places, for the which
he tooke those of the great townes which he had conquered from the Moores. Hee gaue
the like titles to the Queenes his mother and wife, as it appeares by that which was written
of him in Latin the same yeare, as the custome was then: where particular mention is
made of the infants D. Alphonso and D. Frederick,Vniuersitie of ^alamanca. D. Martin Gencales of Mijancas, beeing
Merino Maior of Castile. Besides the Art of warre, wherein the king was very expert* he
was also very careful to maintaine Iustice in his kingdomes, with all other good gouernment,
by reason whereof, he transported vnto Salamanca the Vniuersity which D. Alphonso
his grandfather had instituted at Palenca, as a place more commodious for the
good of all Spaine, and in a country more fertill, and abounding with all things necessary,
to which Vniuersity this king, his sonne D. Alphonso, and others their successors, haue
giuen great reuenues, priuiledges, and exemptions, so as it is thought there is no Vniuersitie
in the world where as the professors haue greater pensions.
Whilest that he busied himselfe in these good and honorable actions, hee had some
troubles by the meanes of D. Diego Lope de Haro, who was retired into his country of Biscay,
discontentdd with the King, yet after some little warre attempted against him, by the
Infant D. Alphonso, the king was aduised not to estrange from his seruice a Nobleman of
so good a race, fro^ whom the kings of Castil^ had receiued so good seruices in their wars
against the Moores: wheresore D. Diego Lop^ was receiued into more fauor then before.
The truce made with Mahomad Aben-Alamar, expired in the yeare 1241.An. 1241. wherefore the
Infant Don Alphonso was sent vnto the fronters of Andalusia: beeing atriued at Toledo,
hee found the Ambassadours of Alboaquis, or according vnto some, of Ahen Hud^^l
King of Murcia, who went vnto the King Don Fernand, to offer him the Realme of
Murcia, whome hee caused to returne backe, marching himselfe with them to receiue
this realme, which was voluntarily offered vnto him, hauing in his company Don Pelayo

Perez Correa, Master of the Knights of Saint Iames. The conditions were, that the king
Alboaquis should remaine vassall to the king of Castile,Murcia deliuered to the king of Castile. and that the reuenues of the
Realme of Murcia should be equally diuided betwixt the two Kings, and that the fort
of Murcia should be deliuered into the hands of the Infant Don Alphonso, and they should
compound with the Captaines which held the other places, the which was put in execution,
with them of Alicant, Elche, Orihuela, Ceruillan, Alhama, Aledo, Ros and Cieca:
but they of Lorca, Carthagena, and Mula, would not hearken to this composition,
whereunto they were afterwards forced. Thus this Realme was vnited to Castile without
any paine or danger, whither the king came in person, and was receiued with great ioy
and honour.
At that time Don Roderigo Arch-bishop of Toledo was excommunicated by Don Pedro
of Albalate,Arch-bishops in qu^rr^ls or the primacie. Arch-bishop of Tarragone, for that he had past by the Iurisdiction of
his Arch-bishoppricke, carrying his crosse, as Primate of Spaine, for which dignity he of
Tarragone did contend with him. The cause beeing pleaded at Rome before Pope Gregory
the ninth,An. 1242. he declared by a decree giuen at Saint Iohn de Latran, in the yeare 1242.
the sentence of the Excommunication against the Arch-bishop D. Roderigo to be void.
By reason of some losse which Don Roderigo Alphonso of Leon the kings bastard brother
had vppon the marches of Andalusia, the king D. Fernand, and the Infant D. Alphonso
marched towards the fronter, where diuiding their forces, the king remained in
Andalusia, and the Insant tooke the way to Murcia. The king began to ouer-runne the
countrie from Andujar towards Arjona and Iaen: he tooke Arjona, Pegalier, Montijar,
and Cartejar, he caused his brother Don Alphonso, Lord of Molina, to enter into the
Realme of Granado, who spoyled the champion countrie: and approching neere vnto
the cittie, he made a shew as if hee would beseege it, entertayning his troupes about it
vntill the king came in person to ioyne with him: where he had an incounter with King
Mahomad Aben-Alhamar, who made a sally with aboue eight hundred horse, and great
numbers of foote Moores, who were defeated; But after that the King resolued to retire
to Cordoua, beeing not strong enough for such an enterprize. Towards Murcia the Infant
Don Alphonso went to beseege Mula, which was his first exploit, for hee had not yet
beseeged any place, the which hee tooke, and did much annoy Carthagena and Lorca.
King Fernand beeing aduertised that the Moores came to put victuals into Iaen, and to
fortifie it, he sent his brother Don Alphonso to meet them, who not onely repelled them
and hindred the victualling, but also spoyled the whole countrie round about. In the
meane time the King was come to Pozuelo, betwixt Toledo and Cordoua, to see the
Queenes D. Berenguela his mother, and D. Ieanne his wife, which was the last sight betwixt
the sonne and the mother. Hauing spent some dayes there in feasting and pleasure,
the Queene-mother returned to Toledo, and the king came to Andujar with the Queene
his wife, whom he led to Cordoua, and there left her, whilest that he cared for the warre,
especially for the seege which he meant to lay to Iaen, spoyling the countrie about it, as
he also did about Alcala of Bensaide and Illora, running euen vnto the gates of Grando,
from whence he returned a victor to Marros. There he found Don Pelayo Perez Correa,
Master of the knights of Saint Iames, who counselled him to inuest Iaen without any further
delay: the which he did, and prest it with such fury, as the king of Granado had no
time to succour it: who to preuent greater dangers, which he feared to fall vppon him
by this warre, resolued to let the king Don Fernand vnderstand, that hee desired to
make some good accord with him, if he would grant a safe-conduct to come vnto him,
the which was granted:Iaen deliuered to the king of Castile. whereupon he came vnto the campe to kisse the king of Castiles
hand, who entertained him courteously, so as they were good friends, and make an accord,
that the city of Iaen should be deliu^^d into the king D. Fernands hands, whome
the king of Granado should acknowledge for his superior, and come to all assemblies in
Castile, and moreouer should pay him 150000. Marauidis of gold for a tribute: others
say 300000. beeing the moity of the reuenues of the Realme of Granado in those daies,
which was esteemed to be 600000. Marauidis of gold, accounting euery Marauidis for
108. deniers, and euery denier for a Marauadis at this day: so as the reuenues of Granado
did amount to 64800000 Marauidis, which make 172800. of gold, at 375. Marauidis apeece.

King Fernand did promise him for his part ayde and succor against a mighty family of
the Moores, his capitall enemies, called the Oysemels. These conditions were faithfully
performed of either part, and by this meanes Mahomad Aben Alomar remained peaceable
king of Granado. The king Don Fernand hauing thus compounded with him, he turned
his forces against the king of Seuile. The citty of Iaen (as some searchers of Antiquities
do beleeue) is the ancient Mentica, an Episcopal seate in the Goths time. The same dignitie
was restored, and the Mesguide made a Cathedrall church by the king D. Fernand, in
the yeare 1243. who continued there eight moneths, for that it had beene taken in Winter,
and for that it did behooue him to giue order for many things, for the preseruation
of his new conquests in that countrie, as also for the distrust hee might haue of the King
of Granado, his new ally, whom notwithstanding he had no cause to doubt, beeing very
faithfull. From Iaen he came to Cordoua, where he was aduised to assayle Carmona,
whither king Mahomad came to serue him with fiue hundred Genets. Hauing spoyled the
countrie, the two Kings came against Alcala of Guadajaira, which place by the king of
Granados meanes, yeelded: from thence certaine fore-runners were sent to a place called
Axarafe of Seuile, beeing led by the Master of the Knights of Saint Iames: and others
vnder the conduct of the King of Granado, and the Master of the Knights of Calatraua,
were sent towards Xeres. The King beeing in the mean time at Guadajaira, he had newes
of the death of D. Berenguela his mother, whereat he was much grieued, so as the warre
of Seuile grew somewhat cold, yet he was so farre imbarked, as he durst not abandon the
fronter to come into Castile. The king of Granado had leaue to returne into his country,
the King Don Fernand remaining very well satisfied of him.
Whilest matters passed thus in Castile,Portugal all was in combustion in Portugal, by the negligence
and basenesse of the king Don Sancho Capello, who was wholly giuen to his wiues
humors, beeing hated of the Portugals, and he himselfe disliked for her sake: for many
malefactors and insolent persons were supported by her, who grew daily more audacious
in their excesse, without any feare of Iustice, which was troden vnder foote, for their
respect. For these considerations (the Queene beeing also barren) all the Noblemen of
the kingdome desired to haue this woman separated, and sent out of Portugall: for the effecting
whereof they made great instance at Rome: but neither exhortation, admonition,
commandement nor censure could preuaile: for the King did so doat of D. Mencia
Lopes, as hee would not leaue her; which the Portugals perceiuing, some of them presumed
to seaze on her in the citty of Coimbra,Queene of ^ortugal (...) his subiects for her insol^n^ies. and conducted her into Gallicia, from whence
she neuer returned more into Portugall. Not content herewith (as excesse and insolencies
were familiar and ordinarie among them) laying aside all respect and reuerence
which they ought vnto their Prince, they sought to depose him from the royall dignitie:
whereby it appeared that the whole subiect of the troubles did not consist in the Queene
Donna Meu^ia, but in their ambition and priuate desseignes: for their chiefe desire was,
to haue Don Alphonso the Kings brother, who was married to Matilda Countesse of Bologne,
and liued in Picardy, aduanced to the royall throne in his place.
The newes of these tumults beeing published in Arragon, Don Pedro Intant of
Portugal, who was Earle of Vrgel, and Lord of Segorue, intreated the King Don
Iaime to send Ambassadours into Portugall to perswade the Noblemen and States of
the Countrie to receiue him for Gouernour, as a Prince of Portugall, who beeing affected
to the good and quiet of the Countrey, would order the affaires, to euery mans liking
and content: The which the king Don Iaime did, but it was in vaine, for most
of the Portugalls were so affected to the Earle of Bologne, as the Ambassadours of
Arragon were forced to returne suddenly.
It was therefore resolued that the Earle Don Alphonso should be called: and to the
end that matters might passe with some colour of Iustice and lawfull Order,D Alphonso called to be (...) Por^^gal. they sent
the Arch-bishop of Braga, the Bishop of Coimbra, with some Noble-men of the
Countrey, to Pope Innocent the fourth, who had begunne a Councell at Lions, who
did authorize this fact of the Estates by his Apostolicke power, and named Don Alphonso
Earle of Bologne, Regent of Portugall; leauing the title of King to his brother
Don Sancho Capello.

Some write, that the Earle came to Lions, to kisse the Popes foote, and accepted from
his hands the charge of Gouernor of Portugal,D. Sancho king of Portugal abandons his realme in Iretires into ^astile. and afterwards at Paris he sware the Articles
and capitulations which were made in that behalfe: from whence he went into Portugall
with the Popes Briefes, where he was receiued by the subiects but not by D. Sancho,
who would not obey the Popes commandement, but retired into Castile. The Authors
do not agree well about the time of this retreate: some saying, that it was during
the raigne of Don Fernand: others attribute it to the time of D. Alphonso his sonne, which
is the most likely: wherefore continuing to treate of the affaires of Castile in D. Fernands
time, we will afterwards returne to the Estate of Portugal.
The yeare 1245. was the last of the life of Don Roderigo Ximenes Arch-bishop of Toledo,Cast^le. 1245.
a Prelate of great esteeme among the Spaniards. He dyed in his returne of a voyage
from Rome, vppon the confines of Castile and Arragon, in the Monasterie called Our
Lady of Huerta or Horta, where he was interred: famous for his doctrine, good life, great
experience, and rare eloquence, according to the time, and especially for his hatred against
the name of the Mahumetists and Moores, to whom hee made warre with all his
power, spirit, body, and wealth: he was a fauourer of the rents and priuiledges of the
Clergie, the which he did much augment in Spaine, especially in his owne Sea, and built
and peopled many places which had beene ruined. Don Iohn the second succeeded him
in the Arch-bishopricke of Toledo, Primacie of Spaine, and Chancelorship of Castile.
About the end of Don Roderigo Ximenes dayes, mention is made of a Booke found by a
Iew in a stone,Booke sound in Spaine. in the which it was contained, without any shew of ioyning together: it
was written in three languages, Hebrew, Greeke, and Latin, the which made mention of
three worlds from Adam vnto Antichrist, shewing the nature and disposition of the men
of either world: and in the beginning of the discourse of the third world, it contained, that
the Sonne of God should be borne of Virgin, and suffer for the saluation of mankind:
and (the which seemed more then wonderfull) it was written in this booke, that it should
be found during the raigne of Don Fernand. Whether this were a thing done of purpose,
or accidentall, by this strange inuention, rather then for that which the Booke contained,
this Iew was mooued to become a Christian at Toledo: for hee might haue learned the
comming of the Sonne of God in Isay, and other bookes of the old Testament, and in the
Gospell, if he would haue read them.
In Segobia there was a stranger accident of a woman Iew, who had a great deuotion
to the Virgin Mary in secret, who beeing wrongfully accused by her husband of adultery,
as by the order of law she was ready to be cast downe from a high rocke neere the town,
she recommended herselfe to the blessed Virgin, who preseruing her in the fal, layd her at
the foot of the rocke without any harme. This Iew beeing ill instructed in her religion,
and worse in that of the Christians, published this miracle vnto the people, and was ledde
with great admiration vnto the church of S. Mary the great in Segobia, where beeing
baptised, she was named Mary that leaped from the rocke: these are the tales of Friar Alphonso
d' Espina in his booke called Fortalitium fidei.
The King Don Fernand hauing a great desire to chase the Moores of Seuille,An. 1246. about
the yeare 1246. prepared an armie at sea in Biscay and Guipuscoa, whether hee sent
a Captaine of great experience, called Raymond Boniface, borne at Burgos, inioyning
him to be at a prefixt time vppon the coast of Andalusia, that he might at one instant beseege
the cittie both by sea and land. In the meane time he so annoyed the towne of Carmona,
as he forced them to some submission: hee tooke Constantine, the which he gaue
to the citty of Cordoua, and to the towne of Reyna, wherewith he endowed the knights
of the Order of Saint Iames, the which is at ^his day a goodly Commanderie. The towne
of Lora hauing yeelded for feare of a seege, the king gaue it to the Order of Saint Iohn of
Hierusalem: he afterwards tooke Cantillana by force, where there were aboue seuen
hundred Moores slaine: Guillena yeelded by composition, so as they sped well for that
time, but rebelling afterwards, it was razed. Hereupon the king fell sicke, which stayed the
course of his victories, for that he could not be in person in the army, the which is of great
importance: yet Alcala del Rio was taken after a long seege, and a great resistance.
The king hauing recouered his health,Arragon. they treated a marriage betwixt the Infant Don

Alphonso and D. Violant Infanta of Arragon, daughter to the King D. Iaime, and the
Queene D. Violant his second wife,Marriage of the I^fant of Castil^e with ^. V^olant of Arragon. the which was consummated in the towne of Vailledolit,
whether the Princesse was brought this yeere 1246. By this marriage all quarrels
betwixt these two Kings were reconciled: for the King D. Iames held himselfe wronged
by him of Castille for many respects, but especially for that hee had assisted and supported
his sonne D. Alphonso, who had conspired against him some yeeres before, with the
Nobility of Arragon and Valencia, for that the King D. Iames, hauing in the yeere 1243.
propounded vnto the Estates, assembled at Daroca, to allot portions vnto his children
which he had by diuers ventures, that he might leaue them in peace after his death: he
had assigned vnto D. Alphonso the eldest, the crowne of Arragon, and to D. Pedro, which
he had by Queene Violant, the Principality of Cattelogne: which Pro^ince notwithstanding
he would restraine by the riuer of Sigro, leauing by that meanes the towne of
Lerida, in Arragon, whereat the Cattelans seemed to be much discontented, and the Infant
D. Alphonso more, who would not haue this principality disme^bred from the
crowne; this businesse being referred vnto the Estates which were held sometime after
at Barcelona, the limits and iurisdiction of Cattelogne were extended vnto the riuer
Signa, so as Ribagorce and Pallars were conteined in Cattelogne: notwithstanding the
King persisting to leaue D. Pedro his younger sonne heire of that Prouince, the Infant
D. Alphonso conspired with D. Fernand his great vncle, D. Pedro of Portugal, D. Pedro
Fernandes d' Aragra, D. Iohn Goncal of Heredia, and drawing vnto him all the Nobility
of Arragon and Valencia, he had taken armes, and being aided and fauored by D. Fernand
King of Castille, he had caused great troubles in Arragon, the which the King hauing
by good councel somewhat pacefied, hee was this yeere reconciled to the King of
Castille, by meanes of this marriage, many Noblemen of both Kingdomes hauing
beene mediators therein, yea and some learned men, whereof there were many in Castille,
for this King D. Fernand was the first of the Kings of Castille,Learned men first a^mitted into the c^^ncel of Castille. which did honour
his councell of Estate with learned men, choosing twelue, which were well read in the
law, who did alwaies accompany him, the which was imitated by many Kings his successors.
By these graue and learned men,Castille. was then begun, by the Kings commandement, the
bookes of the lawes of the realme, called Las Siete partidas, the which was finished in the
time of D. Alphonso his sonne: a worthy worke,Las Siet^ par^^das cont^yning the lawes of Castille. copious and ful of variety: this assembly
of learned men was continued for a time, and then changed, mingling sometimes
church-men amongst them, and knights that were not learned, for the affaires of the Estate.
In the end they did conuert it into a Chancery, whereas suites were decided, the
which was as a court of Parliament following the King, and afterwards it was diuided
into two Courts or Chanceries, one setled at Grenado, and the other at Vailledolit, as
we see in our time. In like manner D. Iames King of Arragon, caused the lawes and customes
of Arragon, to be reduced into writing; as it were in one body, hauing til that
time beene obserued by tradition, which volume was confirmed by the Estates held at
Huesca, in the yeere. 1247.
The King being at Alcala del Rio, he was aduertised that his Admiral Raymond Boniface,
was come into the mouth of the riuer of Guadalquiuir, with thriteene ships of
warre, which had beene set vpon by twenty Moores ships of Seuile, Ce^ta and Tanger,
whom the Christians had vanquished, taken three ships, broken and disarmed the
second, and sonke one, the rest hauing recouered the sea. Of which danger the King hauing
intelligence before, and that there was a fleet of Moores at sea, which attended his
army, hee had sent some troupes of horse (...) foote vnto the sea coast to fauour them, if
they should bee forced to run on shoare: but they arriued after the victory: these thirteene
vessels keeping the month of the riuer, the land army came and camped about the
city of Seuile,Seuile besi^ged. An. 1247 in the mouth of August 1247. not without great and bloudy skirmishes against
the Moores, who sallied out vpon them which made the approches, especially towards
the sea, vsing withall many politike stratagems to fire the ships which lay at anchor 
within the riuer, which attempts the Admiral Raymond Boniface did valiantly withstand,
and repulsed the Moores, to their great losse and shame.

The beginning of this siege was so prosperous for the Christians, as the garrison and
Inhabitants of Carmona, being but sixe leagues from Seuile, resolued to yeeld themselues
to King Fernand, supposing that if they did protract it any longer, they were vndone.
The city being enuironed, and al passages stopt, so as there could no victuals enter,
they were daily in fight both by land, and sea, where the Moores were most annoyed,
and therefore they had a great desire to burne the nauy, but they found good resistance.
Hee amongst the commanders which did most feats of armes, was D. Pelayo, Perez
Correa, maister of the Order of Saint Iames, and of the Knights Garcia Perez de Vargas,
of Toledo.
Whilst they were busie about this siege of Seuile, the Infant D. Alphonso of Castille
was in the realme of Murcia, where he sought to take the towne of Xatiua, which is not
farre from Valencia, hauing already seized vpon Enguerra; but the King D. Iaime, his
father in law, crossed his conquests, saying that the attempted vpon his right, for that Xatiua
and other neighbour places belonged vnto him, according to the last lymitation.
And for that the Infant D. Alphonso did not retire his forces, the King of Arragon tooke
Villena and Saix in the country of Castille, the which were held by the knights of Calatraua;
and from the Moores he tooke Capdetes and Burgarra, places belonging to the
conquest of Castille. These differences being like to cause greater troubles, some great
personages interposed themselues, procuring the father in law and the sonne to meet at
Almizra, where they reconciled them: yet the King of Arragon shewed himselfe very
strict against D. Alphonso, refusing to giue him leaue to conquer Xatiua, the which hee
promised to hold in doury to his wife Yoland. There they did assigne the lands which
should belong to either Realme,Con^^nes of M^rcia and Valence. appointing for the fronter to Murcia against Valencia,
Almanca, Sarazul, and the riuer Cabriuol: and to Valencia, Castralla, Biar, Saxona,
Alarch, Finestrat, Torres, Polop, La Me^le lez d' Aquas, and Altea, with their confines.
The mediators of this accord were the maister of Saint Iames, the Prior of the Templers,
and D. Diego Lopes de Haro, who returned with the Infant D. Alphonso of Castille, and all
their troupes, to the campe before Seuile, where the King of Granado arriued also, wel,
accompanied, and there were some succors sent from the King of Arragon; at this siege
there were great and dayly skyrmishes, especially about a bridge of boates which was
betwixt the city, and the Bourg of Triana, vpon the riuer of Guada^quibir, the which in
the end was broken by the Christians, hauing taken the oportunity of a great and violent
winde, in the which they let slippe two great boates, the which came with such violence
as they brake the bonds wherewith the bridge was tied: the which did wonderfully
amaze the Moores.
This great city was so straightly besieged as they began to want victuals, and therefore
doubting they should not be able to defend it long, they demanded a composition,
the which was granted them vpon these conditions. That the city should be deliuered
vnto the King D. Fernand, and that all the Moores that would should depart, with
their goods, to whom there was left for a retreat the townes of Saint Lucar, Aznalfarache
and Niebla:Seuile yeelded to King Fernand. and for that they should haue time to depart, the King nor his
garrisons should not enter but a month after the making of this accord, and in the mean
time the fort or castle of the city should be deliuered vnto the King. According to these
Articles there went out of Seuile aboue a 100000. Moores of all ages and sexes, which
past into Affrike, besides such as remained in Andalusia and Granado. Thus the King
D. Fernand got this goodly great city in the yeere 1248. hauing continued his siege
sixteene monthes:An. 1248. it was not commanded by any King, but only by a Gouernor called
Axataf.
The first thing the King did was to prouide for matters of religion. He went in a ^ollemne
procession to the great Mesguide, the which was clensed and hallowed, and a
Masse song by D. Guttiere elect Archbishop of Toledo, successor to D. Iohn deceased
D. Raymond Lozana was chosen Archbishop of that church, the king resoluing to enrich
it with great reuenues like vnto the rest. The greatest personages which were at
this siege with the king D. Fernand, were his children, D. Alphonso, D. Frederic, and D.
Henry, D. Guttiere Archbishop of Toledo, hee of Saint Iames, called D. Iohn Arias,

D. Garcia Bishop of Cordoua, D. Sancho bishop of Coria, with other Prelats and Clergy
men, as D. Pelayo Peres Correa the foureteenthmaister of the Knights of Saint Iames,
D. Goncalo Ybanes of Quintana, the fifteenth maister of Calatraua, the maister of the Alcantara,
the Priors of the Templers and of Saint Iohn, with a great number of their
Knights. Of secular Noblemen, there were D. Diego Lopes de Haro, Lord of Biscay, D.
Pedro Nugnes de Gusman, D. Goncalo Goncales of Galicia, D. Pedro Ponce of Leon, D. Ruy
Goncales Giron, Artas Goncales Quixada, D. Alphonso Telles de Meneses, D. Gomes Ruis
de Mancanedo, D. Roderigo Aluares of Toledo; D. Roderigo Froles,. Fernand Yanes, Ruy
Goncales, first Alcayde or captaine of Carmona, Garcia Peres de Vargas, of Toledo, D.
Laurence Suarez, and Diego Martines Adalid: all these were in the Land army. In that
at sea was Ray^ond Boniface Admiral, with many knights and Squiers of Biscay and Cuipuscoa,
with whom there ioyned many marriners and souldiers Basques, from about
Bayonne in France: al that had done the King any seruice in this warre, were rewarded
according to their merits and callings, much land, and many houses were giuen to the
Nobility, wherein the Clergy was not forgotten. And for that the city was vnpeopled,
the King inuited people from all parts, with guifts, preuiledges, and great immunities; so
as it was soone full of inhabitants.
Soone after this prize, the King sent part of his victorious army against some places
of strength thereabouts, the which were made subiect vnto him, some by force, and
some by a voluntary composition, as Medina Sidonia, Alcala, Bejel, Alpechin, Aznalfarache,
Arcos and Lebrixa and others towards the sea. By this conquest the King D. Fernand
was free from all warre behinde the limits of his Prouince, for hee ment to entertaine
peace and friendship with King Mahomad of Granado, who had alwaies carried himselfe
faithfully towards him: wherefore he began now to conceiue in his imagination the
conquest of all Affrike, and resolued to passe the Straights in the spring, with a great army,
against Caid Arrax, Miralmumin of Maroc,Death of D. Fernand King of Castille. but death preuented him, in the city of
Seuile, newly conquered, in the yeere 1252. hauing raigned in Castille about fiue and
thirtie yeeres, and in Leon one and twenty. There were present at his death, his sons,
D. Alphonso, D. Frederic and D. Henry, D. Alphonso Lord of Molina, the deceased Kings
brother, and the Archbishop. Raymond. Hee gaue many admonitions to his sonnes,
touching concord and the publike peace, recommending the Queene Donna Ieanne
very straightly vnto them.
This King was reputed a Saint among the Spaniards, but he is not canonized by the
Popes, yet he was a great fauorer of the Sea of Rome, and of all the Clergy in General,
whom he aduanced to honour and riches, as much as any of his predecessors. He did
wonderfully persecute the Albigeois, who descouered themselues in his countries, burning
them aliue, and he himselfe setting fire to them. In his raigne and during the life
of D. Iohn Archbishop of Toledo, Saint Lewis King of France imparted vnto the church
of Toledo, some of the singularities which he and others had brought from the holy
land from Egipt and other places; as, of the wood of the true crosse, one of the thornes
of our Sauiours crowne; of the Virgin Maries milke: a peece of the purple roabe
wherewith Christ was couered, some of the towel wherewith he wiped the Apostles
feet, of the sheet wherein he was buried, and of the toyes wherewith he plaied when he
was little, with other such relikes, whereof the Princes, Arabians and Turkes, yea and
they of Constantinople, made rare presents vnto the French, who (aboue all other
Christians) did reuerence these things, and did afterwards distribute them to other nations.
These goodly Iewels were receiued by the Spaniards with great deuotion, and
of this subiect there is a letter found written by that King Saint Lewis, in Latin, to the
Chapter of Toledo, with a seale of gold, giuen at Estampes in the yeere 1248. The death
of the King D. Fernand was much lamented by the Christians, and by the Moores also
of Granado, who did mourne with great teares and lamentations after their manner.
32 Soone after the decease of D. Fernand,Nauarre. died Thybauld King of Nauarre, the first of
that name, in Iuly, in the yeere 1253. in the towne of Pampelone, leauing the realme to
his sonne Thybaud the second. After his reture from Syria, he had great troubles and
difficulties with the Nobility and commons of his Realme, or that held in fee of him,

whom he desired (as it was needfull, beeing new come and a stranger) to content, the
which he did by his wisdome great patience and dexterity. Those which crost him most
were D. William Vicont of Sola, D. Raymond Arnaud Vicont of Tartax, and D. Gaston of
Moncade, Lord of Bearn, who made great complaints of the King; but he gaue them
the best satisfaction he could. To the Vicont of Tartax, he gaue Ville-neuue, with all
the land of Miexa, and Hostauares, and to the rest he gaue other things, so as he pacified
them all.
The King had great controuersie with D. Pedro de ^acolas Bishop of Pampelone, for
the rights and immunities of his church, the which proceeded so farre, as the Bishop
presumed to excommunicate the King, and did not onely interdict his owne Diocese
of Pampelone, but the whole realme of Nauar, where by reason of his pretensions and
controuersies, there was no Masse nor Mattins sayd, but whereas the King did force
them, from the which they did appeale: and in the meane time the Bishop kept at Nauardun
in Arragon: from whence going sometimes forth, the King caused him to bee
taken and put in prison as a traitor, but it was too hardy an attempt, the people could
not endure it, so as he was forced to set him free. These stormes continued three yeeres,
whereas the Spaniards lay all the blame vpon the King. In the end by the mediation of
Noblemen, Knights, Prelats and some good religious men, the King and the Bishop
were reconciled. The King acknowledged his fault, and the interdiction was taken away,
and some affirme that he went in person to Rome to demand absolution, the which
he obtained of Pope Innocent the fourth. As we haue sayd, this King died in the yeere
1253. and was buried in the great church at Pampelone. About the same yeere there
died also D. Blanche of Castille, Queene mother to Saint Lewis King of France, leauing
vnto her sonne a good title to Castille (if he would haue followed it) and to his descendants:
she was buried at Saint Denis neere Paris.
The end of the eleuenth Booke.





THE TVVELFTH BOOKE
of the Historie of Spaine.

The Contents.
1 D. Alphonso the tenth King of Castille and 31. of Leon, the 5. of that name in Castille
and the tenth in Leon, or the 11.
2 D. Thibaud the second of that name, 23. King of Nauarre. Contentions betwixt him and
the Kings of Castille and Arragon.
3 Fealty and homage done by the King D. Thibaud to him of Castille, which the inhabitants
of Pampelone refuse to subscribe.
4 Marriage of D. Alphonso King of Castille, vnlawfully sought and broken.
5 Exploits of King D. Alphonso against the Moores.
6 Factions in Germany for the Empire, and the choosing of D. Alphonso King of Castille
to the Imperial dignity.
7 D. Alphonso the third of that name, and fifth king of Portugal, his vnlawful marriage
in Castille, and leauing his lawfull wife, the Popes Censures and interdictions.
8 Continuance of the raigne of Thibaud, second King of Nauarre, and his marriag^s.
9 Politique exercises, restauration of townes, priuat studies, and other Acts of D. Alphonso
King of Castille, called the wise.
10 Negligence and inconstancy of D. Alphonso in the purs^te of the Imperial dignity: indiscretion
of Saint Lewis King of France, to quit his interest to the realme of Castille.
11 Portugal exempt from all fealty and homage to Castille and Leon, the occasion of great tumults,
and conspiracies againg King D. Alphonso the wise.
12 D. Henry the Grosse, first of that name, the 24. King of Nauarre.
13 D. Alphonso King of Castille cast from the Imperial dignity.
14 Persecution of the A^bigeois in Arragon and Cattalogne.
15 D. Ieanne daughter to the King D. Henry, heire of the realme of Nauarre, giues place
to Philip the faire, King of France, and therefore is accounted the fiue and twentith King
of Nauarre.
16 Ciuill dissention in Nauarre, for the gouernment against the French, and their partisans:
impietie, murthers, cruelties, and the punishments of such excesse.
17 The fruitlesse and pernitious voiage of D. Alphonso king of Castille into France. A
conference betwixt the Pope and him.
18 Enterprises of the Moores upon the realme of Castille; a continuance of the Estate and
Empire of the Arabians in Mauritania.
19 Death of D. Fernand de la Cerde the elder of Castille, which was the cause of great
troubles in that country.
20 D. Pedro the third of that name and ninth King of Arragon: his marriage with Constance
the daughter of Manfroy, bastard to the Emperor Frederic, by reason whereof the
Arragonois pretend right to Sicile and Naples.
21 The children of D. Fernand de la Cerde, reiected from the succession of the crowne of

Castille: disanulling of the right of representation: the Law of Toro, contrary vnto it.
22 Building of the great fort of Alhambra, of Granado and of the two forts of Malaga.
23 D. Denis the first of that name, the sixth king of Portugal.
24 Ahominable league, and other practises of the Infant D. Sancho of Castille, to dispossesse
his father.
25 Enterprises of Castillans and Arrag^nois against Nauarre.
26 Homage forced by D. Pedro King of Arragon, from his brother D. Iames, for the Islands
of Majorca and Minorca, and other lands of his portion.
27 Massacre of the French in Sicile, called the Sicilian euensong, D. Pedro king of Arragon
vsurpes the Island from the house of Aniou, and the warre which ensued.
28 Conspiracy in Arragon called the vnion against the king D. Pedro, for the defence of
their preuiledges, and the authority of the Magistrate, called the Iustice Major of Arragon.
29 Censures against the Infant D. Sancho of Castille, and his rebellion against the Pope.
The fathers curse vpon him and his posterity, not vaine, the death of D. Alphonso th^
wise.

Continuance of the royall houses of Spaine mentioned in
this twelfth Booke.

CASTILLE.
11. D. Alphonso, 10. 30.


LEON.
 


NAVARRE.
23. D. Thybaud. 2.
24. D. Henry. 1.
25. D. Ieanne, and
in respect of her
Philip the faire.


PORTVGAL.
5. D. Alphonso. 3.
6. D. Denis. 1.


ARRAGON.
9. D. Pedro. 3.


D. Alphonso the eleuenth of that name, the tenth King
of Castille and thirty one of Leon.
1 THe Moores of Spaine were reduced to that extremity,Castile. as they did all
obey the Kings of Castille and Arragon, as their vassals, euery one
in their iurisdiction, the yeere that. Alphonso the eleuenth came vnto
the crowne: but they continued not long in this Estate, for as
liberty is the most pleasing of all things, when as they found any
subiect of alteration they imbraced it. Yet in the beginning they
kept themselues quiet, seeking to confirme the alliances which they had made with the
King D. Fernand deceased: and for that King Mahomad of Granado shewed himselfe
ready to doe this homage, the King D. Alphonso, who was alwaies bountifull, abated him
50000. Marauidis of gold of his yeerely tribute, beeing in the city of Seuile, where hee
was proclaimed and crowned King of Castille, Leon etc.
The first Ordonance he made, was to decry the money which was then currant, called
Pipions, in place whereof he caused an other peece to be coyned, which they named

Burgaleses, euery one being ninety deniers, six deniers making a solz, and fifteene solz a
marauidis of gold, so as the Burgalois and the marauidis in gold were all one in value.
This change of money made all things deere in Spaine, wherevpon the King did much
augment the Estates fees and ordinary pensions of his followers. The first alteration
which happened in the Moores countries, was in Tareda, but they were easily supprest,
for the petty King of that place, called Amet, was so amazed, as hee quit the place
vnto the Christians, and fled into Affrike.
We haue sayd before that King D. Alphonso had married D. Violant daughter to D.
Iaime or Iames King of Arragon, by whom hauing no children in six yeeres they had
liued together, he intended to leaue her: wherevpon hee sent into Denmarke, to treat a
marriage betwixt him and Christienne, the Kings daughter, attending the returne of his
Ambassadors at Toledo, where he was againe visited by King Mahomad of Granado. The
King of Arragon hauing some intelligence of this diuorce, which D. Alphonso pretended
to make, was much discontented, and in a maner ready to proclaime war against Castille,
if he had not bin diuerted by some noblemen and great personages of his realm, notwithstanding
their subiects, vpon the frontiers, did for a long time spoile one an other, and their
was a league also made betwixt Arragon and Nauarre, which did incense them more.


Thibaud the second of that name, and three and
twentith King of Nauarre.
2 THis league was to defend the realme of the young Thybaud the second,Nauarrel who had
succeeded his father in the yeere 1253. being not yet 15. yeeres old, whose gouernment,
and the Regency of the realme was in the hands of Marguerite of Foix his mother,League betwixt the king of Arragon and the Queene widow of Nauar.
The Histories of Nauarre say, that the King of Arragon came in person to Tudele to visit
the Queene widow, and King Thibaud her sonne, whereas they made an offensiue and
defenciue league: the King D. Iaime offring vnto the widow and to this Pupil, whatsoeuer
hee could doe, or they demand, alwaies reseruing the rights which he pretended in
Nauarre, the which he would end friendly, when as King Thibaud should be come to age,
and in the meane time it was agreed that being of full yeeres, he should marry D. Constance
or D. Sancha, daughters to the King of Arragon, and if King Thibaud died, then
should D. Henry his brother marry one of them: the King of Arragon promising moreouer
not to marry his daughters into the house of Castille, without the consent of Queen
Margu^rite: she promised also for her part, to do her best endeauor that the King her son
should not marry with any of the daughters of Castille, lawful, nor bastards, especially
of King Fernands second marriage. In this league was comprehended the French
King, and the Emperour, by Queene Marguerite: and the King of Arragon would insert
a condition, that this present league should be allowed and confirmed by the Popes
authority, within a certaine time, and great penalties and censures set downe by him,
for them that should breake it. The Queene mother was assisted by D. Garcia Almora^id,
D. Sancho Fernandes of Montagu, D. Garcia Gomes of Agoncillo, D. Goncalo Yuanes
of Batzan, D. Corbaran of Leet, D. Martin Garces of Eusa, D. Pero Goncales of Morentiu,
D. Martin Goncales of Morentia, D. Guerero Siere, Symon Giros, D. Pedro Ximenes of
Valtierra, and D. Lope Arcez, Deane of the Collegiall church of Tudele, who did all sollemnly
sweare to obserue the Articles of this league. The company beeing gone
from Tudele, the King of Castille was presently aduertised of the league which they had
made; wherevpon hee sent many companies of horse and foote vnto the frontiers of
Nauarre, pretending that the realme did belong to him, and that hee would pursue his
right by armes. On the other side Queen Marguerite the Regent, manned the townes and
forts ioyning vpon Castille with good garrisons, being also succored by the King of Arragon;
so as the Castillans passed no farther at that time.Thybaud crowned king of Nauarre. In the meane time King
Thibaud grew to be ful 25. yeers old, wherfore they thought it fit to declare him of age, and
to crown him,An. 1254. the which was done in the yeere 1254. in the great church of Pampelone,

where he did sweare to obserue and augment the preuiledges of the country. Being in
possession of the gouernment, he would haue the alliance and league which his mother
had made with the King of Arragon newly confirmed, for the effecting whereof, the two
Kings met in the church called our Lady of Montagu,League confirmed betwixt Nauar and Arragon. where they did capitulate: and it
was sayd that the King D. Iaime should defend the realme of Nauarre against al, and that
not any one of the two Kings should make any peace or truce without the consent of the
other, for assurance whereof, especially of the aboue mentioned marriages, there was deliuered
in pawne, for King Thibaud, the forts of Gallipienco, Arguedas and Monreal: and
for Arragon, the castles of Rueda, Sos and Vncastillo: which places should remaine in
the hands of certaine knights of Nauarre, who notwithstanding should be discharged by
the King of Nauar of the oth which they did owe him, and with his consent should take
an oth to the King of Arragon, with a reseruation and promise to yeeld the places
to him against whom the other had made the offence: all this was promised and
sworne by both Kings, and the chiefe of their subiects; for the King of Nauarre, by D.
Sancho Fernandes of Montagu, Seneshal of the realme, D. Garcia Almorauid, D. Gil of Rada,
D. Goncalo Yuanes of Batzan, D. Martin Ximenes of Ayuar, Fernand of Leet, Ramir Perez
of Arronis, D. Corbaran of Leet, D. Artal of Luna, D. Pedro of Varillas, and other
knights, with six Bourgeses of Tudele: and for the King of Arragon, D. Alphonso Infant
of Arragon, D. Garcia Bishop of Tarrassone, D. Garcia Romeo, D. Pedro Cornel, D. Symon
de Fosses, D. Frederic Lizana, D. Pedro Martines de Luna, D. Sancho d' Antilla and others.
In this league were comprehended and named by the King of Nauar, the King of France
and his brethren, and by the King D. Iaime, Charles Earle of Prouence, brother to the
French King. This being concluded betwixt these Kings, the warre grew hot and furious
vpon the frontiers of Nauarre and Castille; where the King of Arragon did more
willingly assist, for that the same yeer the Moores of the country of Valencia being rebelled
to the number of 60000. vnder one Alardrac their leader and captaine, the King of
Castille did support and aide them vnder-hand, vpon a secret hatred which hee bare vnto
the King D. Iames: yet by the diligent endeauors of some great personages, there was
a truce made for some months, during the which the King D. Iaime being come into
Nauarre, D. Diego Lopes de Haro, Lord of Biscay came vnto him, and made himself his vassal,
being discontented with the King of Castille, which was no smal aduantage for the
affaires of this league against Castille: for D. Diego was a braue and valiant captaine. King
D. Alphonso pretended the realme of Nauarre by ancient right from his predecessors, or
at the least that D. Thibaud should doe him homage, as the king D. Garcia Ramires, and
the kings D. Sanchos, his sonne and Grandchild had done to King D. Alphonso the eight,
Emperor of Spaines, and to other Kings of Castille; the which King Thibaud refused, alleadging
that it was a forced acknowledgment, without any reason, and that he was so
far from submitting himselfe to the Kings of Castille, as he pretended to recouer the territories
of Bureua, Rioja, Alaua, Guipuscoa, and other lands in old Castille which the
predecessors of D. Alphonso had vsurped of the crowne of Nauarre: these were the causes
which made these Kings enter into warre, who (the truce being expired) went to field
with their forces: the Nauarrois and Arragonois assembling the body of their army about
Tudele; and the Castillans towards Alfaro and Calaorra.
The Kings of Castille and Arragon lead the contrary armies,Castillans i^ armes against the Nauarrois and Arragonois. and were so nere one vnto
the other, as they expected the houre when they should ioyne: but there were many
good men which laboured to preuent this disorder, amongst Christian Princes, so neere
allied: The King D. Alphonso gaue him of Arragon to vnderstand, that it was an vnworthy
thing, and beyond all expectation, to see him that was his father in law, carry armes
against him, hauing done him no wrong; wherefore he intreated him not to hinder him
in his iust pursute of the right which he had to the realme of Nauar, which the Earle Thibaud
detained from him. The King D. Iaime answered, that he could not in conscience, nor
duty, abandon the defence of a yong Prince, which was recommended vnto him, whose
affaires he esteemed as his owne. Many Prelats and men of great authority hauing
imployed themselues in vaine to make a peace betwixt these Princes, a simple gentleman
of Cattelogne, borne at Besalu, of the house of D. Violant Queene of Castille,

preuailed more then al the rest. This gentleman came to the King of Arragon, and perswaded
him with such liuely reasons, as he yeelded to a peace. Hauing done this good
office with him, he did the like to the King of Castille, and was so happy in his negotiation,
as they promised to confer personally together of their disputes and quarrels:Enterview of the Kings of Castille. Arragon and Nauarre. wherefore
certaine Tents being pitched in a plaine betwixt both armies, the three Kings met,
and imbraced one an other louingly, where they feasted each other, and made a good accord
before they parted. Yet notwithstanding the league made betwixt the Kings of
 Nauarre and Arragon,King of Nauarre confesseth himselfe vassal to him of Castille. and the courage which the yong King Thybaud did shew, he yeelded
to doe homage to the Kings of Castille, as his predecessors had done for the realme
of Nauarre, for the King of Castille thinking that he had won the King of Arragon, his
father in law, by this enterview, the which in truth did auaile him much, for that the
Queene Donna Violant his wife was there present, he demanded of King Thybaud the
hardest conditions he could, desyring nothing lesse then to make an accord with him:
but nothing being refused, they compounded, King Thybaud remayning vassal to the
King D. Alphonso: and it was sayd that he should entertaine a Lieutennt in the court of
Castille, and that whensoeuer the King of Nauarre should bee called vpon any occasion
of warre, he should be bound to come and serue himselfe in person, or by his sayd Lieutenant
with two hundred horse. The young King yeelded to all these conditions, either
for that he was not able to resist his aduersary, or else doubting that the King of
Arragon was wonne, or it may be in consideration of the publike quiet; besides hee
did no new thing, but what his predecessors had done before him: yet D. Sancho
Fernandes of Cascante,Inhabitants of Pampelone resuse the homage which their King did to him of Castille. and other knights of Nauarre disswaded him from it, the like
did the Inhabitants of the Bourg of St. Sernin of Pampelone, who after that all the Prelats,
knights and commonalties of the realme had approued this peace, they still disalowed
it, and would not subscribe, wherevpon the King did punish them by fines, as mutines,
yet his choller being past, some few daies after he considered that those of Pampelone
were good and faithfull subiects, louing his honour and greatnesse, and that
they had resisted his will by a true zeale, and loue, which they bare vnto the crowne of
Nauarre, so as he caused their money to be restored vnto them againe, wherevpon there
grew a custome which continued, that in matters concerning Castille, this Bourg did
not set to their seale.
4 The diuorce which D. Alphonso King of Castille pretended to make,Castille. as we haue
sayd, from the Queen D. Violant, could not take effect, for that the cause of sterility, which
he obiected against her, did cease, being the wil of God she should be with child, in the
yeere 1254. and yet the Ambassadors which were sent into Denmarke,D. Alphonsos second marriage pretena^^, diuinely broken. had wrought so,
as they brought the Princesse Christienne to Toledo, wherewith the king D. Alphonso
was wonderfully troubled, so as not knowing how to couer this fault, D. Philip his brother
presented himselfe vnto him (being Abbot of Vailledolit, and Cueua Rubia, and
designed Archbishop of Seuile, for which cause he had beene brought vp in studie, and
had remained sometime in the Vniuersity of Paris) and demanded this Princesse in
marriage. It greeued the King much to giue D. Philippe a portion, yet finding no
better meanes to salue this disorder, hee caused him to marry her, and in fauour of this
marriage allotted him great rents and reuenewes, but it was short and vnfortunate;
for this Princesse Christienne thinking her selfe contemned and scorned, was so opprest
with griefe as shee pined away and died.Genealogie of Castille. Thus the marriage of D. Violant of Arragon
with the King D. Alphonso remayned firme; to whom afterwards shee gaue
an ample off spring. Her first child was. D. Berenguela, then D. Beatrix, D. Fernand,
surnamed de la Cerde, D. Sancho, who was King after the father, D. Pedro, D. Iohn,
D. Iaime or Iames, of all which wee will hereafter make ample mention, and in
the end shee had Donna Isahell, and Donna Leonora: Besides these lawfull children;
the King had D. Alphonso Fernandes, whose mother is vnknowne, and D. Bentriz,
begotten of D. Major Guillen of Guzman, daughter to Don Perez of Guzman, in
which familie the Kings of Castille haue often found Ladies for their seruice. This
daughter D. Beatrix was Queene of Portugal. The same yeere of our Lord 1254. there
came vnto the Archipifcopal dignity of Toledo, and Primacy of Spaine, one called

D. Sancho, whom the Spaniards hold to bee an Infant of Castille, sonne to the King D.
Fernand deceased, and brother to this Alphonso, but it is not verie certaine. D. Pascal successor
to D. Guttiere, had beene Archbishop before him. The same yeere there arriued
at the Court of Castille, Edward, sonne and heire to Henry the third, King of England,
who according to the custome of those times, was armed and made knight, by the
King D. Alphonso.
As for the Moores,Moores. they were, as wee haue sayd, diuided into petty States, except
Granado: all which had done homage to D. Alphonso King of Castille. In Algarbe there
raigned in this quality Aben Mofad, who held Niebla and Xeres: a Lady a Moore ruled
at Lebrixa, or Nebrissa, and Arcos: Murcia was held by Mahumet Aben Hudiel, and other
places by other captaines and Lords, which did al hold of the King of Castille, to
whom notwithstanding, when occasion serued, they shewed no great loyaltie: wherefore
in the yeere 1256.An. 1256. King D. Alphonso dispossessed al these petty Kings, and he receiued
Xeres of the fronter, by a voluntary yeelding, where D. Nugno de Lara was made Gouernor,
and Garcia Gomes Carillo,Petty Kings of the Moores dispossesed and ch^sed ^at of Spaine. a hardy knight, his Lieutenant. Arcos and Lebrixa, following
the example of Xeres, yeelded also to D. Henry the Kings brother, who was sent
thether from Xeres. The yeere following 1257.An. 1257. the King came into Algarbe, where he
tooke the towne of Niebla, and appointed lands about Seuile for King Aben Mofad, and
many rents in that city, so as by this meanes he had al the rest of the country of Algarbe:
that is, the townes of Gibraleon, Huelma, Serpa, Mora, Alcabin, Castro, Martin, Tauira,
Faro and Laule, al held by Moores, who did not in any sort acknowledge the King of
Granado, with whom D. Alphonso entertained firme friendship, so as hauing ordained an
Aniuersary in the city of Seuile, for the King D. Fernand deceased, the which was celebrated
yeerely in the Cathedral church, King Mahomet Aben Alhamar, sent many of his
chiefe Moores thether, with a hundred footmen, carrying so many great torches of white
waxe, the which they set about the dead kings tombe.
All matters betwixt Nauarre and Castille, were in outward apparence quiet, but the
effects shewed this yeere 1257. that peace betwixt Princes, is most commonly entertained
by no other bond, but their pleasures and commodities, without any respect of accords,
othes or promises: for the king of Castille hauing raysed a mighty army, vnder
collour of some doubt he had of the Moores, caused it to turne head towards the frontiers
of Nauarre, to make some notable breach there, before they suspected him. Wherefore
the two Kings, D. Iames of Arragon and D. Thybaud of Nauarre, went sodainely to
armes, and sonne after D. Henry Infant of Castille, the Kings brother, and D. Diego Lopes
Dias de Haro, sonne to D. Diego Lopes Dias, who was dead a little before, at the bathes of
Bagnerets, came vnto the King of Arragon, being at Estelle, with whom they made a
league against Castille, the Infant making great complaints against the King D. Alphonso.
With the young Lord of Haro, there came D. Diego Lopes de Mendoca, Michel Inigues
de Suacu, Inigo Ximenes of Nanclares, Sancho Goncales of Heredia, Ruy Sanches of Landa,
which were all principal Noblemen of the Prouince of Alaua: Lopes of Velasco, Goncalo
Gomes of Aguero, Lopes Garcia of Salezar, Lopes Inigues of Orozco, Sancho Garcia of Salzedo,
D. Goncales of Cauallos, great Noblemen in the Mountaines, who came al with D.
Diego Lope Dias their Lord, and did there homage to the King D. Iaime, promising to follow
him against all Princes wheresoeuer he would lead them. The affaires standing vpo^
these termes, likely to breake out into an open combustion, those which loued peace labored
in such fort, as the Kings of Castille and Arragon had an enterview at Soria, where
a new accord was made.
And for that the Estates which king Thibaud had in France,Nauarre. that is to say, Champagne
and Brie, required his presence, or of some great personage, Queene D. Marguerite went
thether, but she died in the towne of Prouince, from whence she was carried to the Monastery
of Cleruaux, and there buried: for this cause the king was forced to go himselfe,
wherefore he recommended his country of Nauarre to the king of Arragon, and left a
French knight for Seneshal and Gouernor thereof, his name was Ieoffry of Beaumont,
of whom the Nauarrois made no great account, and lesse of the king of Arragon, to
whom they would yeeld no obedience, so as there began to be a breach of friendship betwixt

the Nauartois and Arragonois, in the yeere 1257. at which time D. Gil de Rada, a
knight of Nauar, did homage to the King D. Iaime for his castle of Rada, for him and D.
Maria de Leet his wise. The Seneshal seeing the cou^try, which was committed vnto him,
ready to fal into a combustion, came vnto the king D. Iaime, who was at Barcelona,
and obtained of him an assurance of peace, for a certaine time betwixt the two Estates.
The King of Castille finding himselfe in peace with all his neighbors,Castile. both Christians
and Moores, he tooke care for the good gouernment of his subiects, who at that time
made great complaints, for that by reason of the altering of the value of coines, al things
were growne exceeding deere, which thinking to preuent, by setting a certaine price
vpon al wares that were sold, he wrought a contrary effect, so as the death increased,
wherefore he disanulled that law, and gaue them free liberty to sel their victuals and wares
 at their pleasures.Faction^ in Germany for the Empire. About that time there was great trouble in the Empire of Germany,
betwixt Conrade sonne to Frederic the 2. King of Naples and Sicile, and William Earle of
Holland, both which carried themselues as Emperors. The death of Conrade happened,
who (as the Italians write) was poysoned by Manfroy his Lieutenant and bastard brother,
who vsurped the realmes of Naples and Sicile, which the Popes would draw vnto them
since Frederiks time, and exclude the house of Soaue: notwithstanding that Conrade left
Conradin his son and heire,Impiety of Manfrey Frederiks bastard, in whose preiudice Manfroy made himself king, sugiesting that
he had newes of his death in Germany, hauing in the meane time corrupted some to poison
him, as he had done the father, but they failed him their vowed seruice. William Earle
of Holland had bin chosen Emperor by the practises of Popes against Frederic who held
that title vnto his death, which was soone after that of Conr^^: for hauing war against the
Frisons his rebels, he was defeated by them and drowned in a Marish. He being dead, the
Electors of Germany were diuided, some striuing to haue a Prince of Germany chosen,
according to the lawes of the Empire; and the others (it may be corrupted with money)
sought to haue some forraine Prince placed in the Emperiall dignity, that he might pacefie
the troubles and tumults which did afflict Germany, and Italy. Two Princes were
then vpon the file: Richard sonne to Iohn King of England, and brother to Henry the
third,Richard of England chosen Emperor. then raigning: and D. Alphonso King of Castille. Conrad Archbishop of Cologne
and Lewis Cont Palatin of Rhin Electors, practised by the English man who was present,
did chose him King of the Romains, where vnto the Archbishop of Mentz consented:
But Adolph duke of Saxony, the Archbishop of Treues, and the Marquis of Brandeburg,
disallowing of this Election, they named the king of Castille, who was absent, who being
aduertized of this Electio^ by a sollemn Ambassage, yet would he not go into Germany,
hearing that Richard would force obedience by armes, and that the war was hotter among
the Germains then before, wherefore attending the euent, he kept himself within the city
of Toledo.
7 The same yeere of our Lord 1257.Portugal. D. Sancho Capello King of Portugal, whom they
had depriued of the gouernment of the realme, to giue it to his brother D. Alphonso of
Bologne, came into Castille, to King D. Alphonso the wise (according to the most certain
Authors) intreating him to aide him in the recouery of his dignity, and to punish his rebelious
subiects, who had made his brother their King in his life time: wherevnto the
King of Castille was well affected: but a priuat respect made him to abandon the cause
of the afflicted, for the Earle of Bologne, Regent of Portugal, knowing that his brother
made this pursute, intreated King D. Alphonso by his letters, not to trouble him in the
charge wherevnto he had beene called by the Estates of the realm, for lawful considerations,
the which had also bin allowed and confirmed by the authority of the Romain sea.
That if he would forbeare to annoy him, he promised to marry D. Beatrix his bastard
daughter, which was then of age to be maried, and would be diuorced from the Countesse
M^hault his wife,D. Alphonso of Portugal leaues his lawful wise the, Countesse of Balogne, to marry with Beatrix of Castille. and moreouer did reuiue the ancient homage which Portugal did to Leon.
These offers made king D. Alphonso to open his eares, who entertayning the king D.
Sancho with good words, concluded the marriage of D. Beatrix, with the Regent his brother,
to whom he gaue in doury the country of Algarbe, newly taken from the Moores.
this vnion of the realm of Algarbe to that of Portugal, was the cause that from that time
the kings of Portugal carriedin their armes, a border gueules semee with castles or,

without number, the which were since reduced to the number of seuen. The King D.
Sancho Capello being out of al hope to raigne in Portugall,D. Sancho Capello spoiled of the realme of Portugal. died soone after in Castille,
where for that short time he was entertained in a royal Estate, by D. Alphonso King of
Castille, whose case was like vnto his some few yeeres after; for he was dispossessed by
his owne sonne D. Sancho, where it was happy for him to haue preserued the friendship
of the Moores: for there was not any Christian Prince, that did either fauor him or aide
him. Whilst that the King D. Sancho of Portugal liued, the city of Coimbra resisted D.
Alphonso his brother, and would neuer acknowledge him for Regent, and much lesse for
King. And the writers of Portugal say, that the newes of the Kings death being published;
he which commanded within the towne, whom some cal Fleet, demanded a pasport
to goe vnto Toledo, to informe himselfe, of the Kings death, and that the tombe
wherein he had beene laied, being opened, he began to fight, and to lament the aduenture
of this Prince, and to protest of his loyaltie vnto him, and of the affection of the
citizens of Combra, and laying the keyes of the city vpon his hands, he sayd, that seeing
he had receiued them from him, with the charge and gouernment thereof, he deliuered
it vp vnto him againe: and then resoluing to acknowledge King D. Alphonso for his lawfull
Prince, and to draw the citizens therevnto, he returned into Portugal.


D. Alphonso the third of that name, the fifth
King of Portugal.
BY the death of King D. Sancho Capello,Nauarre. which was the fifth yeere of his age, hauing
raigned foure and thirty yeeres, leauing no children, the realme of Portugal fel to
D. Alphonso his brother, without any dispute, who was crowned King in the city of Lisbone,
in the yeere 1257. and being married to two wiues, hauing no lawfull cause of
diuorce from the first, he was the cause of many troubles and miseries to the realme of
Portugal, for the preuenting whereof he had beene called. He had children by the
Countesse Mahault: Fernand, who accompanied his mother into Portugal and there
remained, and Robert who succeeded his mother in the county of Bologne. Fernand,
whom some call Peter, lies in the Monastery of Saint Dominike of Lisbone which this
King built.
The Countesse his mother led him with her, when as being aduertised of this second
marriage she came into Portugal, to know the cause why she was thus abandoned. She
landed at Cascais, a sea towne at the mouth of the riuer of Tayo, fiue leagues from Lisbone,
and from thence sent to intreat, exhort, and to summon the King her husband of
his duty: for want whereof she made the protestations ordayned by the Canons in that
cause: but she could haue no other reason nor answere from the King, but if it were
lawful to breake the lawes, it was for a kingdome; and that if he thought to augment
his dominions by marrying againe, he would euery day take a new wife. These were
the fruits of her voyage, and D. Alphonso shewed himselfe so rigorous vnto her, as hee
would not vouchsafe to see her, nor to heare any councel that was giuen hm by his seruants,
who had a regard to Iustice, and feared God more then him; wherefore this poore
Countesse returned, and left this sonne in Portugal: being in France, she made her complaints
of the disloyalty of her husband to the King Saint Lewis, and sent some to doe
the like to Pope Alexander the fourth, that by his Ecclesiastical censures, D. Alphonso
might be forced to leaue D. Beatrix, and take the Countesse his lawful wife againe. The
Pope did what he could, exhorting, commanding, yea and excommunicating the King,
and interdicting his realme, but D. Alphonso was so obstinate as he suffred the realme of
Portugal to remaine interdict ten or twelue yeeres,Contumacy of D. Alphonso King of Portugal. as long as the Countesse liued. During
the which time the Portugals had leisure to forget that which they had learned
in religion, when as the King finding himselfe free, he was absolued by Pope Clement
the fourth, retayning D. Beatrix without any let, who in the meane time brought him
foure children, the Infant D. Denis, so called for that hee was borne on Saint Denis day,

in the yeare 1261. who was king of Portugal and Algarbe: the Infant D. Alphonso who
was Lord of Portalegre,Genealogie of Portugal. Ronches, Murban, Castile, de Vide, and other lands, and had to
wife D. Violant daughter to D. Manuel of Castile, sonne to D. Fernand the third, and two
daughters D. Blancho, who was a Nunne in the Monasterie of Lorban, and afterwards
Abbesse of Saint Mary de las Huelgas of Burgos, and D. Constance. Besides these lawfull
children, this king D. Alphonso had one bastard sonne called Fernand Alphonso of Portugall,
and one daughter whose name was D. Leonora of Portugall, married to an Earle called
D. Goncalo. Whilest he stood excommunicated, he made warre against the Moores
which remained in Algarbe, in the yeare 1260.1260. and chased them out of Faro, Laule, Algezir,
and Albofera, and augmented his dominions therewith. Hee built the towne of
Castro of Portalegre and Extremos:Religious houses built by D. Alphonso during the Interdict. he repayred Veja, and other places which had beene
ruined by the Moores. He did not leaue to build Monasteries and religious houses during
the Interdiction: for he finished that of the preaching Friars of Saint Dominicke at Lisbone,
and did build that of Saint Clara, of Saint Iren, and others: he gaue great almes, and
did many charitable deeds, to expiate the sinne which he intended, by the taking of a second
wife, not beeing separated from the first. Moreouer, to ease the people, and to haue
greater store of fruites in the country, he caused certaine barren and waste ground to bee
tilled: neither did he forget to maintaine Iustice, punishing theeues and malefactours,
whome his brothers carelesnesse had made insolent. To conclude, although he were defectiue
and blemished in his marriages, yet was hee a profitable Prince for his country.
Whilest these things passed in Portugall,Castile. and that the warre continued in Germany
against the fauourers of Richard elect king of the Romanes, D. Alphonso king of Castile
sent an Ambassage of certaine Cleargi-men to Pope Alexander the fourth, the which
were D. Dominicke bishop of Auila, D. Garcia bishop of Sylues, and Iohn Alphonso Archdeacon
of the church of Saint Iames, learned men, and of great authoritie, who demanded
assignation of the time of his Coronation, and also to contradict the election of Richard,
who did not care to prosecute his right by iustice, but by force and armes. Attending
the euent of these troubles, and the returne of his Ambassadours, D. Alphonso king
of Castile ordered some things touching the policie of his Realm, he decryed those sorts
of money which he had coyned, called Bourgalois, and caused others to be made, which
they called blacke pence, and in old Spanish, Prietos, fifteene of which were worth a Marauidis
of gold: and he made other lawes which were profitable to the Common-weale.
Whilest he was busie about these things, and irresolute of his voyage into Germany, hee
had another crosse which stayed him more: for his brother D. Henry a turbulent Prince,
and an enemy to all quiet, committed many insolencies at Lebrixa, where he did remain,
tending to open rebellion: wherefore he sent D. Nugno de Lara from Seuile to suppresse
him, by whom he was vanquished, and forced to fly to Valencia, from whence the king
Don Iaime caused him to dislodge, for that he would not discontent his sonne in lawe:
wherupon he past into Affrick to the King of Tunes. This Prince foure yeares after crost
into Italy, and was made Senator of Rome (which is the chiefe dignity of that citty) and
grew to haue great authority and credit in the estate of Italy, in the time of Pope Clement
the fourth, who was successor to Vrbain the fourth.
8 The king of Nauarre,Nauarre. who was come into France, finding his affaires in great disorder,
sought to settle them, and to maintain his rights in the Counties of Brie and Champagne,
beeing in controuersie, the which he preserued by the fauour and authority of the
King Saint Lewis: and moreouer a marriage was made betwixt him and Isabel of France,
the kings daughter, at Melun, whom he led into Nauarre. D. Iame king of Arragon was
the mediator of this marriage, who in a manner at the same time gaue his daughter Izabel
in marriage to Philip the Hardy, sonne to the king Saint Lewis, and heire to the crown
of France, promised vnto him long before. King Thibaud had not any children by this
Princesse, wherefore his brother Henry succeeded him in the Realme of Nauarre. He had
one bastard-daughter called D. Marquise,Children of king Thibaud the 2. whose mothers name was D. Marquise Lope de
Rada, who we may coniecture was allyed to that Gil de Rada, who it may be for this iniurie
left Nauarre, and retired into Arragon, where he did homage to the King D. Iaime
for his castell of Rada. This daughter was afterwards married vnto Don Pero Fernandes

Lord of Ixar, sonne to the King D. Iaime, and to D. Theresa Gil of Bedaura, whom he had
secretly married, as we haue sayd.
9 It was at that time that by the commandement of D. Alphonso king of Castile,Castile. many
learned men laboured to reduce into one body, the booke of the lawes of Castile,
commonly called las siete partidas, which the King D. Fernand had caused them to begin,
and which since hath beene augmented by the succeeding kings, with many ordonances,
the which was reviewed againe by Pero Lopes Alcocer,Compiler of the lawes of Spaine. Doctor Escudero, Pero Lopes Arrieta,
and in the end by Bartholomew of Arienca, Lawyers: these are the lawes by the which
the Realmes of Castille and Arragon are gouerned, and the administration and practise
of Iustice in those countries.
This King Don. Alphonso giuen to study, it may be more then was fit for a Prince
which had so great a kingdome to gouerne,Tables astronomicall of Don Alphonso. caused also those famous Astronomicall tables
to be made, which carry his name, hauing drawne into the citty of Toledo a great
number of men learned in the Mathematickes and Physickes, as well of his owne countries,
as out of Affricke and other parts, both Christians and Arabians, where be comprehends
a certaine supputation of the heauenly motion of the starres, and planets, and of
their aspects and incounters, setting downe for a rule and fundamentall point of all astronomicall
account, the situation of Toledo, where he consumed an infinit treasure. Hee
did beautifie these goodly Sciences of Physicke and Philosophie, causing the writings of
the Arabians, and other Ancients to be put into more familiar tongues: whereby he deserues,
that thankefull posteritie should maintaine a commendable memorie of his vertue:
yet he is to be blamed, for that these honest exercises did so rauish his spirits, and hindred
the care he ought to haue had of the affaires of State, that hee shewed himselfe so
slacke and negligent, as thinking to be Emperor, he found himselfe not onely excluded
from that dignity, but also dispossest of his owne Realme; hauing reaped no other fruites
of his studies, but the vaine surname of Wise and Learned. Which doth admonish Princes
to preferre action before contemplation, yet ioyning the one to the other with moderation.
He left some markes of him in the Prouince of Guipuscoa, in the town of Mondragon,
the which was so called by him for certaine causes, whereas the auncient name
was Arracate: and did indow it with great priuiledges, whereof the letters are to be seene
at this day, Giuen in the towne of Exnatorafe, called at this day, as the Spaniards say, Adelantamiento
of Cacorla, which are the most ancient letters which are to bee found in
the Castillan tongue in all Spaine: for vntill this Kings raigne, all records, instruments,
and publike writings were made in Latin: but he brought in the Castillan style, in all sorts
of writings, causing many bookes, yea of the holy Scripture, to bee translated into that
tongue, whereby it was much beautified. In this priuiledge there are many assistants or
witnesses named, as well of his owne Realmes, as strangers: which shewes, that his
Court was frequented (as if hee had beene peaceable Emperour) by Princes and Noblemen
of the Empire, which are there named his Vassalls: as Hugh Duke of Bourgongne,
Guy Earle of Flanders, Henry Duke of Lorraine, Lewis Earle of Beaumont,
and other Princes holding their Lands and reuenewes in fee of the Empire: Many
Princes of the Moores are there also named as Vassalls to this King. In the same
qualitie are named in this priuiledge, Gaston Lord of Bearne, Guy Vicount of Limoges,
who (it may bee) had some fees in Spaine, or depending of the Empire. Many also
are named in this priuiledge as Benefactours: Queene Violant, his children Don Fernand,
and Don Sancho, according to the custome of the Kings of Spaine: and of witnesses
a great number.
This king Don Alphonso did also cause a collection of the Histories of Spaine to bee
made, the which is read at this day, called a generall Chronicle. Beeing by reason of
these things in great reputation, and esteemed among strangers, by the report (as it is
likely) of learned men, whome he did cherish in all countries. The Sultan of Egypt, a
Turke which raigned then, called Al^andexauer, sent him presents of cloth, and beastes
of Egypt, Lybia, Aethiopia, and other neighbor Countries strange vnto the Spaniards,
the which were requited by him with other gifts.
Beeing thus respected by Barbarians afarre off, hee was contemned by them

which held their lands, dignities and liues of his bountie: for in the yeare 1261.An. 1261. there beeing
an assembly at Granado,Moores. of all the Princes Moores, which held any lands in Spaine,
they made a league together, and conspired all against him, and without any long delay,
beeing long before prepared, they went to field and forced the townes of Xeres, Arcos,
Bejar, Lebrixa, Medina Sidonia, Rota and Saint Lucar, king Mahumet Aben-Alhamar
of Grando beeing the chiefe, against whome Garcia Gomes Gouernour of Xeres defended
himselfe valiantly, but it auayled not. This reuolt did much annoy the elect Emperor
Don Alphonso, yet hauing sent some troupes of horse and foote, the Moores which were
disperst in the Christians countrie, were soone supprest.
The Realme of Valencia had beene subdued by the king of Arragon,Arragon. so as that time D.
Simon de Fosses beeing Vice-roy, there was no alteration in those parts by the Moores:
yet this Prince was neuer in good quiet with his subiects, by reason of the importunitie
and contumacie of his eldest sonne Don Alphonso, who did continually stirre vp new tumults,
vppon colour of portions betwixt him and his brethren: a question which had bin
handled, but not decided in many Assemblies of the Estates, and by Iudges appointed by
them during D. Alphonso's life-time. He died about the yeare 1260. soone after his marriage
with Constance daughter to Gaston Lord of Bearne.Death of D. Alphonso Infant of Arraga^ In the yeare 1261. the marriage
of the Infant D. Pedro was consummated (who then tooke the degree of the eldest) with
Constance daughter to Manfroy Prince of Tarentum, soone after the celebration of the
marriage of his sister D. Izabel with Philip of France, at Clermont in Auuergne. After
which solemnities the question for the Infants portions was reuiued, with as bad successe
as it had beene when Don Alphonso liued: for Don Pedro could not indure that any thing
should be dismembred from the Crowne, nor that any lands or titles should bee assigned
to his brethren, but would haue them to depend wholly vppon him, the which the King
their father did not hold fit for the quiet and rranquility, of the Realme, knowing wel the
rough disposition of Don Pedro, who was cruell and inexorable: wherefore notwithstanding
the protestations of Don Pedro, which were ordinarie, refusing to allow of Order
in that respect, but by constraint, and to obey the king his father. It was decreed, that
after the decease of the King Don Iaime, the Infant D. Pedro should succeed in the realme
of Arragon and Valencia, and should haue by the same right the Principalitie of Cattelogne,
limited from the riuer of Singa vnto Cap de Crux. That Don Iames the younger
should haue, with the title of a King, the Ilands of Majorca, Minorca, and the Pityuses,
and moreouer the Counties of Rossillon, Collibre, Conflans, Cerdagne and Vallespire,
with the rights of Montpellier, with charge to acknowledge the Soueraigntie of Arragon
for these Segneuries vpon the maine land: but Don Pedro did complaine wonderfully at
this portion which was assigned to his brother D. Iames. There were other quarrels pretended
by the Nobility of Arragon, complaining that the king D. Iaime did breake their
priuiledges and liberties: by reason whereof they made many leagues and factions. The
matter beeing debated in the Estate of Sarragossa, and then at Exea, in the yeare 1265.
there were orders made for the pacifying of those troubles: As not to giue any honors
or militarie fees to any but to Gentlemen of race, and borne in the country. That no
Gentleman should be subiect to the tribute of cattell, nor to any other. That in all controuersies
which the Nobility might haue against the king, or among themselues, the
Magistrate, called the Iustice Maior of Arragon, should be Iudge, beeing assisted by the
Councell. That the King should not giue the fees and military rewards, affected to them
that do him seruice, as a recompence of their vertue and valor, to any of his lawfull children,
who by right haue their portions in the realme. In this assembly of the Estates the
King was sollicited by the Pope to roote the Moores out of his Dominions, the which
was hard to effect, neither was it done.
The warre in Germany began to grow cold by the absence of Richard,Castile. who for want of
money was forced to dissolue his army, and to go into England, to make a supply, wheras
he found his brother Henry ingaged in ciuill warres, whereby he stayed there, and neuer
returned into the territories of the Empire: so as Don Alphonso by his delayes lost
many good occasions to effect his desseignes. Approching heare vnto the Moores fronters
with a great army, he built a castell in the territorie of Alarcos, which hee named

Villa Reall, and since called citty Reall by the king D. Iohn the second. The place where
it was built, was before called Pozuello of Saint Gil. Leauing all care of the Empire for a
time, he made violent warre against the Moores of Granado, Murcia, and other confederates,
so as Mahumet Aben-Alhamar was forced to flie to Aben Ioseph Miralmumin of
Maroc for succors, who sent a thousand genets or light horse Arabians into Spain, in the
yeare one thousand, two hundred, sixty three,An. 1263. which was the first succors which past into
Spaine since that the kings of Maroc had abandoned and lost it, one and fifty yeares after
the rout in the fields of Tolousa, or Muradal in Andalusia. The towne of Xeres was recouered
by the Christians, and manned with a great garrison: Bejar, Medina, Sidonia, Rota,
and S. Lucar were in like manner taken, as also Arcos and Lebrixa, from whence the
king chased the Moores and planted Christians. Port S. Mary was built, and other small
exploits of warre done whilest the good time lasted. Winter comming on, the king dissolued
his army, the which was exceeding great: for he had called all such as had in former
times beene at the warre, and had horse and armes, exempting them of the village
of Martiniega, from the Custome of cattel, and other Tributes and Impositions, besides
their ordinary pay. The king with some Noblemen stayed at Seuile: during this warre
which was in the yeare 1264.1264. his father-in-law D. Iaime of Arragon met with him in Alcarras,
with good troupes of souldiers, to second him against the Moores of Murcia, the
which with their king was reduced vnder the obedience of the king of Castille,An. 1265. the yeare
following 1265.
The king of Granado was so ioyfull of these succors which were come vnto him out of
Affricke,Moores. and gaue such great intertainment to these Arabians, at his subiects charge, as
many began to murmure against him, in somuch as the Captaines of Malaga and Guadix,
of friends became his enemies, and many of his followers holding themselues lesse
esteemed them these new come, conceiued a great hatred against him, so as hee began to
feare a reuolt of his subiects. And for that he would not be ingaged in two wars at once,
one ciuill, another forraine, he laboured to make his peace with king D. Alphonso, coming
vpon assurance vnto him to Alcala of Bencaide, and there sware his fealty and homage
anew,Accord betwixt Castile and Granado. in the presence of Mahomet Alamir his son, promising to pay him 250000. Marauidis
of gold for a yearely tribute, and renounced the allyance of Aben Hudiel king of
Murcia. Wherefore king D. Alphonso did more easily subdue him, who yeelded with al his
townes, demanding pardon for his offence, the which he obtained by the intercession of
the king of Granado newly reconciled: his life was saued, and some rents assigned him,
but his royal dignity was taken from him, in the which the king of Castile placed another
Moore, called also Mahomet, brother to Aben-Hut, who had beene slaine in Almerie, to
whome he gaue the third part of the reuenues of that Realme. As for the Captaines of
Malaga and Guadix, D. Alphonso had promised vnto the king of Granado by this last accord,
not to fauor them against him, the which he kept at that time, and did procure a truce
betwixt them for a season. During the which Mahomet Aben Alhamar came vnto D. Alphonso
at Murcia, to intreate him againe (the truce being expired) not to support these
two Captaines, which had rebelled against him: wherein the king of Castile dissembled,
refusing to promise him directly, for he had an intent to bridle him by this meanes, and in
the end to ruine him. Whereupon the king of Granado returned discontented: being in
his country, he sought to corrupt the captaines of the king of Castiles forts, which were
neere vnto him: namely, Don Nugno Goncales sonne to the Earle Don Nugno de Lara,
who was discontented for the wrongs and grieuances which his father Don Nugno de
Lara, and his Vncle Don Iohn Nugnes had receiued from the king, perswading him to
rebell against his Prince, with assurance that he would fauour him, and would giue him
succors vpon all occasions.
During these actions king D. Alphonso,Castile. Emperor elect, had newes of the death of Richard
his competitor, who had bin slaine in England, at the seege of a towne of smal consequence,
being greatly sollicited by his partisans and fauorers to go into Germany, assuring
him that he should be receiued without any contradiction: but he excused himselfe,
either for that he wanted courage or mony, or else being stayed by the aduertisements he
had of the king of Granados practises: yet he called a Court in the city of Burgos, to conferre

of this voyage with the Estates of his countries, who did exhort him to march, yea
offering him money, whereof he had then need, but there was no meanes at that time.
He had sent Ambassadors into France, for the marriage of his son D. Fernand surnamed
de la Cerde, with the eldest daughter of the king S. Lewis, called Blanche, as her grand-mother,
in the end of the yeare 1267.An. 1267. this Princesse being not ful ten yeares old, according to
some Spaniards, and the supputation of Garrybay himselfe, who makes profession to be a
great obseruer of times. By this marriage was decided a great controuersie betwixt the
house of France, and that of Castile, for the succession of the Realms of Castile and Toledo;
the which by right,Marriage of D. Fernand with Blanche daughter of France. and the custome receiued of the succession of the elder, did belong
vnto the king S. Lewis: for that after the decease of the king D. Henry the first, who
dyed without children, being slain with a tyle which fel vpon his head, the succession came
to his eldest sister D. Blanche, mother to this S. Lewis, and not to D. Berenguela the yonger
mother to king Fernand the 3. whom she had by the king of Leon. But the Spaniards disdaining
to be gouerned by a stranger, did easily frustrate this right, through the carelesnes
of the king S. Lewis, chosing D. Fernand his cousin germaine for their King. In fauor therfore
of this marriage made betwixt D. Fernand de la Cerde, son to D. Alphonso the wise, K.
of Castile, and D. Blanthe daughter to the king S. Lewis, he did quite renounce al the right
and interest which he and his successors kings of France might pretend to the crowne of
Castile and Toledo,S. Lewis quits the right he pretented. transferring it to Don. Fernand and to D. Blanche his spouse, and to
their heires. This accord was made in France betwixt the king S. Lewis his councell, and
confirmed by him, and the ambassador: of Spaine, with whom the Princesse was sent thorough
the country of D. Thibaud, who had married Isabel her sister some ten yeres before.
The Princesse and her conductors were honourably intertained by the Nauatrois,Nauarre. although
that they and the Castillans were no great friends: yet for that shee was their
Queenes sister, they spared not any thing that belonged to duty and honesty. D. Thibaud
was then in France, during his absence there were many things done in Nauarre by excesse,
or through the error of Gouernors, or the policy of neighbor Princes. One of the
principall knights of Nauarre called Goncalo Tuanes of Batzan, retired to the king of Arragon,
and made a fort vpon the fronters betwixt Arragon and Nauarre, which hee called
Boeta, from whence he made great spoyles in the country of Nauarre. Notwithstanding
the friendship which was betwixt the kings of Arragon and Nauarre, yet there wanted no
grieuances and subiect of quarrel betwixt them. One of the most apparent pretensions,
which the king D. Iaime had, was, that he sayd, that to succor the king D. Thibaud hee had
made great expences, whereof he would be remboursed: making alwaies vse therof when
there happened any disorder. The summe which he demanded was so great, as neither K.
Thibaud nor his brother Henry, who raigned after him could euer acquit it. About that
time, or soone after was the passage of the Princesse Blanche into Castile, whom the king
D. Alphonso her father-in-law receiued at Logrogno: the king D. Thibaud arriued in Nauarre,
where he labored to set some good order in his affairs, and to prepare all things necessary
for his voyage beyond the sea, which he pretended to make with the king S. Lewis
his father-in-law. He did somwhat repaire the breach of friendship which had bin betwixt
the K. of Arragon and him, and renewed the accord with him of Castile: and hauing left
his brother Henry Erle of Ronay, for Gouernor in Nauarre, he came into France, leading
with him D. Iohn Nugnes de Lara, eldest son to D. Nugno Goncales de Lara, and many other
knights of Nauarre and Castile. He also led Q. Elizabeth or Isable with him, whom he left
gouernesse of his Counties of Champagne and Brie, and then he parted with the king S.
Lewis his father-in-law,An. 1269. who imbarked at Marseilles, with his whole army in May, 1269. to
go into Syria: but he was forced by foule weather to land in Sicily, from whence hee past
into Affricke, tooke Carthage, and beseeged Tunes: but the issue of this expedition was
vnfortunate, as we may read in the Histories of France.
Some moneths before D. Iaime,Arragon. or Iames K. of Arragon, mooued with the like zeale to
make war against the Infidels in the East, and to f^ee himselfe of a vow which he had made,
had imbarked himselfe, but he was driuen back by a storme to Aiguesmortes. Hee had by
reason of these enterprises, familiaritie, and treaties with the great Cham or Emperor of
Tartaria, sending a Bourger of Perpignan, called Alain, Ambassadour vnto him. He consulted

of the voyage at Toledo in an assembly of Princes. where hee did protest to go in
person, although he were very old. King D. Alphonso promised money, Michel Paleologue
Emperor of Constantinople offered ships and victuals by his Ambassadors, but he could
not put it in execution. Yet his children D. Pedro, and D. Fernand proceeded in their voiage,
and arriued in Palestina, where they stayed not long. At their returne they landed in
the Iland of Sicily, then enioyed by king Charles the first brother to S. Lewis, from whome
they receiued great honour and good vsage: there the infant D. Fernand was made knight
by the hands of king Charles, whereat D. Pedro his brother took occasion to hate him, and
neuer after loued him. As soone as K. Thibaud was gone out of Nauarre, whether hee neuer
more returned, the king D. Iaime forgetting not the right he pretended to this realme,
made donation and transport thereof to D. Pedro, resigning all his interest to him, by vertue
of the mutuall donation made betwixt him and the last king D. Sancho the Strong.
In Castile there was nothing but feasting,Castile. for the new marriage of the Infant D. Fernand,
at the which (being as stately as any had beene seene in Spaine) there were present
D. Iaime of Arragon, Philip eldest son to S. Lewis king of France, Edward eldest son to the
king of England, who had beene armed knight by the king D. Alphonso: D. Pedro Infant
and heire of Arragon, and Mahomet king of Granado, not yet proclaimed an enemy with
other Princes Moores: the king D. Alphonso himself, Emperor elect, his brethren and children,
with his vncle D. Alphonso de Molina, and a great number of Prelats and Noblemen
of his countries, and of France, Ingland, Italy and other places: whither also came the
Lords of Lara, D. Lope Diaz de Haro, and other mal-contents, who did then conferre with
the king of Granado, and concluded a dangerous league with him. Of this marriage were
born the Infants D. Alphonso and D. Fernand de la Cerde, of whom we will make mention
in the discourse of this Historie.
The feast being ended, D. Alphonso Emperor Elect, began to thinke afresh of his passage
into Germany, whither they called him by ordinary messages: but whether feare or
necessity did hinder him, he could not begin it. It may be the quarrels of Germany seemed
too dangerous vnto him, beeing also loth to charge his subiects with the expences, for
the conducting of an army into Italy and Germany: for that his prodigality had exhausted
his treasure, and emptied his coffers. For besides the great expences which hee had
made in searching out the Mathematickes and other commendable things which amounted
to so great summes of mony, as a Spaniard writes, that for the compiling of the work
which they call Tabulas Regis Castillae, hee spent more then the reuenues of S. Peters patrimony
could amount vnto in ten yeares. He gaue at one time an hundred and fifty Kintals
of siluer to the Empresse of Constantinople; who came vnto him to Victoria, to beseech
him to ayde her, to redeeme the Emperor Bauldwin her husband, prisoner among
the Turkes, from whom Michel Paleologue detained the Empire. And withall it is likely,
that he spared not any mony to practise the Germaine Electors, by whom hee had beene
chosen: together with the feasts, triumphs, gifts and presents of his sons marriage: and the
prouision for war which it behooued him to make, to defend himselfe against the trecherie
of the Moores, and of those that were vnited vnto them. All which things kept him so
low, as he had neither meanes nor courage to poursue that which he had ambitiously affected.
The rebellion of D. Lope Diaz de Haro, Lord of Biscay, the fift of that name, who
had beene made king during the fore-sayd marriage, and of D. Nugno de Lara, and others,
may in some sort excuse him. These with other their confederates were entred into a secret
league with Mahomet Aben-Alhamar king of Granado, who for his part had openly
broken the truce with the captaines of Malaga and Guadix, vassals to the king of Castile,
annoying them all he could by open force: wherefore king D. Alphonso came to Seuile to
oppose himselfe against this king of the Moores, and to preuent the desseignes of these
conspirators, calling an assembly there of all his knights and other his faithfull subiects.
Hauing a great army readie, and an occasion beeing offered, hee did assaile and suddenly
take the town of Cadiz ill garded, and the Iland which was vnder the protection of the K.
of Maroc, where the souldiers got great spoiles: but for that there wanted people, he left
it still in the Moores hands. This was in the yeare 1269.
The King being at Seuile,Portugal. D. Denis infant of Portugal came vnto him, beeing well accompanied

by the Noblemen and Knights of the country, who besought his grandfather
to make him Knight, and moreouer, that he would discharge the Realme of Portugall,
of the homage and vassalage it ought to the king of Leon. King D. Alphonso was desirous
to gratifie this young Prince, sonne to his daughter D. Beatrix: but thinking it would bee
taken ill by the Noblemen his subiects, hee aduised the Infant to propound it in an open
assembly, the which he called to that end. The demaund being made in the name of Don
Denis, who was yet a child of eight yeares old, by a Knight of Portugall, the opinion of D.
Nugno de Lara (who had not yet declared himselfe) was, that by no meanes he should diminish
the authority and greatnesse of his Crown, the which he should do, if he did quit
this homage to the king of Portugall, and that in any other thing he was of opinion, the
king should gratifie his grand-child D. Denis:VVise aduise of D. Nugno de Lara. wherewith the king seemed discontented against
the Earle D. Nugno: wherefore the rest seeing that he would haue it so, they aduised
him to do it. Whereupon the Realme of Portugal was freed from all homage and obedience 
due to the kings of Leon and Castile, this yeare 1269. And D. Denis being made
Knight by the king, he returned ioyfull to his father, who about the same time was absolued,
and the generall Interdict, in the which the Realm had beene for twelue yeres space,
taken away by Pope Clement the fourth.
This prodigality with some other reasons,Castile. did much discontent the Noblemen of Castile:
and made the Earle D. Nugno to run into open rebellion, for that the king had taken
it ill, for deliuering his opinion freely in open Councell. After these things audience
was giuen to the Ambassadors of the Miralmumin Aben-Ioseph, who were come to complaine
in their Masters name, for the taking and sacke of Cadiz, and to demand reparation:
but they were sent home with good words. King D. Alphonso being parted from Seuile
to come into Murcia, being at Villa Reall, he was abandoned by his brother D. Philip,
the Earle D. Nugno de Lara, D. Lope Diaz de Haro, and other Noblemen and Knights which
came into Castile, to put the League in execution which they had made with the king of
Granado against their king, and to seeke to draw others vnto them, making the ground
thereof to be the dismembring of Portugal from the Crowne of Leon: which league was
renewed in Lerma. Many other Noblemen and knights ioyned with them, the chiefe
whereof, besides the Infant D. Philip, the Earles D. Nugno de Lara, and Lope Diaz de Haro,
were D. Esteuan Fernandes, D. Fernand Ruis de Castro, D. Ximen Ruis de los Cameros, D.
Iean Nugnes, and D. Nugno Goncales de Lara, children to the Erle D. Nugno, D. Aluar Diaz
D. Diego Lope de Haro, brother to D. Lope Diaz, D. Lope de Mendoca, D. Gil Ruis de Roa, D.
Aluar Diaz de las Asturias, and D. Roderigo Rodrigues de Saldagne, all discontented with K.
D. Alphonso: some for one cause, some for another.
The first thing they did, after they had sworne the League,Nauarre. was to send the Infant D.
Philip into Nauarre, to see if he could draw D. Henry the Regent of that Realme to ioyne
with them, for the interest he had to pull downe D. Alphonso, who detained so many Prouinces
belonging to the Crowne of Nauarre, the Confederats promising him (yet without
any such intent) to ayde him in the recouery thereof. If hee would fauour them with
the forces of the Realme which he had vnder his command, where they pretended to stay,
and there assembled all forces, friends and meanes. The Regent Don Henry hauing duly
considered of the consequence of this enterprise, beeing wise and well aduised, excused
himselfe,VVise answer of D. Henry of Nauarre to the Conpirators of Castile. that he was but Lieutenant to his brother, to whom hee must yeeld an account
of his gouernement, and that he desired nothing more, then to restore him his Realme in
the same estate that he had deliuered it him, without attempting to trouble his Estate by
any new enterprises, vpon a vaine hope of bettering it. Don Philip returned into Castile
with this answer, being frustrate of his expectation. Soone after D. Henry had newes of
the death of his brother K. Thibaud, which hapned in the town of Trapani in Sicile, in his
returne from the voyage of Tunes, whereas the king S. Lewis was also dead, and the army
forced by pestilence, and other discommodities, to returne, hauing done nothing of
consequence.



D. Henry the Grosse, first of that name,
24. King of Nauarre.
DOn Thibaud hauing held the Crowne of Nauarre 17. yeares and about foure moneths,
and dying without any lawfull children, Don Henry his brother succeeded
him in the yeare 1271.An. 1271. he was surnamed the Grosse, for that he was exceeding fatte.
And although the common opinion be, that fat men are most commonly of a soft and
mild disposition, yet this was of a sower and froward conuersation; the which he did especially
shew to Don Armingol Bishop of Pampelone, whom he did afflict much. D. Isabel
the Queene Dowager who was in France, when as D. Thibaud her husband dyed, receiued
his bodie (the which was carried with that of the King S. Lewis) and caused it to be buried
in the Church of Prouins: and whether it were for the griefe of her husbands death, or
some other infirmity, she liued not long after him. The Confederates of Castile, seeing
Don Henry receiued king of Nauarre, sent to Don Philip againe, to sollicite him to ioyne
with them in league. The new king Don Henry made answer, that seeing he was now absolute,
and was not to make accompt of his actions to any one,Answer of the king of Nauar to the Confederates of Castile. hee was very willing to
receiue the Confederates into his Realme, and to assist them with all his power: but vppon
condition, that they should in like manner come with all their forces and friends, to
put him in full possession of the lands of Bureua, Rioje, Alaua, Guipuscoa, and others,
the which king D. Alphonso had vniustly vsurped and detained, belonging to the crowne
of Nauarre.
This demand seemed great and difficult to the Infant Don Philip; and as one which
had not reiected all loue of Brother or Country, he refused this allyance which would be
so deare and burthensome, and therefore he made answer, that neither he nor his companions
had any such power, as to accomplish that which he demanded, confessing freely
that he would not do so great wrong vnto the King his Lord, as to dispossesse him of so
great a country. The king Don Henry hearing this answer, would not enter into their
League, beeing loth to breake the accords which Nauarre had with Castile, but vppon
great aduantage: wherein he did wisely not to incense so mighty an enemie against him.
Don Philip returning into Castile, met with his Confederates, to whom he related what
he had done, the which they allowed.
King D. Alphonso was wonderfully perplexed,Castile. during these practises, imploying al his
friends to pacifie and to diuert these conspirators from their enterprise. First he sent Don
Henry Perez of Arana with letters of credit vnto them: the king went in person to Valencia
with Queene D. Violant his wife, to intreate the king D. Iaime her father to mediat an
accord for him, or to keepe him from ioyning with the Confederates: with whom Don
Henry Perez labored in vaine, aduertising the king of all that past, as many of the Councell
of Castile did in like manner: wherefore after many messages of either side, and many
fruitlesse negotiations, which did rather kindle the fire then quench it, king D. Alphonso
was forced to come to Burgos. The Confederats did not onely sollicit the king of Portugall
to enter into their league, but also Aben Ioseph k. of Maroc, promising a safe accesse
and all fauor against this Prince: the which was discouered by a letter written by this Morish
king in the Arabian tong to the confederats: Iu the meane time the king of Granado
began to make open war against Castile, ouer-running the country of Andalusia with the
horsemen which he had out of Affrick: against whom he sent the Infant D. Fernand de la
Cerde. D. Alphonso being come to Burgos some of the rebels came vnto him vppon pasport,
where there were diuers conferences, the king shewing himselfe tractable in many
things, for the desire he had to go into Germany: but all preuailed not, notwithstanding
that there was an assembly of the Estates at Burgos for this pacification, the which was
held without the towne, for the safety of the Conspirators, who reiecting all treaties of
peace, retired to Granado, their troupes committing infinit spoiles where they past without
any respect, loue, and charity of their country, yea in the country of Guadix, whereas
the Captaine a Moore was enemy to Mahomet Aben Alhamar: and they say, they entred
into Granado with aboue 5000 cattel, and many carts laden with spoile which they had
taken.



Mohomad Mir, the second King
of Granado.
WHilest these fugitiue Knights were at Granado,Moores. the king there dyed, which was
in the yeare 1273. hauing raigned 36.An. 1273. yeares, and some moneths. By their support
and assistance, his sonne obtained the Crowne, beeing also called Mahomad
as his father, but surnamed Mir Almus-Lemin, otherwise Abedialle and Aboabdicke, and
Alamir Aben-Azar: for after the death of Aben-Alhamar there were great diuisions vpon
the election of a new king: some demanding a younger brother to this Mahomad Mir,
who was called Ioseph Aben Alhamar, others would haue one of the Captaines of Malaga
or Guadix, desiring thereby to make them leaue the allyance of the king of Castile, to
the end they might vnite all the Moores of Spaine. For the fauour which the Christians
did herein to Mahomad Mir, he caused a pallace to be built, which was called the pallace
of D. Nugno. Such as had held the party of Ioseph Aben-Alhamar escaped, and retired with
him to Malaga, from whence he went and spoiled the country of Granado; But the knights
which were with king Mahomad, hauing assembled some forces, went against them, and
defeated them neere vnto Antequera.
King D. Alphonso was come neere vnto Toledo,Castile. alwaies negotiating a peace, for the
which they assembled the Estates againe at Auila, whither came D. Fernand Ruis de Castro
and Roderigo Roderigues de Saldaigne, who abandoned their companions. Nothing being
concluded, the King resolued to make war with all violence: he came to Requegna, wheras
D. Iaime king of Arragon shold meet him. During his aboad there, he had intelligence
 from his Agents in Germany, that the Electors, tyred with his delayes, and desiring to
settle a good peace in Germany, had proceeded to a new election in the person of Rodolphus
Erle of Habsburg and Holsacia, against the which his said Agents had obiected many
things, and protested in his name of nullity. These newes did much trouble king D.
Alphonso, who was ingaged in these ciuill dissentions, the which he then resolued to compound,
at what price soeuer, to the end he might go into Germany to recouer his imperiall
authority by armes, the which he had let slip by negligence. Wherefore hee sent the
Queene D. Violant his wife to Cordoua, with some of his Councell, to treat a peace with
the king of Granado, and with his owne rebellious subiects, and likewise with the Miralmumin
Iacob Aben Ioseph, who threatened to passe into Spaine. He intreated and coniured
the king of Arragon to ayde him to subdue them, if they wold not yeeld to reason, the
which he promised, and he sent Ambassadors presently into Italy to Pope Gregory the 10
to make new protestations against the Election of Rodolphus, and to lay open vnto the
Pope his pretensions and reasons. The Ambassadors were Friar Aymar a Iacobin, and Fernand
of Zamora, Chancelor to the king, and Chanoine of Auila, who deliuered their
charge in open Consistorie: yet the negligence and little regard which the king their master
seemed to haue of the Empire, did make good the election of Rodolphus, so as they
returned into Castile, without any effect.
Pope Gregorie hauing afterwards called a Councell at Lyons,Councel at Lyons vnder Pope Gregory the tenth. whether he came in person
for the reformation of Christendome, especially for the reconciling of the Greeke
Church with the Romaine or Latin, and in like manner to releeue them in the East, who
went to ruine. He aduised king D. Alphonso, and admonished him by the Bishop of Astorga,
to desist from his pretension of the Empire, where hee should do nothing but spend,
and thrust himselfe and his kingdomes into open danger, without any hope of benefite:
which aduice could not please the King, who being aduertised that the Queene, who was
at Cordoua, had brought the king of Granado, and the Noblemen Confederats to some
reasonable conditions, he came to Seuile, whither all the Noblemen came with the
Queene, and the Infant D. Fernand, where as an accord was made. The Noblemen and
Knights were restored to the kings fauour, and to their goods and honours.

The King of Granado promised to pay a yearely tribute of 300000. Marauidis of gold
to him of Castile,Accord betwixt D. Alphonso and his rebellious subiects. and did pay him a great summe of ready money: the which D. Alphonso
demanded to make his voyage into Germany, whereof he still dreamed. There was
great dispute touching the Captaines of Malaga and Guadix, for king Mahomad would
haue D. Alphonso wholly to abandon them. but in the end the Queene D. Violant procured
a truce for them for a yeare. Thus the conspiracie made against D. Alphonso was dissolued
in the yeare,An. 1274. 1274. the which had continued almost fiue yeares. Hee that wrought
best effects in this negotiation of peace, and that tooke most paines was Goncal Ruis of
Atienca, a gallant Knight, and a faithfull seruant to the king D. Alphonso. There is no
doubt, but this Prince, by his inconsiderate bountie, his negligence in great affaires, and
contempt of his subiects and Councellors, was the cause of great troubles and diuisions,
which were both preiudicial and dishonorable vnto him, although that conspiracies can
not be excused.
Many Princes came to the Councell of Lyons, and many sent their Ambassadours:
namely, Michel Paleologue Emperour of Constantinople sent Germain Patriarke
of Constantinople, George Acropolite, and Theophanes Metropolitane of Nicea
in Bithynia, with charge to make a shew to desire an Accord betwixt the Greeke
and the Latine Churches: but in effect it was to diuert, by this goodly pretext, the
Armes of Bauldwin his aduersarie, and of Charles King of Naples and Sicily, who
pressed him, and to assure his Estate which hee had gotten by vniust and violent
meanes.
Thither went Don Iames king of Arragon in person,Arragon. who came to do his filiall submission
vnto the Pope: yet the king beeing desirous to be crowned in this Councell, by
the hands of Pope Gregorie, (a Ceremonie whereof he made great account) he refused
him, vnlesse he would acknowledge himselfe Vassall to the Church of Rome, and pay
the arrerages of the Rent which the deceased King Don Pedro his father had promised:
the which the King Don Iames would not do, holding it an vnworthy thing, so to
debase the greatnesse of his Crowne, and restraine the libertie of his Realme in any sort.
Wherefore seeming to haue some feeling thereof by his words, and making his merits
knowne vnto the Church, by so many victories gotten against the Moores, in regard
whereof, they should do him honour, hee returned very much discontented to Montpellier.
Both this yeare 1274. and some others before, the Realme of Arragon and Cattelogne
had beene in continuall tumults and rebellions, the Nobilitie opposing themselues
against the king, vppon colour of breach of their priuiledges and liberties, besides
the continuall practises of the Infant Don Pedro against his brother Don Fernand,
who drew the Nobilitie and Townes of Arragon into pernicious factions: Don Pedro
proceeding so maliciously, as the king Don Iames their father was forced to take the
gouernement of the Realme, and the managing of affaires from him: the which hee
did in an open assembly of the Estates called to that end at Exea, in the which were
condemned for contumacie, Don Artal of Luna, Lopes Ortis Sentia, Symon of
Ahones, Diego Gurrea, and Pedro Ortis, by the sentence of Roderigo Castelliol, holding
then the Magistracie of Iustice Maior of Arragon:Troubles in Arragon. by reason whereof, and of
these seditions and quarrels, hee was afterwards slaine by Bertrand Canelia, and
Don Willyam Raymond Odena smoothered in the water, by the commandement of
the Infant Don Pedro, who accused his brother Don Fernand of treason, and practises
against the life of their father: whereof diligent information was made, and
Don Raymond Foulques, Vicount of Cardonne, Don Pedro Verga, Galserand de Pinos,
and other Noblemen were poursued, both by reason thereof, and for that they refused
to do their due seruices and obedience vnto the king, in his warres, voyages,
and expeditions, as feudataries are bound, whereuppon they were depriued of their
fees and military honours, according to the custome of Spaine, by the which Places
and States were giuen to be held in fee, vnder the Soueraigntie of the Crowne, vppon
condition to yeeld them vp vnto the king beeing demanded.
It did auaile them nothing to obiect the priuiledges of Cattelogne, which were:

That the Nobility might quit the kings obedience in case of controuersies and sutes,
especially if there were question of their liberties, and to protest it publikely. To compound
which troubles the Estates were assembled againe that yeare 1274. at Lerida, and
Iudges appointed by them: but the disorder was so great, as the king incensed with a
rash and inhumane fury against his son D. Fernand and his confederates, he gaue him ouer
in prey to his brother D. Pedro, who beseeged him in the Castell of Pomar, took him,
and caused him to be drowned in the riuer of Signa,Don Pedro of Arragon drownes his brother. and obtained his goods and spoile,
for the execution of this cruell act. D. Fernand had married Donna Aldoncia of Vrrea, by
whom he lest a sonne called Don Philip Fernandes, which was the stemme of the noble
house of Castro in Arragon.
14 These disorders were seconded by the proceedings of the Inquisitors Monkes, against
them that were suspected to fauour the opinion of the Albigeois, condemned by
the Popes. This Commission was affected by Friar Raymond of Begnafort a Iacobine abouementioned,
and giuen to Friar Pedro Cadrieta, and William Colonico of the same Order,
who inquiring of this crime with great vehemency, did many exploits in Cattelogne,
namely, in the Diocesse of Vrgel, where they tooke out of the graue the bones of Arnaud
of Castelbon, and of Ermesinde, or Brunicende his daughter, Grandmother to Roger Bernard
Earle of Foix, deceased a little before, and caused them to be publikely burnt, condemning
their memorie. Such was the estate of Arragon after the returne of the king D.
Iames from the Councel of Lyons.
D. Henry king of Nauarre newly come to the Crowne,Nauarre. was to dispute with D. Pedro infant
of Arragon, for the right which he pretended, to the Realme of Nauarre, as Cessionarie
to D. Iaime his father: but it fell out happily for him, that there grew, so great diuision
betwixt the father and the sonne: by reason whereof the Infant D. Pedro entred into
familiarity with the king of Nauarre, that he might be fauoured by him (...) enterprises:
and the better to incourage him, he sent a knight vnto him called D. William of Cruillas,
to make an accord betwixt them for this pretended right, wherof the king D. Henry made
no great account, yet he gaue him good words, and intertained this young Prince, still
keeping Don Iaime in feare, that they would agree to his preiudice, which was a good
meanes for the king of Nauarre to be assured of him: for D. Iaime fearing this league
should take effect, preuented his sonne, and sought D. Henries friendship, making a truce
for many yeares with him, during the which they should not talke of right, pretensions,
nor of any reall nor personall actions. So King Henry the Grosse inioyed his Realme
quietly, by the discord of others.
This king was married before he came to the Crowne, beeing but Earle of Ronay,
to Ieanne daughter to Robert Earle of Arthois, Brother to Saint Lewis: so as shee was
allyed to the Royall houses of France and Spaine. The king had Don Thibaud by this
marriage,Genealo^^ of Nauarre. whome the nurce let fall out of a Gallerie, in the towne of Estella, and slue
him: some say, it was his Gouernour, who let him fall vnaduisedly, and was so grieued,
as hee cast himselfe headlong after the child, and slue himselfe: Hee had no other
sonne, Wherefore the masculine line of the Earles of Champagne in Nauarre, ended
in this king, hauing continued but forty yeares. Hee had besides one daughter by his wife
called Donna Ieanne by her mothers name, who came to inherit the Realme of Nauarre
with the Counties of Brie, Champagne, and other Estates of her Father. The Spanish
Authours write, that the King and Queene, her father and mother, caused her to bee receiued
and declared Queene in the Estates of Nauarre beeing but two yeares and seuen
moneths old, which was a meanes to vnite Nauarre to France for some yeares. This
King Don Henry beeing Lieutenant in Nauarre for Don Thibaud his brother, being yet
vnmarried, had the company of a Lady, the heire of the house of Lacarra, of whom hee
begatte a sonne, whome he named Henry as himselfe. Beeing growne, he was much fauoured
by the kings which succeeded his father, and obtained the dignitie of Marshall, or
chiefe Commander of armes in Nauarre:Family of Henriques of Nauarre Lords of Ab^^tas. They hold, that the noble family of Henriques
in Neuarre, Lords of Ablitas, is descended from him. D. Henry the Grosse raigned
only three yeares, 7. moneths, and 17. dayes. He died in the citty of Pampelone in the Bishops
pallace this yeare 1274. and was interred in the Cathedrall church.

There is no particular mention of his deedes, nor of his gouernement in Nauarre, but
that he brake an vnion made in the time of the king D. Sancho, betwixt the Bourgers and
inhabitants of Pampelone, from that time diuided in Nauarriere, a Bourg, the reason
that mooued him thereunto, is not set downe, but that it it was preiudiciall to the
Ci^^le.
Donna Ieanne the onely daughter and heire to the king D. Henry,D. Ieanne he^^^^ Nauarre. remained in the power
of the Estates of Nauarre, beeing onely three yeares old: presently there grew great
 troubles among the Nauarrois, as well for the gouernement of the Realme, as for the
bringing vp of the Infanta. The gouernement of the Realme was in the hands of Pero
Sanches de Montagu,D. Pero Sanches de Montagu Regent in Nauarre. Lord of Cascant: but for the bringing vp of the Infanta D. Ieanne,
who was then in the custodie of the Queene her mother, there was great dispute in an
assembly called to that end in the citty of Pampelone. Some would haue her deliuered to
the king D. Alphonso and of this number was Don Garcia Almorauid: against these Don
Pero Sanches of Montagu, Don Armingol Bishop of Pampelone, with many others, were
of opinion, that she should be put into the hands of D. Iames king of Arragon: but the
Queene her mother desired she might come into the hands of the French, demanding
Philip king of France to be tutor to her daughter and Realme. In these debates which
were neither gouerned by modestie nor reason, the Queene (fearing lest some inconuenience
should fall vpon her daughter and her selfe, beeing assisted by the Noblemen and
Knights which were of her faction) stole away in the night, and carried the Infanta (who
was the cause of all the quarrell) with her into France,The b^ire of Nauarre transported into France by her mother. where shee was courteously intertained
by King Philip the third then raigning, her cousin germaine. The Nauarrois
hearing of her ^^parture, disputed no more for the daughter, but applyed themselues
wholy to the^ ^^ns which were made betwixt the kings of Arragon and Castile, either
of the^ (...) ^e receiued King of Nauarre, vppon fauour of the rights which they
pretended to haue.
Don Iaime of Arragon was first aduertised of the death of the King Don Henry:
wherefore hee sent Ambassadours presently vnto the Estates, intreating them not
to hinder him in the possession of the Realme which did of right belong vnto him, not only
by reason of the adoption and donation which the king D. Sancho the strong had made
vnto him, but by a more ancient title: for that (sayd they) the kings which had held the
Realme since D. Alphonso the Warrior,Realme of Nauarre effected by the kings of Castile and Arragon. had vsurped it by force, and were intruders without
any lawfull title, to the preiudice of the Kings of Arragon. Moreouer, he let them vnderstand,
that there was due vnto him by the deceased kings of Nauarre, 60000. markes of
siluer, which did augment and better his pretension to the sayd Realme: for which considerations
the Ambassadors required them to receiue the king D. Iaime, or D. Pedro for
their king. which they should best like of, promising them all good vsage. On the other
side, king D. Alphonso desiring that his sonne D. Fernand de la Cerde should obtaine this
realme, renouncing the ancient rights which he pretended thereunto, and without any
other request, he gaue him an army to seaze thereon. It fell out that these two pretendants
demanded ayde and support one of another, to recouer that which they both desired.
The Noblemen and Deputies of the Estates, seeing the great danger which did threaten
the Realme by these diuisions, resolued to send the Bishop of Pampelone, and the gouernour,
to Sos, to accommodate their affaires in some sort with D. Pedro of Arragon,
who came thither, where they agreed, that in regard of 60000. markes of siluer, they
should stand to that which should be set downe by Don Sancho Arch-bishop of Toledo,
and brother to Don Pedro, who was held to be a Prelate of a good conscience, and as for
the rest, they should vse no force of either side, but all peaceable meanes: whereuppon
they made truce for a certaine time. The Ambassadors beeing returned, the place of the
Nauarrois assembly was changed to Puente la Reyna, whether came the chiefe Prelates,
Noblemen, and knights of the Realme, and the Deputies of the Townes of Pampelone,
Tudele, Estella, Olite, Sanguessa, Puente la Reyna and others of the same
iurisdiction.
There in the presence of this honourable Assembly Don Garcia Ortis of Acagra, one

of the Agents for the Infant of Arragon, required to haue the King D. Iaime receiued
for King of Nauarre, making a large relation of his rights, with promises and asseuerations
that it should re^ound to the great good of the Realme: whilst they are thus busied,
D. Fernand de la Cerde, Infant of Castille, entred the country in armes, where he had many
knights of his party: Comming therefore by the country of Oja hee past Ebro, and
besieged the towne of Viana, but finding it wel garded, hee left it, and came to Mendauia,
the which he tooke, and afterwards won the tower of Moreda, and committed great
spoiles finding no resistance in field. This force offred by the Castillan, made them incline
more to Arragon, and to the end they might preuent the danger which did threaten
them, they sent the Bishop D. Armingol againe to the Infant D. Pedro, being at Tarrassone,
who although he were a Castillan, yet was hee not of D. Fernands faction, and
with him were the Gouernor D. Goncalo Yuanes of Batzan, and his sonne D. Iohn Goncales
of Batzan, D. Gil Balduin Gouernor of Tudele and D. Martin Garces of Vnca. These
Deputies gaue him to vnderstand from the Estates, that they should bee very glad if hee
had any good interest to the realme of Nauar, and that they desired much to know from
him, what good alliance they might now treat together. To whom D. Pedro made answere
that he desired there should bee a promise of a marriage betwixt the Infanta D.
Ieanne, and his eldest sonne D. Alphonso: and if that he should die before she came to ful
age, then shee should marry with D. Iaime his second sonne, and if the marriage could
not be accomplished with the Infanta, that it should then be with some one of her cosin
germains, issued from the daughters of King Thibaud the first, especially of the Duchesse
of Brittan. He offred to giue them his sonne D. Alphonso, to assist them in the gouernment
of the realme: he did withall lay open vnto them the right which his father
D. Iaime had to the realme of Nauarre, and the cession which had beene made vnto him,
concluding, if these things were not pleasing vnto them, that they should aduise to
receiue him for their King within a yeere, deliuering the whole realme freely vnto
him.
The Ambassadors being returned with this answere,Accord betwixt the (...) of Nauarre and D. Pedro of Arragon. the assembly was put off to Olite,
where hauing consulted of their affaires, they made an accord with the Infant of Arragon,
according to the Articles which follow. That the marriage betwixt D. Alphonso
of Arragon his eldest sonne, and the Infanta D. Ieanne should take effect: and if shee
should die before the consummation, the Estates should seeke to marry him to one of
her cousin germains, daughter to Iohn Duke of Brittaine; and in case D. Alphonso
should die before the consummation of the marriage, the Infanta, or one of her cousins,
should bee giuen to him of D. Pedros sonnes which should bee next heire to the
crowne of Arragon. And whereas the Estates of Nauarre, could not for some lawfull
let accomplish it, then they should pay vnto D. Pedro, a hundred and forty thousand
Markes of siluer, for the expences hee had beene at in the defence of the realme of Nauarre,
and that out of the reuenues of the crowne, besides the 60000. markes which
were already due, making in all the sum of 200000. markes, as it was currant at that
time, payable within one yeere after the sayd let, accounting from Easter day: which accords
should not bee any preiudice to the rights and pretensions which his father D.
Iaime and he had to the realme of Nauarre, wherein the Estates promised to bee fauourable
vnto them, and to aide them all they could. These promises were made and
sworne by most of the Noblemen and Deputies assembled in the yeere 1274. vpon paine
of high treason if they failed, except in regard of the marriages, for that the Princesses
were not in their power.
But D Garcia Almorauid and others, who were otherwise affected, did not allow of
these accords, neither would they consent, not sweare them, which caused great troubles
and diuisions within the realme, neither did any of these Articles take effect, for that Philip
King of France, tooke the realme of Nauarre into his protection, and made his sonne
King, to whom hee married the Infant D. Ieanne, frustrating the King of Arragon; for the
Queene D. Ieanne widow to D. Henry, beeing retired into France, with the Infanta her
daughter, heire to that crowne, and being aduertised of all that had past in the assembly
of the Estates at Olite, was so incensed, as shee deliuered her daughter into the hands of

King Philip, who receiued both her and the realme of Nauarre into his protection, and
caused her to be brought vp with his two daughters,Nauarre vnder the protection of the French. Marguerite and Blanche, whom he
had had by his second wife, Mary of Brabant, beeing also very young. This Infanta D.
Ieanne was tall, beautifull, and of as good a grace as any Princesse of her time, wherefore
King Philip married her very yong, by a future promise, to his sonne Philip, surnamed
the faire, who succeeded in the realme of France.
16 The Estate of Nauarre standing vpon these termes D. Garcia Almorauid, a great
enemy to the Gouernment of D. Pedro Sanches of Montagu, Lord of Cascante, and a
fauourer of the Castillan faction, tooke occasion to enter into quarrell and to trouble
the realme, vpon certaine iarres which were betwixt the Inhabitants of Pampelone, who
had beene long diuided and in mutiny one against the other. Those of the quarter, called
Nauarriere would haue made certaine fortifications against the Bourg, but they
were hindred by the Gouernor, who thought that such barres betwixt the Inhabitants of
one towne would be the very nurses of hatred and sedition: Wherefore D. Garcia taking
vpon him to support the Inhabitants of Nauarriere, the realme grew into such factions,
as there was nothing but Insolences, murther, thefts and such like disorders committed;
to remedy the which the Estates were againe assembled at Pampelone, whereas disagreeing
who should gouerne the country, they resolued to send into France, to beseech
King Philip to send them a Nobleman to supply the place of Viceroy,Eustache of B. B^llemarche Gouernor of Nauarre. for their Princesse,
who was vnder his Gouernment. King Philip sent them a knight, who was wise and
very vertuous, called Eustache Beaumar, or Bellemarche, who was receiued and respected,
in whose hands the Estates did sweare fealty vnto their Queene, whose person he did
represent.
This knight by his wisdome and milde courses did soone reduce the realme to a quiet
peace, D. Iaime King of Arragon, being iealous that the French did thus set footing into
Nauarre, and being out of hope of the marriages which were concluded with his sonne
D. Pedro at Olite, he beganne to demaund the other point of the Capitulation, which
was to deliuer him the Realme, and that the Estates should assist him with their forces to
recouer his rights, the which being not accomplished, a warre began betwixt Nauarre
and Arragon. The pacification made within the realme by the French viceroy, continued
not long, for some knights, enemies of all rest, began vnder hand to accuse, and to
speake seditious words against their Gouernor, saying, that it was an ignominious thing
for the Nauarrois to be gouerned by a stranger, seeking to draw the people of Pampelone
into a muteny. Moreouer hauing practised some gentlemen of Castille, neere vnto
the frontiers of Nauarre, making them to enter the country in hostile manner, to the
end they might draw the Gouernor into armes, and to haue meanes in some incounter
or charge, to dispatch him. The French Gouernor seeing the affaires troubled towards
Castille, came to Estella, hauing giuen commandement to all knights and souldiars
to come thether with their armes and horses, where he was aduertised to the treason
which was plotted against him: wherefore in the night time he returned to Pampelone,
where hauing complained in open councel of this treachery and rebellion, he did wonderfully
amaze the confederats, but especially the chiefe actors, seeing their mallice discouered:
wherefore as it often happens that the wicked, being reproched of their wickednesse,
grow more impudent and mad, these conspirators were so rash, as they commanded
him to retire into France, saying, there were men ynough in Nauarre, better able
to gouerne then he: to whom the Gouernor answered, that he doubted not of the
sufficiency of the Noblemen of Nauarre, and that for his part hee had not affected that
charge, but it had beene imposed vpon him by King Philip his Lord; who was Tutor and
Protector of their Queene and her realme; wherein they (who were priuat persons)
should not hinder him, neither was he resolued to obey them: notwithstanding hee
would assemble the Estates, and if it were sayd by a common consent that he should retire
into France, he would obey, so as they gaue him a discharge, and testimony of his
administration, otherwise he could not with his honour shew himselfe before his King,
the which he esteemed more then his life.
The assembly being called at Pampelone, there was nothing concluded, for they

found not any iust cause why they should refuse the Gouernment of this French knight:
wherefore after many disputes, and seditious speeches vsed by the confederates of D. Garcia
Almorauid,D. Garcia Almorauid chiefe of a faction. the chiefe Author of this disorder, they departed, and presently went to
armes: so as the Gouernor was constrained to fortefie himselfe in the Bourg of Saint
Sernin: the Inhabitants whereof promised to assist him, and to die at his feet, rather
then to suffer him, who was Lieutenant to their Soueraigne Princesse, to take any
wrong, whether also D. Corbaran of Bidaure retired.Pampel^ne diuided into two factions. Against this Bourg, they of Nauarriere
banded for the other faction, D. Garcia Almorauid beeing their head: committing
all acts of hostility, one against the other, which choller and the fury of a barbarous
multitude could inuent; so as neither the authority, admonitions nor intreaties of Prelats,
and other great personages, which seemed Neu^^rs and Mediators of peace, preuailed
any thing, but did rather adde oyle to this fire.
They did labour much to make a truce for forty daies, which did but giue them means
to fortifie themselues, to commit all the cruelties which ensued, for the mutines of Nauarriere
during the truce drew in,Bishop of Pampelone a fauorer of the seditious. by the meanes of the Bishop Pampelone, great supplies
of strangers, with the which the truce being expired they attempted the Bourg:
but seeing they could not force it, they went into the Vignes of the aduerse partie, the
which they cut and pulled vp by the rootes; and not satisfied therewith, they murthered
all the little Infants which they of the Bourg had put forth to nurce in those villages,
beating out their braines (with a most barbarous inhumanity) against the stones
and walles, adding to these impieties, many iniurious words against their aduersaries, to
the dishonour of their Queene.
Moreouer this brutish people hauing intelligence that D. Pedro Sanches of Montagu,
who in this last tumult had beene opposite to the Gouernor Eustache Bellemarche,
would reconcile himselfe vnto him, they came in the night into his lodging, and murthered
him cruelly. Such insolencies did the Inhabitants of Nauarriere commit against
the Maiesty of God and their Queene:D. Pero Sanches de Montagu murthered. wherefore they drew a heauy Iudgement
vpon them: for the French King beeing aduertised of their rebelious actions, vpon the
descouery of their conspiracy, was wonderfully offended: wherefore he raised a great army,
meaning to punish those which had carried so little respect vnto his greatnesse, and
had beene the cause of the ensuing miseries, which army he himselfe would lead into
Nauarre, in the yeere 1276. but being arriued at Saluaterre in Bearn, and forced to stay
there some time,An. 1276. by reason of the aboundance of snow which had fallne, and stopt the
passages of the mountaines, he was so sollicited by them that were not well pleased with
this voyage, as he resolued to returne, giuing the floure of his army to Charles (the Histories
of France call him Robert the second) Earle of Artois, to conduct it into Nauarre,
who crossing the mountaines by Iacca,Earle of Artois sent into Nau^^e to punish the rebels of Pampelone. came by Sanguessa to Pampelona, refusing to
passe by the Valley of Roncal, for that the Inhabitants held the party of them of Nauarriere:
To whose succors there were certaine bands of Castillans entred into the realme,
who would haue retired, when as they heard of the comming of the French, but beeing
charged in the reereward, they lost some men, and as they retired slowly, the French
and Nauarrois of their party charged them againe, wherevpon they turned head, but
they were defeated and put to flight, with great losse. And for that during the fight
the Nauarrois cried often vnto the Castillans, Aqui tornais? that is to say, doe you returne?
and that this demaund was often heard; they say that the hospital which was
built to bury them that were slaine in this incounter, was for this caused named Aqui tornais,
and so continues vnto this day. The Earle of Artois besieged Nauarriere, the which
he prest in such sorrt,D. Garcia almorauid abandons the rebels. as D. Garcia Almorauid, who was within it with many of his confederates,
fearing they should not bee able to defend it, got out in the night, abandoning
those miserable wretches to the punishment which they had deserued. These
commanders retired to the castle of Sar, from whence the French dislodged them, forcing
them to flie into the Island of Sardaigne.
The Inhabitants of Nauarriere finding themselues in the morning without captaines,
were much troubled, and like men which were better theeues and mutines then soldiars,
they beganne to cry out for mercy, and to craue pardon of the Earle of Artois, who

seeming to pitty them much,Nauarriere of Pampclone taken. whilst he entertained them with words on the one side, hee
caused the walles and forts which were vnmanned to be assailed on the other, so as the
souldiars entred sodainely, and made a cruell butchery of this wretched people, neuer
ceasing to kil whilst that day lasted, and when night came they fel to the spoile, committing
such excesse and violences, as victory, hatred and fury doth sugiest to insolent souldiars:
and not content to haue slaine the men, and taken their goods, without respect
of holy to prophane, they extended their rage euen vnto the houses and buildings,
which they did ruine and burne: wherewith the other quaters of the towne were indomaged,
the fire flying from one to the other, doing great harme to them that had not
offended. The Chamber of accounts was fired, where there were many titles, letters
and ancient Records of the realme of Nauarre burned: the rest which could bee saued,
was carried to the castle of Tiebas, whereas the Treasor and Chamber of accounts of
Nauarre hath continued long.Seuere punished. The fury beeing ended, those which had escaped the
sword, were condemned, and publikely executed as traitors: not any one escaping the
seuerity of that sentence, but such as the innocency of their age excused, and all their
goods were confiscated.
Thus Nauarriere of Pampelone was ruined by a iust iudgement of God, in reuenge of
the brutish cruelties, which these mutines did vse against innocent age, in the villages, against
the city, and other their insolencies and rebellions. For the murther committed
vpon the person of D. Pedro Sanches of Montagu, Lord of Cascante, and other their insolencies,
there were called in question and accused before the Estates of Nauarre which
were called to that end, D. Goncal Inigo, Iohn Incalbiz and his sonne, Symon of Varriz, Michel
Garces of Varriz, Garcia Perez of Licoani, Pedro Ximenes of Sabalca, Symon Perez of
Opaco, Ineg^ Gil of Vrdauiz, Sancho Inigues of Vrdaniz, Goncal^o of Arbicu, and Ruy Goncales
his brother, Sancho Perez of Aguerre, and Ochoa Perez his brother, Iohn of Armendariz,
Iohn and Sanches the Biscain, al which appeering not, their cause was more hainous,
hauing for their aduerse parties, Ruy Peres of Echales, Fernand Perez of Echales, Michel
Perez of Subica, and Pedro of Aybar. By these proceedings and excutions, and rest of
mutines were terrefied, and the realme remained in peace.
17 During these actions in Nauarre, D. Alphonso King of Castille.Castilie, made preparation
to march, with an intent to despossesse the Emperor Rodolphus, who had beene chosen
to his preiudice, notwithstanding that he had beene perswaded by many of his friends
not to make any more account of the Empire, seeing the occasions which might haue
fauored him were lost: yea Pope Gregory being come to the councel of Lyons, considering
the miseries which might come to Christendome, if D. Alphonso should wilfully
pursue his pretended right, hee sent one vnto him, called Fredul Abbot of Lunel, afterwards
Bishoppe of Ouiedo, to perswade him to rest satisfied with his royall Estate,
and not to trouble himselfe any more with the affaires of the Empire, seeing that by
the consent of all the Electors, Rodolphus had beene crowned in the towne of Aix La
Chappelle. And to make him beleeue that hee gaue him fatherly councell, he dispensed
with him to take the tenth of all the reuenues of the Clergy, for sixe yeeres to make
warre against the Moores. But D. Alphonso being obstinate, hee thought that if hee
went to see the Pope, he might draw him to set downe some order betwixt him and Rodolphus,
so as both might intitle themselues Kings of the Romains: wherefore he told
the Abbot of Lunel, that he desired to passe into France, and to conferre personally
with his Holinesse, in some commodious towne, either Montpellier, or where hee
pleased.
The Pope hearing this answer, perswaded, himselfe that D. Alphonso had no great desire
to be Emperor, wherevpon without further deliberation, he ratefied the Election of
Rodolphus,Pope ratefies the elections of Rodolphus. with the cons^^t of the whole consistory, in a conuocation at Lyons, calling
him King of Romains, and commanding all the Princes and Prouinces of the Empire,
to obay him: aduising Rodolphus to passe speedily into Italy, to receiue the crowne of the Empire.
It may be he had regard to the diuersity of humors betwixt the Germains and
Spaniards.
D. Alphonso hauing in the meane time setled his affaires, with his Nobility, and

giuen order for the gouernment thereof (not caring to seeke any truce with Aben Ioseph
King of Maroc, holding it would be dishonorable, which notwithstanding was the cause
of great mischiefe, as we shall see) he went from Toledo, to goe into France, to the Pope,
yet was he aduertised, that he had proceeded to the confirmation of Rodolphus. He was
accompanied by D. Munuel his brother, the Queene D. Violant the Infants D. Sancho, D.
Iohn, D. Pedro and D. Iaime his children, with many Noblemen and Knights of Marke, of
Castille, Leon, and his other dominions. He left the gouernment of the realme to his
eldest sonne D. Fernand, and the Moores frontier, to the Earle D. Nugno of Lara. Hee
had giuen order to haue a fleet prepared of many ships, in the ports of Asturia, Gallicia,
and Andalusia, the which coasting along Spaine, Languedoc and Prouence, should attend
him at Marseilles, being furnished with many souldiers, and great store of victuals;
sending with it the superfluous horses and baggage of his traine. D. Alphonso marching
through the country of his father in law D. Iaime, he came to Tarragone where he was
honourably entertained by him, then they arriued at Barcelona, about Christmas, in the
yeere 1275.An. 1275.. Alphonso stayed there with his traine six weekes, being often aduised by
the King of Arragon, not to proceed, giuing him many great and considerable reasons:
but there was no meanes to diuert him from this voyage, beeing so farre aduanced.
Being come to Perpignan, hee stayed some time to conclude of the time and place
of their enterview; the towne of Beaucaire was chosen, and the Archbishop of Narbonne
had commandement to goe and meet him, and to conduct him. Hee left the
Queene his wife and his children at Perpignan, except D. Sancho whom he sent into
Castille, by the aduise of the King of Arragon; and crossing Languedoc hauing the Archbishop
for his guide, he arriued at Beaucaire,Pope and D. Alphonso King of Cas^ille meet at Beaucaire. whereas the Pope met him with some of the
chiefe Cardinals, the councel of Lyons being ended. D. Alphonso treated of many matters
with the Pope, but he could not obtaine any thing that hee propounded. He shewed
him the nullity of Rodolphus election by many reasons, complayning greatly of his confirmation,
making a great instance vpon that point in vaine;Complaints and requests of D. Alphonso to the Pope; but in vaine. but the Pope wanted no
excuses. Then he laied open to the Pope the reasons he had to the succession of the
house of Suabe after the death of Conradin King of Naples and Sicile, and Duke of Suabe,
who was inhumainly beheaded by the French at Naples, in the yeere 1269. who hauing
left no lawfull children, the succession of the house belonged to him, in the right
of his mother D. Beatrix, who was the right heire of that Dutchy, whereon Rodolphus
had to his preiudice seized: besides he complayned of the French King, who had intruded,
and seized vpon the realme of Nauarre, which by ancient rights belonged to the
house of Castille, whereof he produced some reasons to iustifie his saying, but all was
in vaine: finally he besought the Pope to be a mediator for the deliuery of D. Henry
his brother, who since the battaile, and defeat of Conradin, was prisoner in the hands of
Charles King of Naples and Sicile. D. Alphonso propounded many other things vnto the
Pope, but without any effect: So as he spent the whole spring and part of the Sommer
in this negotiation, vntill that the Pope seauing him much discontented, returned
to Rome, yet hee still vsed the title and armes of the Empire, vntill that he was forced
by censures to leaue them, the Archbishop of Seuile hauing charge to intimate them
vnto him.
18. King D. Alphonso being busied in this vaine pursute, the MooresMoor^^. his confederats
and vassals of Spaine, called in Aben Ioseph Miralmumin of Affrike, thinking they might
not onely shake off the Christians yoake, but make some notable breach in the Estates
of Leon and Castille, the King being absent, or at the least they should seize vpon Andalusia;
and for that wee haue often made mention of this King Iacob Aben Ioseph, it is
needful we should relate what he was, and treate some thing of the Moores Estate in
Affrike, for that those of Spaine haue had their support from them. The Miralmumin
Aben Mahomad the old, of the race of the Almohades, beeing dead, after he had lost the
battaile of Muradal, we made mention that his Grand-child called Caid Arrax, raigned,
who was the sonne of Buxaf, dead before his father Mahumet. This Caid Arrax was the fifth King of Affrike, of the race of the Almohades, whose Empire extended from the

West Ocean vnto Egipt. There were many Admirals, or Gouernors vnder him, ruling
the Prouinces; among the which Gomoranca Aben Zein, of the Linage of Abdalues, held
that of Tremessen, who behauing himselfe couetously and violently in his gouernment,
fell in disgrace with his King Caid Arrax, so as carrying himselfe rebelliously, the
King came and besieged him in a castle called Tremezezir, whereas a Moore, cousin to
Gomaranca, going out of the fort slue the Miralmumin, seeming to yeeld vnto him, and
shewing him a place whereby the castle might be taken. The army amazed at the death
of their King, was instantly set vpon by the garrison of Tremezezir, being led by G^mararca*
and put to flight,Kingdome of Trem^ss^^. by which victory the Moore did appropriat that Prouince vnto
himselfe, causing himselfe to be called King of Tremessen, and this was the beginning of
that Kingdome.
At the same time there was in the city of Fez, a family of Moores, called the Benaotazes
and Merines, which descended from a famous Moore, called Merin, who had beene
a Christian and became a Mahometist. The chiefe of this house at that time, was called
Bucar Aben Merin, and gouerned the city of Fez, vnder the Miralmumin Caid
Arrax, after whose death, and the defeat of his army by Gomaranca, before Tremezezir,
this Bucar Aben Merin fell vpon the Almohades, which had escaped, and gathered themselues
together about Fez,Realme of Fez. whom hauing put to rout, he carried himselfe for King of Fez,
imitating that which his companion Gomaranca Aben Zein had done in Tremessen, and
giuing a beginning to this new Kingdome. A brother of his called Iacob Aben Ioseph,
vsurped (in the same troubles) the Principality in Ribat: so as the Estate of the Almohades
raigning in Maroc, was then much decaied. These being aduertised of the death
of Caid Arrax,Almorcada the sixt Mira^mumi^ of Maroc. and of the tyranies aboue named, did presently aduance a kinsman of his,
to the royall seat, his name was Almorcada, who was the sixth Miralmumin of the race
of the Almohades. He was no sooner crowned King, but he went to field with an army,
to punish these rebels which had intitled themselues Kings in their gouernments: First
he came and assailed Bucar Aben Merin, the new King of Fez, but he was repulst, and
vanquished by him; so as the race of the Merins kept the possession of Fez, and of the
territory, in the plaine country, or Algarue, as the Moores call it. So as Bucar dying a
peceable King, his sonne Hiaja raigned after him, vnder the tutelage of Iacob Aben Ioseph,
his vncle, for that he was then very young, but he liued not long; wherefore Iaccb Aben
Ioseph remained heire of the realme of Fez, and was much esteemed and feared amongst
the Moores, being called (as an honour) the old or elder of the Merins. This Moores
good fortune was not so bounded for Budebuz nephew to Almorcada king of Maroc, being
rebelled against him, and retired to Fez, he gaue him an occasion to get the realme
of Maroc, and to ioyne it vnto Fez. Budebuz intreated Iacob Aben Ioseph, to aide him against
his vncle, promising to giue him all that he held of the realme of Fez, vnto the riuer
Natab.
Iacob Aben Ioseph gaue him such succors, as Almorcada being amazed, durst not attend
him within Maroc, but fled, being pursued by certaine horsemen which Budebuz sent after
him,Budebuz the seuen^ King of Maroc. whom they ouertooke and slue, carrying his head to the King of Fez: wherefore
Budebuz was peaceable King of Maroc, the seuenth and last of the Almohades. Finding
himselfe setled in his Kingdome, he would haue mocked Iacob Aben Ioseph, who had helpt
him to attaine this dignity, not caring to performe any promise, but threatned to take
Fez from him, by reason of which Ingratitude, there beganne a cruell warre betwixt
them, the which hauing continued three yeeres, at the last it was ended, by the defeat
and death of King Budebuz,Iacob Aben Ioseph first King Merin at Maroc. being slaine in battaile, of whose Estate Iacob Aben Ioseph
seized, giuing an end to the raigne of the Almohades, and a beginning to that of the family
of Merin in Affrike, about the yeere of our Lord 1270. It is this Iacob Aben Ioseph,
which we haue sayd, had sent one thousand light horses Arabians into Spaine to Mahumet
Alhamar King of Granado, vnder the conduct of a captaine with one eye, of great
authority: with whom D. Alphonso the wise, King of Castille, hauing not vouchsafed
to treate of a truce, when as he went in France to court the Pope, Mir Almuz who had
succeeded in Granado, and hee conspired together, to the preiudice of Castille, and all
the Christians in Spaine: for this King of Granado beeing discontented with the

accords which he had made at his first entrance, in the which he could not procure King
Alphonso to abandon the captaines of Mal^ge and Guadix his enemies, he feared that
these Moores which had beene enemies to his father and him, would attempt some
thing against his realme, and therefore he resolued, at what price soeuer, to ruine them.
And for that it was a meanes to imbarke him in a warre with the King of Castille, hee
did solicit Iacob Aben Ioseph to vndertake the enterprise of Spaine, as his predecessors
Kings of Arabia had done, offring him the townes and ports of Algezire and Tariffe,
for his descent, whereof the Miralmumin did willingly accept, finding himselfe assured
in his Estate, and mighty in men and armes: but it happened that they of Malaga and
Guadix, seeing that the truee, which they had with the King of Granado, was nere expired,
and doubting they should haue warre, and not be releeued by the forces of Castille,
by reason of the Kings absence, they held it the best course to reconcile themselues
to the King of Granado, as in like manner the captaine of Comares did, who was
of the same league.
Notwithstanding the Miralmumin hauing leauied great forces to passe into Spaine,
sent some troupes of Moores to receiue the townes of Algezire and Tariffe, according
to the accord,The King of Maroc passeth into Spaine. the which were deliuered vnto them: so as he stayed not long to come
himselfe in person to Algezire, whereas afterwards he past his troupes to the number
of seuenteene thousand horse: The two Kings met in the country of Malaga, whereas
they concluded to make warre against the Christians; the Affrican King towards Eccia,
and he of Granado but Iaen. This passage was contrary to the expectation of the
Christian Princes, for the Miralmumin, who could not make so great a leauy of horse,
without knowledge, made a shew as if he would goe against one of his subiects which
was rebelled, and had by stealth taken the towne of Ceuta; and the better to dissemble
his deseigne, hee had sent to intreat the King of Arragon to assist him in this warre
with tenne Gallies, and some ships of burthen, and with fiue hundred horse, to
whom hee promised good entertainememt. Don Fernand de la Cerde Viceroy and
Lieutenant generall in Spaine for his father, did not descouer that these forces were
prepared for Castille, vntill they had past the straight, being then a Burgos, hee
was aduertised of the League betwixt these Moorish Kings, and of the reconciliation
of them of Malaga and Guadix with the King of Granado, all which inconueniences
grew by the Kings absence, wherefore, both of himselfe, and at the instance of
Don Nugno de Lara, who was at Cordoua, hee made the speediest preparation hee
could, to oppose himselfe against the violence of these Infidels.
Don Nugno knowing that the Miralmumin tooke the way of Ecclia, drew neere
vnto that quarter, with such forces as he could gather together: but finding the passage
stopt, hee was forced for to fight with the Moores, where after a long fight
hee was defeated and slaine, yet most of his men which escaped entred but night
into Eccia.
The victorious Moores hauing found the body of Don Nugno,D. Nugno de Lara vanquished by the Moores and slaine. cut off his head and
sent it to Mahumet King of Granado, who was glad of this victory, but very much discontented
for the death of the Earle Don Nugno, who had beene the cause that hee
raigned wherefore hee sent his head to Cordoua, to bee buried with his body. The
like misfortune happened to Don Sancho of Arragon Archbishop of Toledo, who
hauing gathered together all the souldiars of Toledo, Guadalajara, Madrid and Talauera,
presented himselfe vpon the frontier, where hee incountred the King of Granados
army, inuading the Diocesse of Iaen, where hee was slaine and his army put
to route. His body, head and hand, where he ware the Pontifical Ring,Rout and death of D. Sancho of Arragon Archbishop of Toledo by the Moores, beeing seperated,
were recouered from the Moores, and brought to Toledo, where they were buried
with great sorrow of all the people, taking it for a mournfull presage for the affaires
of Spaine: D. Goncalo, Bishop of Burgos succeded him in this dignity, and was afterwards
made Cardinal, the first amongst all the Bishops of the Church.
They write that the Archbishop Don Sancho did not die fighting, in the charge,
but that beeing taken, there grewe debate betwixt some captaines Moores, some striuing
to lead him to the Miralmumin Iacob Aben Ioseph, and others to King Mahumet, and

that the Gouernor of Malaga, called Aben Atar arriuing; foreseeing that by the contention
for this prisoner, there might happen some great slaughter amongst the captaines
Moores, he cast an Azagaye, or Moorish dart at the Archbishop, and peerced his belly
through, saying, God forbid so many braue men should kil one an other for a dogge.
The day of this defeat, there arriued D. Lope Dias de Haro, Lord of Biscay, with a great
number of souldiars, horse and foote, which he had sodainely leuied, and lead by great
iourneies towards the frontier, by fauour whereof many which had remained at the battaile,
ioyntly with his troupes, and without any delay went all ioyntly together to incounter
the Moores, who receiued them couragiously, so as neither party could vant of
the victory, when as the night parted them. The greatest deeds of armes in these incounters,
were done about the Archbishop D. Sanchos crosse, the which he caused do be carried
before him, as primat, and had fallne into the Moores hands: but the Christians recouered
it againe, which made them hope for better.
19 These losses were augmented by the death of the Infant D. Fernand, the Viceroy,
being in villa Real, since named city Royal, where he attended the rest of his forces which
were leauied in all the countries subiect vnto Castille,Castille. to goe himselfe in person to this
warre.Death of the Infant D. Fernand de Ia Cerde. This Prince finding himselfe neere his end, he recommended his eldest sonne D.
Alphonso, being but an Infant, to D. Iohn Nugnes of Lara, eldest sonne to the Earle D.
Nugno, coniuring him to take the charge and gard of him, and of his right vnto the
realme, wherein he should by right succeed his grand-father Don Alphonso the wise;
the which Don Iohn Nugnes promised him, and being dead, he caused his body to bee
carried to Burgos, where it was buried in the Monastery of Las Huelgas. The miseries
which ensued brought the realme into great trouble, and if God had not stayed the enterprises
of the Infidels, by some admirable and vnknowne meanes, they were likey to
haue giuen a great and mortall wound to the Christians Estate in Spaine, but he spared
them. The Infant D. Sancho who had beene sent backe by King Alphonso, from Perpignan
being aduertised of his brothers death, went with al speed to Villa Real, where he was
receiued by the army, as Lieutenant to the King his father. The Myralmumin not able
to take Eccia,Truce betwixt the Christians and Moores. and finding the Christians forces to be much augmented, he retired to Algezire
and Tariffe: and seeming to himselfe that he had done ynough, and likewise the
King of Granado, they resolued to make a truce for two yeeres with the Christians a the
which being concluded and sworne, Iacob Aben Ioseph retired into Affrike, holding still
the townes of Tariffe and Algezire, where he left good garrisons: this was the successe
of the Arabians warre, King D. Alphonso being absent.
Being returned into Spaine about the end of the yeere 1276.An. 1276. he found the state in
great disorder, whereof he had beene alwaies aduertised during his aboad in France.
That which most grieued him, was the death of his eldest sonne D. Fernand, and not without
cause, for his other sonne D. Sancho made shew that he had some disordred enterprise
in his conceit, the which he put in execution, to the dishonor and preiudice of his father,
and elder brothers children, wherein D. Lope Dias de Haro, Lord of Biscay, did animate,
councel and conduct him: for as soone as the Infant D. Sancho arriued at Villa Real,
where his brother died, D. Lope Dias came vnto him: whereas D. Sancho knowing that
he was ill affected to the King D. Alphonso, and the deceased D. Fernand, and his familiar
friend, he did freely acquaint him with the desire he had to reigne, saying, it was fit that he
who was a knight,D Sanchos re^^tion to ^^ssesse his ^^^ewes of (...) Kingdome. and had learned to gouerne a realme, were it in warre or peace, should
reigne after his father, rather then his Nephews, the sons of his brother D. Fernand, who
were yet very yong, hauing need to Regents and Gouernors, charges which were effected
but great personages, who by reason therof, grew into quarrel one with the other, to the
oppression of the people, and hazard of the Estate, the which was chiefly to be feared in
these reuolts and tumults of the Moores; who could imbrace such an occasio^, to augment
their Estate with the preiudice of the Christians: intreating him to assist him to effect his
deseigne, adding therewithal great promises: wherevnto D. Lope Diaz answered, according
to the Infants desire, incorraging him to proceed in his enterprise, with assurance to
aide him: with this resolution they past with the army by Cordoua, and repulst the
Moores in such sort, as the Miralmumins retreat, and the abouementioned truce followed.

Herevpon the King D. Alphonso, did somewhat stay his sonnes enterprise, but not quite
ouerthrow it: for not long after D. Sancho not only assured himselfe to succeed his father
in the Kingdome, but would also raigne in his life time.
D. Iaime King of Arragon,Arragon. being intreated by the Castillans, had inuaded the Moores
by Marica during this warre, but with as bad successe, as the rest, for his men were put to
rout nere to Xatiua,Death of D. lame of Arragon. wheras D. Garcia Ortis of Acagra with many others were slaine. The
King resoluing to goe in person in his army, being old and broken, he fell sicke, and died
at Valencia, whether he caused himselfe to be carried, hauing raigned threescore yeeres
and ten monthes. A Prince whom Spaine, and especially his realme of Arragon, ought
much to commend,His vertues. for his great, pollitike, and millitary vertues, and his great zeale to
the religion of his age. They write of three notable precepts which hee gaue vnto D.
Alphonso King of Castille, being with him at Toledo. That hee should make the townes
and common people his friends, against the Insolencies of great men. That he should
neuer punish offenders secretly;His buildings and valour. and that hee should neuer seeme fearefull in doing
well. The Authors of Arragon write, that in his time hee built aboue two thousand
Churches and Chapells, and that he fought thirtie times in battaile against the
Moores; Hee left his sonne Don Pedro successor in his realme of Arragon, Valencia
and Cattelogne. To D. Iames his second sonne, he left the Islands of Majorca
and Minorca, with the title of a Kingdome, and the right of Soueraignty, but it continued
not long. He gaue by testament to the children of D. Theresa Gil of Bedaure, that is,
to D. Iames, Xirica, Toro, Eslida, Beho and Ahin: and to D. Pedro, Ayerbio, Lusia, Ahuero,
Liso, Artasson, Castillon, Sustico, Borota, Azuere, Gabatraios and Beninuena. It is credible
that he did marry this Lady secretly, yet after the death of Queene Iolant, which was about
the yeere 1251. hauing accompanied with her before, it may be betwixt these two
marriages, and not as some haue written, before his first marriage with D. Leonor of
Castille. These two sonnes D. Iames and D. Pedro, borne of D. Theresa, were the Authors
of the families of Xerica and Ayerbio. He also gaue by testament to D. Pedro Fernandes,
whom hee had by D. Berenguela Fernandes, Ixar: and did substitute vnto his lawfull
sonnes, the children of his daughters D. Isabel, Constance and Iolant: hee was interred in
the habit of a Monke of Cisteaux, in the royal Monastery of Pobler.


D. Pedro the third of that name, and the ninth
King of Arragon.
20 DOn Pedro his eldest sonne, was King in the yeere 1276. being surnamed the great,
by reason of his great exploits, some good, some bad. His Sonne. D. Alphonso
had the yeere before, by the care of D. Iames his Grandfather, beene sworne King of Arragon
and Valencia, after D. Pedro his father, by the Estates assembled to that end at Lerida.
He had him by D. Constance, daughter to Manfroy,Gene^logy of Arragon. bastard to the Emperor Frederic
the second King of Sicile and Naples, of whom hee also begat D. Iames, who was
King of Sicile; whose elder brother dying without children, he came to succeed in the
Realme of Arragon. Besides these, he had D. Fadrique, or Frederic, to whom was giuen
the realme of Sicile, and D. Pedro, who alone of all the brethren was no King, and two
daughters. D. Isabel, who was married to Don Denis King of Portugal, and Constance
or Violant, wife to Robert King Naples. In the right of his wife Constance, daughter
to Manfroy the vsurping King of Naples and Sicile, hee challenged these realmes
for him and his successours, who in the end enioyed them, and thus the Historie records
it.
William the second of that name King of Naples and Sicile,Sicile and Naples held by the Normans. being dead, being of the
Normans race, about the yeere 1189. Pope Clement the 3. then raigning, pretended that
these realmes were fallne to the church of Rome. But the noblemen and barons of the
realm, for diuers considerations, did make Tanered bastard son to Roger the 3. their King,
who first intitled himselfe King of Naples and Sicile, whereat Pope Celestine the 3. successor
to Clement, being discontented, he would haue dispossessed Tanered, to inuest the

Emperor Henry the sixth sonne to Frederic Barbarossa Duke of Suabe, in the realmes of
Naples and Sicile. And the better to assure him the royall title, he caused him to marry
Constance Neece or lawfull daughter of Roger, who was a professed Nunne in the Monastery
of Saint Mary, or as some write at Saint Peters of Palermo, dispensing with her
vow and profession, by his papal authority, by whom the Emperor Henry had Frederic,
who was afterwards Emperor, the second of that name. Henry sought long to dispossesse
Tancred, but it was in vaine. He beeing dead, his sonne Roger raigned little, after
whose decease, Queene Sibille caused an other sonne called William, to be presently
crowned, being very yong, whom the Emperor Henry found meanes to circumuent, vpon
collour of making some good accord with him: and hauing by policy drawne him
to Palermo, without entring into any conference, he caused him to be gelt, and sent him
into Germany, with his three sisters. By this meanes the Normands command in Naples
and Sicile, fell into the hands of the house of Suabe.Sicile and Naples in the house of Suabe. After the death of Henry,
Frederic his sonne being Emperour, and duke of Suabe, succeeded in these realmes, the
which hee enioyed, notwithstanding many crosses which the Popes gaue him, against
whom Gautier of Brene, husband to Queene Sybille, who had escaped out of prison,
led an army, but hee was taken and slue himselfe in prison. Frederic had by many
wiues many children: by Constance of Arragon, Henry the elder, duke of Suabe, and King
of Romains: by Iolant of Brenne, daughter to the King of Ierusalem, Conrad, also duke
of Suabe, and King of Romains, after the decease of his brother, and moreouer by testament
King of Naples. By Mahaut, or Isabel, according vnto some, daughter to Iohn
King of England, he had Henry the yonger, who was King of Sicile by Testament, and by
a concubine Manfroy, Conrad and Henry succeeded after their father Frederic, respectiuely,
in the realmes of Naples and Sicile. And for that they were young and absent, Manfroy
was appointed to be Gouernor of these Estates by the Emperor, in his brothers
names. Against whom Pope Innocent did chose the King of Englands brother to bee
King of Naples and Sicile, but he neuer past into Italy. By the practises of Popes, these
realmes were in great combustion, so as Manfroy was obeyed but by the lesser part.
Wherefore Conrad King of Romains was forced to passe into Italy, with a great army,
by meanes whereof the reduced these realmes vnder his obedience,Parricids committed by Conrad. who was afterwards
so transported with a desire of raigne, as he caused his brother, Henry the younger, to
bee slaine as Saint Felix, in Basilicata, and Frederic his Nephew, sonne to the elder
Henry, to bee poysoned, hauing inuited him to supper: for which parricide God suffered
that hee himselfe should die of poyson, which Manfroy his bastard brother
gaue him.
By these deathes the realmes of Naples and Sicile came by lawfull succession to Conradin,
brother to Frederic that was poysoned,Manfroys parricide. sonne to Henry the elder. But Manfroy
who had gouerned in an others name, and tasted the sweet of command, resolued then to
keepe these realmes for himselfe, sending men into Germany to dispatch Conradin, if it
were possible, were it by poison or otherwise: in the meane time he held his authority
of Lieutenant or Viceroy, against the Popes attempts: and after a while faigning that
Conradin was dead, he clad himselfe in mourning, and making a great speech in an assembly
of the Noblemen and States of the Realme, seeming to bee very sorrowfull for
the death of his Nephew, he perswaded them to choose him King of Naples and Sicile
by a generall consent, where he raigned thirteene yeeres: and the better to maintaine
himselfe, he made a league with the Venetians and other Potentates of Italy: Against
whom Pope Vrbain the fourth, called out of France Charles brother to Saint Lewis,
Duke of Anjou,Charles of Aniou made king of Naples and Sicile* and Earle of Prouence, who had married D. Beatrix of Arragon, Proprietary
of that Earldome, according to the Arragonois, who was inuested by him in the
realmes of Naples and Sicile, in the yeere 1262. with charge that hee should expel Manfroy,
and pay a rent vnto the Church as feudatarie. Charles, by the perswasion of D.
Beatrix his wife, who was iealous to see her two sister Queenes, the one of France, the other
of England, vndertooke the voiage of Italy, where his inuestiture was confirmed,
and he crowned with his wife, at Rome, at Saint Iohn of Latran, by Pope Clement the
fourth. Then passing on against Manfroy, who came to incounter him, both armies met

about at Bencuent,Manfroy vanquished and slaine by the French. in the yeere 1266. whereas Manfroy was slaine in battaile, and his
men vanquished; so as Charles remained peaceble King of Naples and Sicile. The body
of Manfroy was not buried in holy ground, for that he stood excommunicate, but in a
field nere vnto beneuent, from whence he was afterwards transported vnto the confines
of Campania, his wife and children, being taken by the French, died in prison. Some
yeeres after Conradin (the right heire of these realmes) past into Italy, being perswaded by
many Italians of the Gibeline faction, who hauing incountred the French army neere
vnto Arezzo, vanquished it: wherefore marching boldly on, hee had a second incounter
with King Charles his army, neere vnto Alba, the which was vnfortunate for him; for
his army was not onely defeated, but himselfe taken prisoner (thinking to saue himselfe,
in a disguised habit) and carried to Naples, whereas King Charles by a detestable inhumanity
(thrust on by Pope Clement) in the yeere 1269. cut off his head, with that of his
cousin Frederic Duke of Austria, and of many Noblemen of Naples and Sicile, which
had followed Conradins party. By these meanes the Popes gaue these realmes vnto the
French, and called them the two Sicilles, the one on this side, the other beyond the Far.
Henry brother to D. Alphonso King of Castille, Lieutenant of Rome, was partisan to Conradin
in this warre, and was taken, as hath beene sayd.
If the Sultan of Egipt, a barbarous Prince, hauing the King Saint Lewis, and his brother
Charles prisoners, had intreated them in like manner, the French would haue held it
very strang. But God powred forth his vengeance vpon the French some yeeres after, in
the Island of Sicile, whether they called D. Pedro King of Aragon, who had succeeded
D. Iaime his father, in the yeere 1276. who without delay caused himselfe to be crowned
in Saragossa, by. Bernard Oliuelia Archbishop of Tarragone: but before he receiued
the crowne, he made protestation, that he would not be bound to any submission,
nor promise, which. Pedro his Grandfather had made vnto the Pope, or the church of
Rome, to the preiudice of the liberty of his realme, to the end they should not pretend
that hee was their Leege-man, or vassal.
In the same assembly of Estates of Sarragossa, he caused the oth to be confirmed to
his son D. Alphonso, to raigne after him, as heire presumptiue, and for that at his comming
to the crowne, he had not assembled the Estates of Cattelogne at Barcelona, according
to the ancient customes, there to promise and sweare the obseruation of the
rights, lawes and preuiledges of the country, the Noblemen of Cattelogne, being long
inured to tumults, they made a league and conspired with the townes, for the preseruation
of their liberties: the chiefe of which conspiracy, were D. Roger Bernard Earle of
Foix holding many fees, and much land in Cattelog^e, Arnold Roger Earle of Pallars,
Ermengaud Earle of Vrgel, and Aznar his brother, Raymond Foulques Vicont of Cardone,
Bernard Roger Eril, Raymond Anglesol, and William Raymond Iosse, whereof we will
hereafter make mention: But wee must returne into Castille, where we haue left King
D. Alphonso the wise much troubled, for the disorders which had happened during his
absence.
21 Being arriued at Toledo, euery man repaired thether,Castille. and especially the Infant D.
Sancho, who had made truce for two yeeres with the Moores. Thether came also D. Lope
Diaz of Haro,An audacious speech of D. Lope Diaz d^ Haro. who was so hardy, as to deliuer a message for them all, that it would please
him to declare his sonne D. Sancho his successor in the realmes of Castille, Toledo, Leon
and other places, seeing hee had already giuen some proofes of his vertue and valour
against the Moores, and that he was the eldest of his sons lyuing: to whom the King made
but a cold answere in the beginning, but hauing afterwards assembled the Estates in the
towne of Segobia,D Alphonso reiects the children of D. Fernand his eldest sonne from the succession, and giues it to D. Sancho. by the councel of the Infant D. Manuel his brother, he resolued to gratefie
D. Sancho, whom he made heire of the crowne after his decease, and in this quality
hee was receiued by them all. Thus D. Alphonso and D. Fernand, the children of
Don Fernand de la Cerde, were put from the royall succession, which did belong vnto
them by right, although that some excuse this fact of D. Alphonso, saying that there was
no law at that time which did binde him to leaue the realme more to one then to an other;
as since there was made and receiued in the time of D. Fernand the fifth, in the city
of Toro, where it was decreed vpon this difficultie that the children of the elder brother

deceased, should in that respect be preferred before the vncle, representing their fathers
person.
The Queene D. Violant, and D. Blanche widow to D. Fernand, were so discontented
with this resolution of the Estates of Segobia, as taking his young children with them,
they went out of the country of Castille, to D. Pedro King of Arragon, brother to the
Queene D. Violant. Many Noblemen and townes of the Realme did also hold it to bee
very vniust, foreseeing many great miseries which would ensue, if the children did liue.
King D. Alphonso finding this discontentment, came to Burgos, where transported with
choller, he caused his brother D. Fadrique, or Frederic, to bee smothered, without any
forme of iustice, and commanded that D. Symon Ruis of Haro, Lord of Los Cameros,
should he burned in the towne of Treuigno,Cruelty of King D Alphonso. for that they had assisted the Ladies in their
retreat into Arragon, the which terrefied euery man. He sent also to D. Pedro King of
Arragon, to complaine that he had receiued these Princesses, and the children, whereof
he excused himselfe with good words.
Going from Burgos,An. 1278. he past through the country of Leon, and then tooke the way to
Seuile, being resolued to make warre against the Moores, so as in the yeeere 1278. hee
laied siege to Algezire, where there was a small garrison of the Miralmumins of Affrike;
D. Pedro his sonne was chiefe at this siege; but notwithstanding they prest it both by sea
and land, yet the Christians lost their labour.
During this enterprise the Infant D.The Queene D V^^l^nt vachast. Sancho caused the Queene his mother to returne
into Castille, to whom it was tedious to liue out of that Realme, where shee had some
Mignons, as Histories report, who tax her of adultery: and he procured D. Pedro King of
Arragon, to detaine the children of D. Fernand de la Cerde, his Nephewes, prisoners in the
castle of Xatiua, to the end they should not carry them into France, to King Philip the 3.
their mothers brother: who after she had done her vttermost endeauor for the deliuery
of her children, in the end she came to the King her brother, to implore his aide and
protection. The siege of Algezire was vnfortunate, for the army at sea was in a manner
all lost, by the ambushes of the Miralmumin, who victualed the place; and as for
that at land, there died so great a number of men as they were forced to rise, for the King
of Moroc was vpon the passage, and came to Algezire, where the truce was renued, not
comprehending the King of Granado, who fortefied the city of Granado that yeere,
and there made that famous fort,Alhambra of Granado. which is called Alhambra, as stately a building as any
 is in Spaine. The captaine of Malaga being againe reuolted, and come vnder the protection
of the King of Castille, began two forts which defend that city, called Alcaca^a
and Gebralfaro.
In the yeere 1279. the Infant D. Sancho and the King D. Pedro had an enterview betwixt
Requena and Bunol,An. 1279. whereas they made a league, from whence the Infant returned to
his father being at Badajos, whether also the rest of his children came, and there they resolued
to make warre against the King of Granado: and therefore he sent away D. Sancho
to assemble his forces in Castille, hauing in the meane time a desire to see D. Denis
sonne to his bastard daughter, to whom he sent to intreat him to come to Badajos.
He was a very gallant Prince, whose Estate King D. Alphonso his father had begun toPortugal.
set vp the yeere before, giuing him 40000. pounds of currant money yeerely: but this
yeere 1279. he has the whole realme, by the decease of King D. Alphonso his father, who
was buried in the Monastery of Saint Dominike of Lisbone, which he himselfe had built.
This King Alphonso had raigned two and twenty yeeres, and died seuenty yeeres old. Ten
yeere after his body was transported to the Monastery of Alcouaca.


D. Denis the first of that name, and the sixth
King of Portugal.
23 THe King D. Denis his sonne was seuenteene yeeres old when he began to raigne,
and was surnamed the builder, for that he made many goodly buildings in his

Realme, as well holy, as prophane, Churches, Monasteries, Towers, Ports of the sea, and
whole townes, wherof mention is made, that he did build and re-edifie, to the number of
foure and fortie. At his comming to the Crowne, and before, there had beene some discontentment
betwixt him and his mother D. Beatrix, daughter to D. Alphonso king of
Castile, the which (it may be) did stay him from going to him to Badajos: for being come
to Yelbes vpon the confines of Portugal, three small leagues from Badajos, he fell into
a sudden distrust, and turned head, wherewith the King his Grandfather was much discontented.
King Don Alphonso thereupon parted from Badajos,Castille. and came to Seuile, where he had
newes that the Infant D. Sancho came towards the citty of Iaen, with great troups of soldiers
from Castile, Leon and Toledo. Wherefore he sent him those men he had, where
there were certaine skirmishes rather to the Christians losse then the Moores. Beeing at
Seuile, there came certaine messengers vnto him from Philip of France, to bee a meanes
for the deliuerie of the children of D. Fernand de la Cerde, who were detained at Xatiua,
and for other affaires. There it was concluded, that the two kings should meet at Bayone
in December, in the yeare 1280.An. 1280. The king of Castile came thither with his children, and
Philip the French king came to Salueteree in Bearne, where by Mediators it was concluded,
that the realme of Iaen should be giuen to the children of la Cerde, the which they
should hold in ^ee, and do homage to the king of Castile, and the Infant D. Sancho: but he
being aduertised of that which his father had concluded, would not consent thereunto, so
as by his meanes they returned without any effect, euen touching the warre against the
Moores, for the which there had an vnion bene propounded betwixt the kings of France
and Castile, to inuade and conquer Affricke with their vnited forces, but it was left vnresolued.
Beeing returned, D. Sancho made an enterprize vpon the king of Granado, but
his men were charged by the Moores neere vnto Moclin, who slue aboue 2800. whereas
Goncalo Ruis Giron master of S. Iames, was sore hurt, and died within few daies after, to
the great griefe of D. Sancho, and many others: whereupon he entred into the territories
of Granado, where he made a wonderfull spoile, euen to the citty gates.
The yeare following 1281.An. 1281. there was an interview betwixt the king D. Alphonso, the
infant D. Sancho,League betwixt the king of Castile and Arragon. and D. Pedro king of Arragon, at a place called Campillo, about Agreda,
where there was a League sworne betwixt them against all Princes, and there were
townes and castels deliuered for assurance of either side: yea they concluded to make war
against Nauarre, and to diuide the conquest betwixt Castile and Arragon: it was at such
time as the king D. Pedro plotted the warre of Sicily, whereof wee shall make mention.
King D. Alphonso being afterwards come to Burgos, he married his two sonnes, D. Pedro
to the daughter of the Earle of Narbone, and D. Iohn to the daughter of his sonne-in-law,
Will^am of Montferrat, to whome he gaue two millions of Marauidis of the money of
those times. The Infant D. Sancho did afterwards meet with D. Pedro at Tarrassone, where
they renued their contract, but it tooke no great effect. The Realme of Castile beeing in
great want, there was a decree to make copper money, and some peeces of siluer.
24 About the end of the yeare 1281. the king being importuned to release the children
of his sonne D. Fernand, did somewhat relent, sending D. Fredulo Bishop of Ouiedo
to the French king, vnder colour to send him vnto the Pope to procure a Croysado against
the Moores: but the Infant D. Sancho was aduertised of all,D. Sancho of Castile makes a league with the Moores to dispossesse his father. and beeing discontented,
that his father had disguised this businesse, he came to Cordoua, and made a league
against his father with Mahomad Mirk. of Granado, who promised to pay him the third
of the reuenues of his Realme for a tribute. Then did D. Sancho begin a miserable pursute,
the which he neuer ceased, vntill he had driuen his aged father, with griefe and heauinesse,
into the graue: who indeed had worthily deserued all the miseries which fell vpon him: for
he shewed himselfe wilfull in his conceptions, and many times without iudgement in his
prodigality without reason, and tractable to his owne losse: sharpe and very seuere vnto
those which did not applaud his actions, but sought to perswade him to the contrarie.
And he was so vniust in his iudgements (as appeared by his grand-children, the sonnes of
D. Fernand de la Cerde) as it was an admirable thing, so many imperfections should bee
found in a king so studious: yet it did not befit a son to be the scourge of his ^athers vices.

The new King of Portugall, who would not trust king D. Alphonso his Grandfather,
was now in quarrell with his brother,Portugal. called also D. Alphonso, whome he poursued with
Armes, but aswell this controuersie, as that he had with his mother, were pacified by the
meanes of Don Sancho of Castile, and of Don Pedro King of Arragon, to whose daughter
called Don Isabel, borne of the Queene Don Constance, daughter to Manfroy King
of Naples this Prince was married, which marriage was celebrated at Troncoso,
in the yeare 1282. with royall pompe, about the time Don Sancho burst forth into
open rebellion against his father. This King Don Denis did afterwards enter into league
with Don Sancho, who drew vnto his seruice D. Iohn his brother, besides. D. Lope Diaz de
Haro, Diego Lopes his brother, Ramir Diaz, D. Nugno de Lara, Don Pedro Aluares of the
Asturies, Fernand Roderigo of Cabrera, and many others, which were out of the countrie
since the death of the Infant Don Fredericke, and of Symon Ruis de los Cameros.
The Infant Don Sancho was so well beloued,Castille. as in a short time all men followed him,
leauing the king D. Alphonso poore and miserable. The conspirators beeing assembled at
Vailledolit, they were all of opinion, that D. Sancho should intitle himselfe king of Castile,
and of the other dominions which his father had enjoyed: but hee shewed himselfe
somewhat modest, saying,D. Sancho takes vpon him the regency, and refuseth the title of king. saying, that he would not do his father that wrong, to intitle himselfe
King during his life time: but would rest satisfied to be tearmed Infant of Castile, the eldest
and heire of those Realmes. So. Sancho carried great respect vnto the king his father,
in words and vaine titles, but he made himselfe king in effect, ordayning lawes both
for peace and warre, disposing of Captaines and Gouernors, and of the treasure at his
owne will: the king D. Alphonso beeing driuen to that extremity as hee was forced to
send his royall Crowne, with Iewels of inestimable value, in pawne for 70000. doublons
to Iacob Aben Ioseph Miralmumin of Maroc, complaining vnto this Infidell king, of the
wrongs he had receiued from his sonne and subiects who were Christians. They say,
that king Iacob beeing a Barbarian, did heare of D. Alphonsos afflictions with teares in
his eyes, and shewing this royall Crowne vnto his Knights, he sayd, That he did willingly
imbrace this occasion, to succour a King of an ancient race, with his person and goods
against the impietie of a wicked sonne: giuing so good an answer vnto the King D. Alphonso,
as he was much esteemed and commended of all men. Necessitie and indignitie
did so transport D. Alphonso, as he accepted the Moores offer, intreating him to passe the
streights with his forces, the which he did: In the meane time D. Sancho married D. Mary
daughter to D. Alphonso, Lord of Molina, his great vncle, brother to the king D. Fernand
the third, who seeing himselfe supported by the kings of Arragon and Portugal, came to
Cordoua, where by the aduice of the Noblemen and Knights of Castile that were present,
and by a decree pronounced by the mouth of D. Manuel, in the name of the whole
Nobilitie, the king D. Alphonso was depriued of all his Realmes: the causes they pretended,
were the death of D. Fredericke and of Symon Ruis, obseruing no forme of Iustice,
nor any orderly proceeding: the breach of the rights and priuiledges of the Nobility, and
the wasting of the treasor. D. Iohn Nugnes de Lara, nor D. Iohn Nugnes, and Nugno Goncales
his children, D. Aluaro Nugnes, D. Fernand Perez Ponce, with many others, would
not assist at this assembly, nor consent vnto this act of so pernicious a consequence.
The Miralmumin Iacob Aben Ioseph past at Algezire, with great troupes of horse, and
the two kings had an enterview at Zahara in Granado, whereas he of Maroc arriued first.
The manner of this interview is worthy obseruation, for the humanitie and courtesie
which this mightie Moorish King vsed to a Prince of a contrarie Religion, sometimes
his enemie, and deiected from his dignitie. Hee caused a great and rich Pauillion to bee
set vp in the open field, in the which were two seates made like throanes, the one beeing
higher and more eminent then the other: and hauing placed the chiefe Noblemen of the
family of the Merins (from whence he was descended) at the entry, he commanded them
all to kisse k. D. Alphonsos feet, and that they should not suffer him to light from his horse
before he were neere vnto the Pauillion, where beeing arriued, King Aben Ioseph and hee
imbraced one another like breethren, and so entred into the Pauillion holding hands.
The royall and magnificent ceremonies which they vsed in their sitting downe, were
great and long, either striuing to giue the more honorable place vnto the other: but in

the end the king of Castile was forced to sit in the highest, the king of Maroc saying: It
was reasonable that D. Alphonso,Humanity and modestie of the Moorish king. a king descended of kings, and borne of a king, should be
set aboue rather then himselfe, whom God by his mercy had aduanced to that dignitie
of late time.
These Monarkes beeing set, they conferred of their affaires, and hauing resolued, king
D. Alphonso returned to Seuile, to gather together those small forces which were faithfull
vnto him. The Moore marched with his army towards Osuna and Estepa, and then came
to Eccia, where the two kings ioyned, and hauing taken Castro, they presented themselues
before Cordoua: but the Infant Don Sancho had entred into it the night before
with great troupes of horse, where as they spent twenty dayes in vaine, without any memorable
act done by either side. Rising from thence, the king of Maroc, with the consent
of D. Alphonso, did ouer-runne the champian country, and going through the pace of
Muradal, he entred into the fields of Montiel, destroying all he incountred, and finding
no resistance. Returning towards Eccia, D. Alphonso parted from Seuile to go and meet
him,D. Alphonso distrusts the King of Maroc according to the king of Marocs desire. Beeing come vnto the campe, king Don
Alphonso grew into so great a distrust, vppon reports, or some other vaine imagination,
that the king of the Moores would stay him, as he parted by night in great hast, and returned
to Seuile. The Miralmumin beeing much discontented at this iealousie, sent vnto
him to excuse himselfe, and to assure him that he neuer had any such thought, intreating
him to send him his troupes, the which he would entertaine, and so enter into the countrie
of Granado against king Mahomad his enemy, hauing conspired with Don Sancho his
sonne: whereunto D. Alphonso yeelded, and sent him a thousand horse, who presently receiued
pay: but growing suddenly into a iealousie that they would leade them into Affricke,
they abandoned the Miralmumin, and sent him the remainder of his money. The
King of Maroc seeing these proceedings, grew discontented, and returned into Affricke,
yet nothing estranged in his affection to pleasure D. Alphonso. D. Fernand Perez Ponce of
Leon, Commander of these thousand horse, durst not returne to king D. Alphonso, hauing
no lawfull excuse to haue abandoned king Iacob Aben Ioseph: but whilest he intertained
himselfe about Cordoua, there was an oportunitie offered which did deface this blemish.
It was strange, that these thousand horse did charge ten thousand which sallyed out of
the citty, the which were assembled from all the parts of Spaine for Don Sancho, and defeated
them. Wherefore returning to Seuile they were well receiued: D. Sancho (who was
then absent from Cordoua) was much discontented at this route, and did so sharpely rebuke
his men for their rashnesse, daring to present themselues against his fathers Standard
royall,Hypocrisie of the Infant D. Sancho. the which he did euer greatly reuerence. Thus Don Sancho did honour the Images
and royall ensignes, but not the king his father: who being much incensed with
the continuall vexation of his sonnes rebellion, who had vsurped his Realmes, hee pronounced
in the presence of many men of marke, both Clergie and Secular, in the Cittie
of Seuile, about the end of that yeare 1282.An. 1282. the curse of God and his vppon D. Sancho,
a sonne, sayd he, disobedient, rebellious, and a parricide, declaring him incapable and vnworthy
to raigne;Curse of the father vpon D. Sancho. depriuing him of his succession and inheritance, and discharging the
subiects, as much as in him lay, from all oath and homage which they had done vnto him.
This act was done with great solemnitie and maiestie, but they were but words, which D.
Sancho did not much esteeme; who at the same time returned to Cordoua, and conferred
with the king of Granado at Priego, to whome hee restored Arenas, and renewed their
League.
In the yeare 1283.1283. D. Sancho beeing come to Carcetes, to Pont d'Alcantara, and to
Ledesma, he forced the Infant D. Pedro his brother to hold his party, who notwithstanding
had a great desire to follow his fathers, who intended to giue him the countrie of
Murcia, with the title of a king. He did the like to the Infant D. Iohn, who aspired to haue
the kingdome of Leon for himselfe, all which was forced. Many knights which followed
these Princes, and which were well affected to king D. Alphonso, escaped and passing thorough
Portugal came to Seuile. The towne of Agreda reuolted and followed the kings
partie, and Infant D. Sancho beeing come against it, he had newes that Martin d'Aybar,

Gouernor of Treuigno, was also reuolted, and had receiued Don Iohn Nugnes de Lara,
with a great bootie which he had taken in the territories of Burgos, into Treuigno, from
whence he made roads, and did annoy his people. D. Sancho sent D. Lope Diaz de Haro
against them, who made them to keepe within their fort. Thus was the warre mannaged
betwixt the father and the sonne in Castile and other places depending.
25 During the which D. Pedro king of Arragon,Nauarre. had giuen libertie to his soldiers vppon
the fronter, who were daily in skirmish against the Nauarrois, especially they of Sos
and Filera, against the Inhabitants of Sanguessa; and they were so incensed one against
another, as they could not be pacified: yet the diligence of Eustache Bellemarche Gouernor
of Nauarre, made them to lay aside armes, and to conclude a truce for a time Bellemarche
returned into France, and in his place a Knight called Guerin of Amplepuis, gouerned
the Realme of Nauarre. Philip the third King of France, beeing Protector of this
Realme for his Neece Queene Iane, had also occasion to thinke of the affaires of Spaine,
for that the children of D. Fernand de la Cerde, borne of his sister D. Blanche, had not only
beene deiected by the King D. Alphonso from the right of succession to the Crowne of
Castile, which did belong vnto them, as children to the eldest sonne, but also these two
young Princes, D. Alphonso and D. Fernand de la Cerde, were kept prisoners in the castell
of Xatiua by the king of Arragon: and moreouer beeing aduertised, that besides the Arragonois
attempts in former times, their king had made a new accord at Campillo with
D. Sancho of Castile,Practises of the Castillans and Arragonois against Nauar. where among other things it was concluded, that they should inuade
the Realme of Nauarre at their common charges, and diuide the conquest equally.
Moreouer that at another enterview betwixt D. Sancho of Castile, and D. Pedro of Arragon,
the Infant had resigned vnto D. Pedro all the right he pretended to Nauarre, promising
neuer to make warre there without his liking to the end he might bee the more
freely assisted with the forces of Arragon, to dispossesse his father. King Philip was wise,
and of power to preuent all these practises, all which he made frustrate in regard of Nauarre.
Yet he did in vaine sollicite the kings of Castile and Arragon for the deliuerance
of his Nephewes, who were at Xatiua. He sent good troupes of horsemen into Nauarre,
for the guard of the countrie, and to be readie vpon all occasions.
The factions betwixt the Nobilitie of Castile (some holding the partie of King Don
Alphonso, others that of Don Sancho his sonne) fell out happily for the French and Nauarrois
in many things: for Nauarre serued for a retreat to all those that were in disgrace
with Don Sancho. Many of the chiefe of Castile, and other places depending, came and
ioyned with the troupes of France and Nauarre, and making roades into Castile, did alwaies
keepe the Realme of Nauarre in reputation, and made the forces to be redoubted,
the which changed many Gouernors in a short time: for after Eustache Bellemarche and
Guerin of Amplepuis, William of Broede was sent thither, and then Iohn of Conflans L.
of Dompierre, Marshall of Champagne, in the yeare 1283. when as among other Noblemen
of Castile, there fled into Nauarre Don Nugno de Lara, Don Pero Aluarez of the
Asturies, Don Ramir Diaz, Don Fernand Ruis de Cabrera, and Don Fernand Ruis de
Saldaigne, who ioyned with others which made themselues strong in the Countrie,
which were the Infant Don Iaime of Castile, Don Iohn Nugnes, Don Aluar Nugnes and
others, all beeing assisted by the troupes of France and Nauarre, they made roades as far
as Toledo, with great ruine of the country and people, for the French King hated Don
Sancho, as an vsurper of his Nephewes right, neither was he lesse enemie to Don Pedro
King of Arragon, as well for the detention of his nephewes, and his practises with Castile,
as for that which had happened in the Realme of Naples, betwixt the Arragonois
and the French, as you shall heare.
These spoilers being a competent armie of foure thousand horse, and great numbers
of foot, returning towards Toledo, had a desseigne to enter into Arragon, and to assaile
Tarrassone, whereof Don Pedro being aduertised, who kept a garrison of three hundred
horse at Logrogno, for the defence of Castile, he sent to intreat the Infant Don Sancho
to march thither, and to succour him against the French and Nauarrois, who came to
destroy his Realme of Arragon, the which he did presently: so as beeing ioyned with the
king Don Pedro they saued Tarrassone: yet the Arragonois lost the castell of VI, the

which was wel defended by Ximeno of Artieda: they also lost Lerida and Filera, the which
were giuen in gard to them to Sanguessa: Baylo and Arbuis were ruined, and the French
and Nauarrois past vnto Verdun. Vpon their returne, the army of D. Pedro and D. Sancho
attended them, where as they could not auoyd the battaile, which the French presented
them: but the Knights of Castile which did accompany them, told them that they had
willingly ouer-runne the country, and done their indeauors in all assaults, but to charge
their lances against Don Sancho, it was not their intention: that is to say, to spoile
towns, and to ruine poore innocents, who had no interest in great mens quarrels, they did
it willingly, yet wold they not attempt any thing against the heads, who might giue them
impunity for all their insolencies, and could take reuenge of them, if they shewed themselues
too eager enemies. So the troupes of France and Nauarre returned towards Pampelone,
from whence some of the Noblemen of Castile went to D. Sancho, hauing made
their peace.
26 The King D. Pedro finding himselfe in this danger,Arragon. it made him to seeke a peace
with Nauarre for some moneths: for he had many questions to decide with his Noblemen
and Knights of Arragon and Cattelogne, who complained much of his sower disposition,
and his tyrannous manner of gouernement, insulting ouer the greatest, yea against
his owne bloud, contrarie to all lawe and nature. For wee reade, that there were
scarce two yeares expired, after the decease of his father, when as hee forced his brother
Don Iames, to whom the Ilands of Maiorca and Minorca, with other places adiacent,
had beene giuen by testament,Iniustice of D. Pedro against his bro. with the title of a king, to hold them of him, as fees depending
of the Crowne of Arragon, and therefore he caused him to take an oath and do homage,
as also for the Counties of Rossillon, Cerdagne, Conflans, Vallespierre, Colibre,
Omelades, Carlades, and for the rights of Montpellier: with promise for himselfe and
his descendants Kings of Maiorca, to come to the Estates of Barcelona beeing called, and
do deliuer the citty of Maiorca, the towne of Perpignan, and the castell of Cerdagne, vnto
the Kings of Arragon, whensoeuer they shold demand them, in regard of which submissions
and promises, the king Don Pedro did confirme these lands and portions to the
king Don Iames his brother: for the which he would haue the Earles of Foix and Empurias,
D. Dalmas of Rocabertin Vicount of Castelnau, Raymond of Vrgio, William Canet,
Bernard Hugo Serralongue, Dalmais of Castelnau, Ponce Zagardia, Arnaud Corsaccio, William
Sous, with the Deputies of the Ilands of Maiorca and Minorca to become cautions.
Sometime after picking a quarrell against the Nobilitie of Cattelogne, and their priuiledges,
this king Don Pedro did so furiously assaile the Earles of Foix, Vrgel, and Palliars,
with the Vicount of Cardona, who were the most apparent, as hauing beseeged and
taken them in Balaguer, he detained them long in a miserable prison, especially the Earle
of Foix, whom he intreated vnworthily in the castell of Siurana. Moreouer, a little before
this last warre of Nauarre, hee had attempted and executed great matters against the
French, raigning in Italy, hauing employed the men and meanes of Arragon and Cattelogne,
to the great discontentment and oppression of all his subiects, and hee was newly
returned out of France, whether the warre of Naples and Sicily had drawne him, vppon
the occasion which followeth.
27 The French hauing conquered Naples and Sicily,Insolencies of the French in Sicily. vnder Charles the first brother
to Saint Louis, they committed many vnaccustomed insolencies among these nations,
against the honor of women, with other exactions and spoiles vnder colour of Iustice: by
reason whereof (as also by the iust iudgement of God, to whom without doubt the cruel
deaths of Conradin, and of the Duke of Austria, whose heads King Charles had caused to
be cut off, by the pernitious counsell of Pope Clement) the Sicilians did sollicite D. Pedro
King of Arragon to pursue the right which he had vnto these Realmes, as husband to Q.
Constance heire thereof, beeing daughter to king Manfroy, promising to ayde and assist
him with their persons and goods: he which did most labour in this poursute was called
Iohn de Procula or Prochida, borne at Salerne, Phisition to the deceased King Manfroy,
who by his perswasions induced the king Don Pedro to affect this conquest: for the effecting
whereof, he first made a secret league with Pope Nicholas the third, and with Michel
Paleologue Emperour of Constantinople, obtayning from the Pope a promise of

Inuestiture of the Realmes of Naples and Sicily. Martin the 4. beeing Pope after the decease
of Nicholas, the king sent Hugh Mataplana a Catelan to Rome, to sound his disposition,
touching the confirmation or renewing of this Leaque, and to intertaine him (for
Martin was friend to Charles King of Naples) and to disguise the cause of his Ambassadors
voyage, he had charge to mooue the Pope and the Consistorie, to canonize Don
Friar Raymond of Pegnafort according to the aduice of a Prouinciall Councell held a litle
before at Barcelona, by the Prelates of Arragon and Cattelogne. In the meane time
D. Pedro did arme forty galleys with many ships, the which he caused to passe along the
coast of Affricke vnder a colour of restoring Bouqueron king of Constatine in Africke,
who was expelled by his brother: and the better to couer his enterprise, the Ambassador
besought the Pope to take the Realme of Arragon into the protection of the Church,
whilest that the king D. Pedro should be absent in the warre of Affricke, and to demaund
leaue to exact a tenth of his Cleargie. The king was demanded by the Ambassadours of
France, the reason of this great preparation, with offers, that if it were against the Infidels,
King Philip their master would ayde him with all his forces, and withall protesting,
that if it were to preiudice Charles king of Naples, he would take it ill: to whom he made
no other answer, but that he had meanes sufficient to end the warre which hee had vndertaken,
without employing any others. To Arnaud Roger Earle of Palliars, who demanded
of him, in the name of the whole Nobilitie, whether he meant to leade them, he made
a sharpe answer, that if his left hand presumed to inquire too curiously of that which the
right intended to do, he would cut it off. So the army parted from Tortosa, beeing sollicited
by Nicholas Copula and Raymond Portella.
In the meane time the French were slaine thorough out all the townes of Sicily,Sicilian euensoag. with
such rage and hatred against the nation, as whereas they knew any women to be gotten
with child by the French, they opened their wombes, and slue both mothers and children,
for that they would not leaue any of their seed in the countrie. Onely one French-man
called William Porcelot Gouernor of Galataphimia was let go vntouched, for the
good opinion they had of his modestie and temperance. And then D. Pedro arriuing at
Palermo, he caused himselfe to be crowned King, in the yeare 1281. King Charles being
desirous to be reuenged of this iniurie, he led an army against Messina, but he was repulsed
into Calabria, without any effect. The king of Arragon left Queene Constance his wife
in Sicily with three children: D. Iames who was king of Sicily, D. Frederick and D. Tolant,
establishing a Councell of Estate, whereof the chiefe were Willyam Galseran a Cattelan,
Alain Leontine, holding the place of chiefe Iustice of Sicily, and chiefe author of their rebellion
against the French, Iohn Prochida, and Roger de Loria his Admiral, to whom hee
appointed an army of 25. gallies: but he wold haue in either of their two Captains, one a
Cattelan, the other an Italian, the marriners should be part Cattelans, and part Italians,
but the rowers should be all Italians. Hauing thus setled the affaires of this Realme, hee
returned into Spaine, where he had many matters to attend: for besides open force, there
past many scandalous books betwixt Charles King of Naples, and D. Pedro king of Arragon,
so as not able to decide their quarrels neither by law nor armes, they challenged
one another with a certaine number of Knights of either part: and this combate was allowed
by the Pope; an vnworthy thing for a Christian Prelate. The place beeing appointed
at Bourdeux, in the king of Englands country, a neuter-Prince in this cause. King
Charles came at the day appointed, but he found not his aduersarie. Wherefore hauing
attended most part of the day in the place appointed for the combat, and seeing no man
appeare, he returned. The King of Arragon who had onely an intent to circumuent his
enemy by the expectation of a combate, and in the meane time diuert him from the war
of Sicily, had stayed in a safe place, from whence he came vnknowne to Bourdeaux with
great speed, where attending vntill king Charles were parted, when he thought he was far
enough off, he shewed himselfe in the place of battel, as if hee had had a great desire to
fight, complaining that he had fayled, where after he had made the protestations requisit
in the like case, he tooke an act of his presence from Iohn Graille Seneshall of Guien (to
whom he left his helmet, his target, his lance, and his sword in witnesse of his appearance,
and that he had kept his faith and promise) he returned with the like speed into Spaine:

and a little before the French and Nauarrois forraged Castile, he arriued at Logrogno,
where he intertained a garrison in fauour of D. Sancho, as we haue sayd. For these subtilties,
Pope Martin (who had succeeded Nicholas the 3.) beeing a French-man borne, did
excommunicate the king D. Pedro, giuing his Realme of Arragon to Charles of Valois second
sonne to Philip King of France, who with the Popes dispensation married Constance
daughter to Charles Prince of Salerne, the onley sonne to this Charles King of Naples,
causing a Croysado to be preached against this king D. Pedro. Whilst that Charles King of
Naples was in Gascony, the king of Arragons Admirall called Roger de Loria a Calabrois
a very expert man in sea-fights, came running along the coast of Italy, with 45. galleys,
and many other vessels, doing much harme: so as this army being discouered at Naples,
approching so neere the citty, as the souldiers might be heard, prouoking the garrison by
iniuries and casting of darts into the towne, Charles Prince of Salerne issued foorth with
36. gallies, and some other vessels against his enemies, where there was a furious fight,
but the Admirall of Arragon was victor, who tooke and carried away nine galleys, with a
great number of prisoners of note: and amongst the rest Charles who would needes go
foorth against the will of the Popes Legat,Charles Prince of Salerne defeate and taken by the Arragonois. and contrary to the commandement which
his father had giuen him at his going into France, not to depart out of Naples, nor to
hazard a battell, either by sea or land in any sort whatsoeuer. The desire of glorie prouoked
it, and brought him to this misery, which cost many Noblemen their liues, for the
prisoners beeing brought to Messina, he beheld with his eyes the heads of 200. Gentlemen
cut off, to reuenge the death of Conradin. His father beeing returned to Naples,
found the affaires in a pittifull estate,Reuenge of the death of Conradin of Suabe. and liued not long after. At his death there were
two Legats in Sicile to treate of an accord with Queene Constance, who was a wise and religious
Lady, but not able to draw her to any reason, they did aggrauate the Excommunication
against the King D. Pedro, and interdicted the Sicilians, the which did so incense
them, as running in a rage to the prisons where the remainder of the French were that
had beene taken by Roger de Loria, they sought to enter to murther them: but the French
made resistance, so as these mutiners seeing there was no meanes to effect what they intended,
they set fire of the prisons and burnt them all. After which there was an assembly
of all the chiefe Magistrates of the townes of Sicile, to resolue what was to be done with
Charles Prince of Salerne, and nine other Noblemen which were prisoners with him,
where they concluded, that after the example of Conradin, and the other Noblemen,
they must all dye.
Whereuppon wee may not let passe an act of Queene Constance, full of pietie and
courage: for this Princesse hauing sent on a Friday morning, to aduertise Charles to
thinke of the saluation of his soule, and that he was condemned to die after the same maner
that Conradin had done: he answered, that hee tooke his death the more patiently,
for that hee should receiue it the same day that our Sauiour Iesus Christ had suffered.
This answer deliuered to the Queene, shee sayd, If it be so that the Prince takes his death
so patiently by reason of that day, for my part I am resolued to shew him mercie for his
sake, who the same day suffered death and passion for vs all. Whereuppon shee commanded
he should be preserued without any harme, letting the people vnderstand (who
did presse her to put him to death) that shee ought not in a matter of so great importance,
and which might be the cause of great inconueniences, resolue nor excecute any
thing, without the priuity of the king her husband: and therefore she commaunded that
Prince Charles should be carried into Cattelogne to the king Don Pedro, to dispose of
him as he should thinke fit by good aduice. This generous and Christian like act, is worthie
of eternall prayse, as the excesse which king Charles, through bad councell, and an ilgouerned
passion, had committed against Conradin and other Noblemen his prisoners, is
to be blamed and detested. This Charles Prince of Salerne was afterwards king of Naples
the second of that name.
28 After the king D. Pedros returne out of France, expecting daily (by reason of the
Poues censures, and his enterprises against Nauarre) to be set vpon by Philip k. of France,
and Charles of Valois his son: and the Noblemen and Knights of Arragon and Cattelogne,
being tyred by him in the former wars, and ill intreated, as they thought, in their freedoms,

(whereof the townes and commonalties of his Countries did also complaine) they did
also stirrre vp troubles and seditions, and made an vnion together. The heads of the Nobility
were, Symon of Vrrea the elder, D. Pedro Fernandes Lord of Ixar, and D. Pedro of
Ayerbio,Vnion in Arragon against the king for their liberties. both base brothers vnto the King. Pedro Cornel, Artal Alagon, Lope Fernece de
Luna, Athon des Posses, Sancho of Antillas, Gombald of Beneuent, and Symon of Vrrea the
younger, all of Noble families, and moreouer Lope William of Oteicia, Pedro Iourdain
Pegna, Gombald Tramasset, Giles of Bidaure, Pero Garces Nuez, who were Knights, whose
predecessors had beene aduanced by Kings. These hauing made a league with the people
did promise and sweare to let the king and his sonne D. Alphonso, (who was his Lieutenant
generall) vnderstand, that if they did not containe themselues within the limittes of the
lawes of the country, they would withdraw themselues from their obedience, and declare
themselues enemies, and poursue them by armes that should seeke to breake them. The
king had called the Estates to Tarassone, and afterwards to Saragossa. There he intreated,
promised, and did all he could to breake this vnion: but he was forced to yeeld, and
therefore he granted vnto the Arragonois, the priuiledge which they call general, wherby
the liberty which had beene somewhat restrayned, was againe restored, the ancient maners
of the Country, and customs of their Ancestors, fit for the country, put again in practise.
And moreouer, there were lawes made for their Kings, which they should be bound
to obey. And for that they were in a mutine in some places, by reason of certaine Impositions
layed vpon salt, the trafficke thereof was made free by the Estates. Notwithstanding
all these things, the king refused the iudgement of the Iustice Maior of Arragon, the
which was then exercised by Pedro Martines Artassone, whom he deposed from his office:
but soone after this dignity was fortified with stronger lawes. The like assembly was made
at Barcelona, and to the same end; where they obtained confirmation of their old statutes
and customes, which they call Vsatiques. They of Valencia beeing called to the Estates
of Arragon, would not appeare, pretending liberty to assemble apart. In this Realme of
Valencia there was a Magistrate established, who was President of the Iustice, who shold
be an Arragonois, and should do right vnto the townes and Noblemen of that Realme,
who enioy the priuiledges of Arragon: the first in this dignitie was Alphonso Martines. In
Ribagorca there was also a peculiar Iudge created at Grados, from whence the first appeales
should go to Barbastro, or to the Iustice of Arragon, and the second to the king,
or to Iudges deputed by him: but these last ordonances were made and executed in the
yeare 1285. at the Estates held at Huesca, where as the king did preside. They being transferred
to Zufaria, the king being absent, Iohn Giles Tarin Iustice Maior of Arragon was
President, where it was sayd, that he was a lawfull Iudge, yea in causes commenced against
the King: who beeing cited and not appearing, there were decrees made against
him in many instances. In the end the king confirmed the decrees of the Iustice Maior,
and whatsoeuer should be concluded by the Estates, the Deputies, and Councellors hauing
giuen their suffrages. At that time the king Don Pedro spoyled his brother D. Iames
king of Majorca,King of Majorca dispoyled by his brother. of the County of Rossillon, for that he had retired himselfe into France,
and had made a League against him with king Philip, who had promised him the Realme
of Valencia, after the conquest which he did hope to make thereof, and of the rest of D.
Pedros country. In these combustions was the estate of Arragon about the returne of the
king D. Pedro from the warre of Nauarre attempted with the Castillans.
29 As for D. Sancho Infant of Castile,Castile. he with all his followers had bene also excommunicately
by Pope Martin the 4. The Arch-bishop of Seuile, the Deane of Tudele in
Nauarre, and the Arch-deacon of S. Iames in Gallicia were the denouncers thereof: wherfore
it was concluded in D. Sanchos Councel, to kill all those that shold intimate or bring
these censures: yet the Commissioners deputed by the Pope went on in their Commission,
and did interdict all parts of Spaine, holding the Infants party. On the other side the
fury of armes ruining the country, Queene Beatrix the widow of Portugal, D. Mary wife
to the Infant, laboured to procure a peace, and to remedie those great miseries, at which
time there was some hope that the king and his sonne should haue an interview: for the
king was come to Constatine, and the Infant to Guadascanall, but the Infants minions and
bad Councellers did hinder it. The Ladies pursuing this holy enterprise, Don Sancho fell

sicke at Salamanca, and in such extremity, as the Phisitions had abandoned him: the king
in like manner fell sicke vnto death, whereby it seemes that God was highly offended against
these miserable Princes, whose reconciliation was thus preuented. The king seing
his end drawing nigh,Alphonso king of Castile giues portions to his sonnes. he gaue by his will, Seuile and Badajos, with the title of a Realm, to
his sonne Iohn, with charge, that he should hold them of the Crown of Castile and Leon.
To D. Iames his other sonne he gaue the Realme of Murcia with the same condition. Hee
pardoned all such as had carried armes against him, except his sonne D. Sancho. In the beginning
of a will of his made in Nouember 1283. he makes great complaints of his aduersities,
and doth much blame the kings of Portugall, Arragon, England, the Pope, and
others,Curse of the father vppon D. Sancho and his posterity. who had fauoured D. Sancho, cursing him and all his posteritie, and leauing heires
of his Soueraigne Realmes, D. Alphonso and D. Fernand de la Cerde, one in default of the
other, and if they dyed without issue, he gaue them to Philip king of France, and to his
descendants: He gaue many other Legacies to his other children, to Churches* and to
his Officers and domestique seruants. By another testament apart, made in the yeare
1284. he ordained, that his heart should be carried and interred on mount Caluarie in the
citty of Ierusalem, and his body in his citty of Seuile or Murcia, in the which his Executors
should please. He dyed in the yeare 1284. and was buried at Seuile,An. 1284. hauing raigned
31. yeares, 10. moneths, and 23. dayes.
This Prince was a president of the weaknesse and inconstancie of humane things, not
onely in the goods which they call of Fortune, but also of those of the mind, whereof he
was as well furnished as any Prince that hath beene before or since him, all which did him
more harme then good: for neither vertue, knowledge, honour nor riches auayle not, if
the blessing of God do not accompany them, but they rather ruine a man. And in truth
this Prince may be tearmed miserable in all these things. He was a great and mighty king,
but nothing did suffice him, by reason of his prodigality, and ill-measured bounty: he was
neuer sincerely beloued of his subiects, by reason of his sower disposition and wilfulnes,
proceeding from too great a presumption of his knowledge: so as hee did neuer beleeue
any good counsell: It was the fruite of his Philosophie, the which had made him so ouerweening,
as he presumed to controule the Author of Nature, saying, That if he had bin
present at the Creation of the world, he should in many things haue beene of another
opinion, with other such speeches, full of impietie. By iudiciarie Astronomie, whereunto
he was giuen beyond all reason,, he had foreseene (as he thought) his aduentures, the
which made him affect the Imperiall dignitie, where hee purchased more dishonour then
euer any Prince. This vanity made him cruell to his brother D. Frederick, and other Noblemen,
to preuent the conspiracies which threatened him, but could not auoid them:
the which he had done, if leauing these diuinations, hee had relyed wholly vpon the prouidence
of God, without any further search. But it is the will of God, the curious should
haue this torment, alwaies to feare their misfortune, which they would know by damnable
meanes, giuing effect to vanity, and to the spirit of error, against those that follow it.
The Queene D. Beatrix his mother (who it may be was superstitious, and giuen to these
impieties) had neuer any contentment after his birth, hauing vnderstood when hee was
in his cradle, from a Grecian, who was a great Sorceresse, that he should bee depriued of
his Realmes.
The end of the twelfth Booke.




SEMPER EADEMTHE THIRTEENTH BOOKE
of the Historie of Spaine.

The Contents.
1 Don Sancho the Braue, the fourth of that name, the eleuenth king of Castile, and the
32. of Leon.
2 Warre betwixt the French and the Arragonois in the Counties of Rossillon and Cattelogne,
where as the king D. Pedro dyed.
3 D. Alphonso the third of that name, tenth king of Arragon, who continued the warre against
the French.
4 Philip the Faire, king of France, husband to Ioane of Nauar, began to raigne in Nauar.
5 Aduancement of D. Lopes Diaz de Haro, preiudiciall both to the Realme of Castile, and
to himselfe.
6 Acts and proceedings betwixt the Estates of Arragon, and the King Don Alphonso the
third.
7 Treaties betwixt D. Alphonso king of Arragon, and Charles the Haulting, king of Naples,
prisoner, and what succeeded.
8 Quarrels in the Court of Castile, and the death of D. Lopes Diaz de Haro.
9 Deliuerie of the children of D. Fernand de la Cerde from prison in Arragon. Don Alphonso
de la Cerde declared king of Castile.
10 Tumults at Badajos supprest.
11 Family of Guzmans, who are Dukes of Medina Sidonia.
12 D. Iames the 2. of that name, 11. King of Arragon.
13 Peace betwixt the French and the Arragonois, and the retention of the Iland of Sicily by
D. Fredericke of Arragon, brother to the king D. Iames, contrarie to the Capitulations.
14 Donation of the Ile of Corsica and Sardinia, to the king D. Iames of Arragon the second,
by Pope Boniface the eighth.
15 D. Fernand the fourth of that name, the twelfth king of Castile, and the three and thirtith
of Leon.
16 Iewish superstitions. Conuersion of some Iewes to the Christian faith.
17 Foundation of Bilboa in Biscay.
18 Compromise betwixt the children of D. Fernand de la Cerde, contending for the Realm
of Castille, and D. Fernand then raigning: and betwixt the king of Arragon and him of
Castile: and the sentence giuen by the arbitrators.
19 Lewis Hutin the 1. of that name, 26. king of Nauarre.
20 Translation of the Popes Court from Italy into France.
21 Persecution of the Templers.
22 Order of Christ in Portugall.
23. Order of Monteca in Arragon.
24 VVarre in Granado.
25 Deeds of the Cattelans in Greece and Thrace, after the wars of Sicily and Naples.

26 Troubles at Lyons, and in the Court of France.
27 Discourse of the crosses which did accompany Philip the Faire, as well in his raigne, as in
priuate affaires.
28 D. Alphonso the 12. of that name, 13. King of Castile, 34. of Leon, and the troubles which
happened at his entrie.
29 Papacie affected with murthers.
30 Philip the long King of France, 2. of that name, 27. king of Nauarre.
31 Exploits of the Castillans against the Moores: the sodaine and strange death of D. Pedro,
and D Iohn Princes of Castile, and troubles in that Realme.
32 Perpetuall vnion of Arragon, Cattelogne, and Valencia.
33 D. Iames the eldest sonne of Arragon, quits the successsion of the Realme, and becomes
a rebellious man.
34 Confirmation of the gift of Sardinia and Corsica to the house of Arragon by the Pope. Conquest
of Sardinia by the Infant D. Alphonso.
35 Deedes of Denis King of Portugall. Pietie of Queene Isabell his wife: their buildings in
Portugall.
36 Troubles in Castille by the death of D. Mary the Queene mother.
37 Maioritie of king D. Alphonso the twelfth of Castile.
38 Estate of the Moores of Granado at that time.

Order of the Kings raigning in Spaine, whereof mention
is made in this 13. Booke.

CASTILE.
11 D. Sancho
12 D. Fernand
13 D. Alphonso


LEON
4-23.
4-33.
11-34. Some number him for the 12.


ARRAGON.
10 D. Alphonso 3.
11 D. Iames 2.


NAVARRE.
25 Philip the faire 1.
26 Lewis Hutin 1.
27 Philip the Long 2.



D. Sancho the Braue, the fourth and last of that name,
the 11. of Castile, and 32. of Leon.
1. IN the yeare 1284. D. Sancho caried himselfe as king, hauing
performed his fathers obsequies in the city of Auila,
where he was at the time of his decease, where he mourned
in shew, for that which he had long desired, as we may
iudge by his actions. He commanded that D. Maria his
wife should be called Queene, and their daughter called Izabell,
beeing but two yeares old, to bee declared and receiued
heire of those Realmes, if he had no issue male: the
titles which he gaue himselfe were, King of Castile, Leon,
Toledo, Galicia, Seuile, Cordoua, Iaen, Murcia, Badajos,
and Algarbe. He came to Toledo with D. Maria,Don Sancho of Castils titles and
there they were crowned. By a complot made with D. Pedro king of Arragon, D. Iohn
Nugnes of Lara was dispossest of the fort of Albarrazin, a free place holding of no man,
the which was very preiudiciall to Castile: this place was afterwards giuen by the king D.
Pedro, to a bastard sonne of his called D. Fernand, whome he had by D. Agnes Zapate. The
Infant D. Iohn brother to the new king, with the helpe of some knights, which were fled
ou^ of Castile, thought to surprize Seuile* but the king posted thither with speed, and disappointed
their desseignes. Being in that citty, Ambassadors came to him from Aben Ioseph
king of Maroc, to settle some order betwixt Affricke and Spaine, but the king D. Sancho
being incensed, that the king of Maroc had come to make warre against him in his fathers
fauour, answered his Ambassadors very sowrely, saying, that he held his bread in one
hand, and a staffe in the other, and that if any one would seeke to take away his bread, he
would strike him with his staffe. The Ambassador, whose name was Abdalla, returned to
Algezire, from whence they began to make roads into the territories of Medina Sidonia
and Xeres, which caused the king D. Sancho to looke to his affaires: who for this cause began
to make prouision of galleys and other vessels, in the sea townes of his Iurisdiction,
and did entertaine a Captaine of Genoa, called Benet Zacharie with 12. gallies, to whom
he gaue the port of S. Mary in propriety, vpon condition, that he should for euer entertaine
one galley armed. This king hauing called a Court at Seuile, hee disanulled many
priuiledges which were extorted in time of necessitie. Beeing returned into Castile hee
disposed of matters of Iustice, and punished many which had beene rebels vnto him, causing
some heads to be cut off.
These things past in the yeare 1284. about the end of which he had newes of the preparation
which the king of France made to inuade Cattelogne, by reason whereof, he and
his vncle D. Pedro of Arragon had an interview in Ciria, where they were moreouer aduertised
that there was intelligence betwixt king Philip and him of Maroc, to make warre
at one instant, the one in Cattelogne the other in Andalusia: wherefore beeing parted
D. Sancho came to Burgos, to hold an assembly of the Estates.
D. Iohn Nugnes of Lara being dispossest of Albarrazin,Arragon. as we haue sayd, by Don Lopes
Diaz de Haro, being the Commander, he put himselfe into Tudele, the which hee defended
for Philip the faire king of Nauarre, against the king D. Pedro, and not onely repulsed
him, but also tooke great store of victuals and cattell which was brought to the enemies
campe: for he had within it aboue 300. horse, and a great number of foote: so as D. Pedro
seeing that he should do no good before Tudele, he spoiled the countrie, and returned nto
his Realme, to defend the passage against the king of France, who came to assaile him:
from whom the Earle of Artois,Castile. whome the Spaniards call Charles, and the French Robert,
was sent to the king Don Sancho beeing at Toledo, to perswade him to set at libertie
without exception the sonnes of his deceased Brother Don Fernand de la Cerde, who

were prisoners in the hands of D. Pedro King of Arragon; and then he intreated him not
to succor the King of Arragon in the warre which the French King pretended to make against
him, to whom the King D. Sancho made no other answere, but that he would send
his Ambassadors to King Philip, to treat of those affaires: wherevpon he sent vnto him
D. Martin Bishop of Calaorra, and D. Gomes Garcia of Toledo Abbot of Vailledolit,
who found King Philip at the entry of the country of Cattelogne, with a great army,
besieging Girone, who were but sleightly entertained, and returned without any effect.
They write that the Earle of Arthois being dispatched from the court of Castille, taking
his leaue, the King D. Sancho receiued a pacquet out of France: hauing opened it and
read the letters, he sayd vnto the Earle that he had good friends in the court of France,
who adduertised him of all that passed, intreating him to ioyne with them, and to become
his friend: yet the Histories of France say, that this Earle of Arthois had beene before
in Castille, after the suppression of the rebels of Nauarre, in the life time of King D.
Alphonso, at which time this packet was brought, and not now: the which the Earle of
Arthois hauing reported to the King it caused a great tumult and search in court. In
the meane time the King D. Sancho made preparation to succor Xeres, the which was already
inuested by the army of the Miralmumin of Maroc, where there were eighteene
thousand horse Moores, or Arabian Affricans; and came from Toledo by Talauera
and Merida to Seuille, whether the Moores made daily roades euen vnto the gates, the
King D. Sancho hauing not yet sufficient forces to suppresse them: but within few daies
after there came vnto him about foure thousand horse, as well of the military orders of
Spaine, as of Noblemen, with the which he made a sufficient army to goe to field. Hauing
mustred his troupes, he marched towards his enemies, to whom hee presented battaile,
but the King of Maroc would not accept thereof: for besides the great forces at
land which came daily to the King D. Sancho, hee had a mighty army at sea, which lay in
the Port of Saint Mary, where there were aboue a hundred saile of great vessels. The
King of Maroc raised his siege from Xeres,Accord betwixt the Kings of Maroc and castille. and afterwards they were made friends, hauing
an enterview at Pegna Ferrada, or according vnto some in Albuhera, where the
King of Castille receiued a present of Iacob Aben Ioseph, of two millions of Marauidis of
gold, then currant. This peace was not pleasing to the Infant D. Iohn the Kings brother,
nor to Don Lopes Diaz of Haro, who demaunded nothing but warre. About the
end of the yeere 1285. the Queene D. Maria was brought to bed in Seuile of a sonne,An. 1285.
called D. Fernand, who succeeded the father in those realmes.
2 Philip the 3. King of France, and his sonne Philip the faire King of Nauar, being entred
into Cattelogne, had taken Perpignan, ruined seuen and twenty townes and castles,Arragon, Perpignan taken by the French.
and laied siege to Girone. The victuals for the campe were brought from Narbone to the
neerest hauens and ports of Empurias, Roses and others, and from thence was carried a
little space by land with a gard of horsemen. Which the King desiring to preuent and
withall to take the treasor which he knew was brought to pay the souldiers,The siege of Girone. he came and
laied an ambush of fiue hundred horse, and about two thousand foot betwixt the sea and
the French campe: whereof the King of France, being aduertised by his spies, sent before,
by the aduice of the Constable of France, three hundred choise men at armes, vnder
his charge, who being come to the ambush, and discouered to be few in number,
were presently inuironed and charged with great cries, by the Arragonois, who
thought to defeat them, but the French who were come thether to fight, did incounter
them in such sort, as although they were much inferior in number, yet they seemed
more then equal in valour and courrage.
The Arragonols animated by their King, who was present and fighting, behaued
themselues valiantly, so as the one yeelding nothing vnto the other, the fight continued
long without aduantage, vntill that the King D. Pedro being grieuously hurt in the face
with a Lance, retired himselfe out of the fight, wherevpon his men beganne to faint.
Many of his horsemen escaped with him, but as for the footmen they were all cut in
peeces, there were some horsemen slaine vpon the field, on either side, but most Arragonois.
The King D. Pedro hauing caused himselfe to be carried to Villa-franca, died soone

after of his wound. He had raigned nine yeeres, three monthes and foure daies; A generous
Prince, but ambitious beyond all measure, being growne an irreconciliable enemy
to the French, since the successe of the Island of Sicile, the which he left to D. Iaime
or Iames his yonger sonne.


D. Alphonso the third of that name, and the
tenth King of Arragon.
3 DOn Alphonso his eldest succeeded to the realme of Arragon, this yeere 1285. Don
Pedro being aduertised by his Physitions, the chiefe whereof was Arnaud of Villeneufue
(whose workes we haue but much curtalled by the Inquisitors) that he drew neere
his end, he did sollicite his sonne D. Alphonso to hasten the conquest of Majorca, which
he had vndertaken,D. Iames King o^ Maiorca dispossest by his Nephew. and did much desire; wherefore D. Alphonso presently after his fathers
death, led the army to Majorca, and tooke the Island, ioyning that of Majorca to the other
titles of the Kings of Arragon. In this action the chiefe Commanders were D.
Blasco of Alagon, Sancho of Antillas, Pedro Garces Nuez, Pedro Seses, Blasco Ximenes of
Aierbio, Symon Perez Andosilla of Arragon: and of Cattelogne, D. Pedro de Moncade,
Raymond of Vrgi and Maimon Plaigaman. Euen vpon the death of the King D. Pedro,
there arriued in Cattelogne, Charles Prince of Salerne, called the halting, a prisoner, being
conducted by Raymond Alleman, Symon of Estorio and William Ponce Cattelans, who
had bound themselues to the Infant D. Iames, who was appointed King of Sicile, to carry
him into Cattelogne, or to loose their liues, swearing that if any came to rescue him, and
that they found themselues too weake, they would kill him and cast him into the sea.
You must vnderstand that one of the chiefe conspirators in Sicile against the French,
called Alain Leontain, a councellor of Estate, and chiefe Iustice of the realme, which is
one of the greatest dignities, staied not long before he receiued from the Arragonois,
a worthy reward for his notable treachery,Alain Leontin Author of the Sicilian Euensong a double traitor and his end. and immoderat appetit of reuenge: for being
discouered that he sought to reconcile himselfe vnto the French, for some discontentment,
he was sent prisoner to the castle of Siurane, from whence he neuer parted, being
knowne to be a double traitor: and God brought him to this end, to shew that he detests
those, that for their priuat passions seeke the ruine of Estates.
The Constable of France returning to the campe before Girone, he was receiued
with all possible signes of ioy: whereas soone after they had newes of the death of D.
Pedro King of Arragon,Girone taken by the French. whereof hauing aduertised the besieged that they should not
continue obstinate; Raymond of Cardona, who commanded within the towne, demanded
leaue to send one thether to vnderstand the truth, who brought him word that hee
had seene the King his maister dead: wherevpon he yeelded vp the towne to the French
King, the souldiars and Inhabitants departing and carrying away what they could, except
gold and siluer which they were to leaue, for the which they were sercht. At this
siege the plague fell into the campe, and the King himselfe grew sick, so as this warre ceased,
and they began to thinke of their returne into France. The King had entertained
certaine gallies of Pisa and Genoa, which hee now sent backe, hauing no more vse
for them.
Sayling towards Italy, they were met by Roger of Loria Admiral of Sicile, who came
to Cattelogne with fiue and fortie gallies, to succour the King of Arragon his Maister,
of whose death he was then aduertised. This man who was pollitike, and loath to
loose any oportunity, hauing vnderstood from these captaines the Estate of the affaires
in Cattelogne, and especially of the enemies army, he entertained all their fleete,
and lead them backe towards Ampurias, where they found the remainder of the
French fleete in the hauen, whom they did sodainely set vpon and burne, all the souldiers
and marriners hauing escaped, and ioyned with the rest of the Land-army. King Philip,
who caused himselfe to bee carried in a litter, was much grieued at this losse, and his

sicknesse did so increase,Death of Philip the third King of France. as he gaue vp the ghost in the towne of Perpignan, whether the
annie came with great difficulty, the Arragonois hauing stopt the passages of the mountaines,
so as they were forced to make their way by the sword.


Philip the first of that name, the fiue and twentith
King of Nauarre.
4 PHilip his sonne, called the faire,Nauarre. who succeeded him, was both King of France and
Nauarre, hauing a little before married D. lean the heire of Nauarre. Of which marriage
were borne three sonnes, Lewis Hutin, Philip the long and Charles the faire, all
which three were Kings of France and Nauarre one after an other, hauing no children.
They had also two daughters, Ioane who died young (who is not in the French Genealogies)
and Isabel Queene of England, mother to Edward the third, who contended for the
succession of the Realme of France against Philip of Valois.
At the time 1286.An. 1286. Clement of Launay Viceroy of Nauar. the Realme of Nauarre was gouerned by a Gentleman called Clement
of Launay in quality of Viceroy, who defended it against the daily inuasions of the
Arragonois. A captaine of Nauarre, whose name was D. Iohn Corbaran, hauing the
charge of the frontier towards Arragon, was defeated and taken by D. Pedro Cornel, an
Arragonois. The Nauarrois also entring into the country of Arragon, besieged Tiermas,
but could not take it, yet they did great spoiles. About the end of the yeere there
was a truce made betwixt these two Kingdomes, and a defence made not to molest one
an other vpon paine of death. There was also a truce concluded betwixt Philip King of
France and Nauarre, and Don Alphonso King of Arragon, during the which they
sought meanes to make a peace betwixt them, for the controuersies of Sicile and other
places.
The death of Philip the third King of France being knowne in Castille, the King D.Castille.
Sancho sent backe the Archbishop of Calaorra, and the Abbot of Vailedolit, his Ambassadors,
to Philip the faire his sonne, to seeke some meanes of an accord, for many considerations:
one and the most important was, that the Kings of France, father and sonne had
beene the meanes at Rome to stop the dispensations of the marriage which D. Sancho
had made with D. Maria his cousin. These Ambassadors carried backe into Spaine an
entervew of both Kings graunted in the towne of Bayonne; yet they met not, for the
King of France would not passe the mount of Marcan, and he of Castille staied at Saint
Sebastians, sending their deputies to treat and end their quarrels. For King Philip there
came Robert Duke of Bourgongne and others, for the King of Castile came D. Guttieres
Archbishop of Toledo,Conference of Deputi^s for the Kings of France and Castille. successor to the Cardinal D. Goncalo, with the Bishop of Calaorra,
Burgos and others. The first demand which the French made, and whereon they
did insist, was, that the King D. Sancho should leaue his wife D. Maria, to marry one of
king Philips sisters, which should be either Marguerite or Blanche: which the Ambassadors
of Spaine found to be out of reason: and hauing giuen aduice thereof vnto their King,
who was neere, he was so much offended, as hee recalled them, and would not haue the
conference to proceed any further. The Abbot of Vailledolit, who was superintendent
of the Kings reuenues, by this voiage fell into disgrace with his master, and was accused
to haue put this sauage demand into the Frenchmens heads: wherefore hee was
straightly looked into, and dismist from all affaires. The King went from Saint Sebastians
to Victoria, where the Queen attended him, from whence they past to Burgos, from
thence he went to Saint Iames in pilgrimage. Passing by Sahagun, he caused the bodies
of the King D. Alphonso the sixth, and the Queenes which were there interred, to be
remoued.
5 His voyage being ended, hee honoured D. Lope Diaz de Haro,Haro Lord of Biseay exceedingly honored by the King D. Sancho. Lord of Biscay, with
the dignity of high Steward, and Standard-bearer of the realme of Castille, giuing the
suruiuance vnto D. Diego Lope de Haro his sonne, with promise neuer to dispossesse them
of their offices, so as they did serue him and his sonne D. Fernand faithfully, without

affecting any other parties, appointments or alliances, the which they promised sollemnly,
vpon paine of losing Biscay, and all they had in Castille and Leon: and the King
gaue into the hands of D. Lope, for assurance of that which he had promised, most of the
forts in Castille.
By meanes of these things D. Lope Diaz was made Earle the first day of the yeere
1287.An. 1287. with command ouer all the country, from Burgos vnto the sea. To D. Diego
Lopes de Haro the Earles brother, was giuen the Gouernment of the Moores frontier:
about which time the marriage was made betwixt D. Iohn the Kings brother, and D.
Maria Diaz de Haro, daughter to the Earle D. Lope: who had a great desire to see the
King D. Sancho diuorced from the Queene his wife, to haue him marry the daughter of
Gaston Lord of Berne his cousin, hoping that the children which should come of that
marriage, should inherit those realmes, and those which hee had had by Queene Mary
should be excluded, for that the marriage was made without the Popes dispensation:
but God did otherwise dispose. This Princesse was brought in bed this yeere of her second
sonne, called Alphonso, and then the King retired D. Isabel, heire of the Estate of
Molina, whom her mother D. Blanch, sister to Queene Mary, would haue married to D.
Alphonso King of Arragon. This great power and authority which the King had giuen
to the Earle D. Lope, discontented many Noblemen of Gallicia, but especially of Leon,
so as hee was prest to abate this power, too great for a subiect, the which hee abused:
but the King had no will to diminish any thing, wherefore he tried to content them with
good words: and in the meane time he ordained, that the Earle D. Lope should goe into
the Marches of Galicia, with good numbers of souldiars, to suppresse such as would
attempt any thing against his will. The Earle D. Lopes held a garrison at Astorga, and
the King went an other way to see his Nephew D. Denis King of Portugal, to reconcile
him with D. Alphonso of Portugal, who held some places vpon the frontiers of Leon,
where by reason of his quarrels hee kept some souldiers, whether also some banished
men of Castille retired themselues, who made roades into the territories of Leon. The
two Kings of Castille and Portugal met at the siege of Ronches, and tooke it by composition:
by the which D. Aluaro de Lana, who had retired himselfe to D. Alphonso of
Portugall, was restored to D. Sanchos fauour. At this siege the King of Portugal did
councel the King of Castille to humble D. Lope Diaz de Haro, who did abuse the authority
which he had giuen him tyranously, else it was to be feared there would grow great
troubles in Castille.
This aduice was wel taken by the King D. Sancho, and from that time hee began to
study by what meanes he might take away or diminish that extraordinary power, but it
was too late: It is not the custome for such as are once mounted, to stoope. The Earle
D. Lope finding the Kings intent, retired to Gaston of Berne his cousin, there to make
some faction: where he had newes of the death of D. Aluaro de Lara his competitor and
enemy, whereof he was exceeding glad, and returned into Castille, but he found that the
King had giuen his offices, and all that D. Aluaro had enioyed to his brother D. Iohn Nugnes
de Lara, of as D. Lope found himselfe preuented; wherevpon he debaucht the Infant
D. Iohn his sonne in law, leauing the court much discontented. D. Iohn made some roads
about Salamanca; wherefore the King being in the towne of Carrion, the weeke before
Easter, whether the Earle D. Lope Diaz came well accompanied, he complained vnto
him of the excesse which his sonne in law D. Iohn had done, to whom the Earle answered
proudly,Speech audatious of the Earl D. Lope Diaz de Haro. that hee had not done any thing but what he had aduised him; and that if hee
would heare the Infants reasons, hee should goe to Vailledolit, and hee would bring
him to Cigales. This proud manner of speech of the Earles, seemed strange vnto the
King, and increased his desire to punish them both: Notwithstanding he went to Vailledolit,
and the Earle with his sonne in law came to Cigales, not daring to come in the
Kings presence in any great towne. There the Deputies of either part did confer dayly,
at a place called Loueruela, whereas these iarres were somewhat reconciled: wherevpon
the King came towards the frontiers of Arragon, to treat with the King D. Alphonso
touching the deliuery of his Nephewes, the sonnes of La Cerde, whereof hee was much
sollicited, euen by the Earle D. Lope Diaz.

Notwithstanding before the King D. Sancho could approch nere to Tarassone, where
the King of Arragon was, the Earle had preuented him, who hauing spoken with the
King of Arragon, hee reported vnto his maister, that he found by the way, that the King
of Arragon would not be pleased with this kinde of enterview, and therefore hee had no
need to passe any farther. The Earle finding himselfe somewhat crost by the enterview
of the King D. Sancho and him of Portugal, did also thinke that this would bee nothing fauorable
vnto him.
6 As for D.Arragon. Alphonso of Arragon, whom we haue left carefull to execute the charge
which the King his father had giuen him, to dispossesse the King D. Iames his vncle of the
Islands of Majorca and Minorca: after the conquest thereof hee had brought backe his
victorious army to Valencia, and there was receiued and acknowledged for King by the
Valentians. Yet he was admonished by D. Bernard, William Entenza and Symon of Vrrea,
Ambassadors for the Estates of Vrrea, to come speedily to the assembly at Saragossa,
where hauing sworne and promised the obseruation of the customes, rights and preuiledges
of the country, and receiued the oth of fealty from the deputies, he might lawfully
take vpon him the title of King of Arragon, the which (said they) he might not vse
before this act and ceremony, according to the ancient customes of Arragon. The
King hauing giuen them audience at Moruiedro, he answered them courteously, that he
would repaire thether with speed: and as for the royal title, he had held it reasonable to
take it, seeing he had beene so saluted by the Archbishop of Tarragone, and by the Cattelans
and Valentians. Being come to Saragossa, he tooke and receiued the oth, and
was crowned by the Bishop of Huesco, in the absence of the Archbishop of Tarragone,
to whom (by the Popes decree) this office doth appertaine, where he protested that he
held the realme as hereditary from his father, and was not bound to any. At this assembly
of the Estates, which was in the yeere 1286. there grew great contention touching the
reformation of the manners of courtiers, and the ordering of the Kings house, the noblemen
and deputies of the Estates of Arragon maintayning that the knowledge thereof
was incident to their charge; the King and his houshold seruants on the other side
denied that there was either law or custome which tied the King or his followers to any
such subiection.
In the end it was concluded that the reformation of the court should bee made byReformati^^* of the King of Arragon house be^or^ged to the generall Estates.
twelue of the principal families (which they cal in that country Mesnadas) the like number
of Knights, foure Deputies of Saragossa, and one of either of the other cities the
which should giue their voices in that case. This vnion of Arragon obtained a decree,
that the King should haue certaine councellors chosen, that is, foure of the chiefe Noblemen,
which were D. Pedro d' Aierbe the kings vncle, Pedro Cornel, Artal Alagon and
Pedro Martines de Luna; foure knights of noble and ancient races, which were D. Fortun
Sanches Vera, Symon Perez Salanoua, Symon Perez Vera, and Arnaud de Castro, and foure of
his household seruants: that is D. Gyles de Bedaure, Roderigo Sanches Pomar, Alphonso de
Castel nouo and Fernand Perez Pigna: Moreouer two knights for the realme of Valencia,
two citizens of Sarragossa, and one of either of the other cities of Huesca, of Tarassone,
Iacca, Barbastro, Calatajub, Turol and Daroca: with a condition that whilst the
King should remaine in Arragon, Ribagorca or Valencia, two of the
noblemen, two of his houshold seruants, two Knights of Arragon, one of Valencia, and the foure Deputies of
the realme of Arragon, should follow and reside in court, as councellors appointed by
the vnion, the which by the mouth of D. Fortun, Sancho de Vera, Sancho Martines Laeunella,
and the Deputies of Saragossa, Huesca and Turol (who were sent to that end) protested
that if he did not receiue, obserue and maintaine these orders, they would seize vpon
his reuenues, and of all the fees, offices and dignitles of such noblemen as should contradict
them: thus were the Kings of Arragon intreated in those times.
This yeere the King restored D. Philip de Gastro, sonne to his vncle D. Fernand Sanches
(who as we haue sayd was cast into the riuer of Singa) as wel to the possession of theMoores expelled out of Min^re^.
castle of Pomar, as to the rest of his fathers patrimony: and for that there were some remainders
of Moores which stood out in the Island of Minorca, the King soone after
went thether with an army in person, and clensed the whose country, hauing forced them

to fly into the castle of Agaic, and to compound, from whence according to the treaty,
they were transported into Affrike, by D. Raymond Marquet and Berenger Majol. In the
meane time King D. Alphonso did sollicit the Pope by his Ambassadors to receiue him
into fauour, which the French did hinder: for besides the rights, pretended by Charles
of Valois, and granted to him by the Pope, to the realme of Arragon, and lands anexed,
which were interdict, there was moreouer, that not onely the two yong Princes D. Alphonso
 and D. Fernand de la Cerde were detained prisoners by the King of Arragon, but
also Charles, called the Limping, sonne and heire to Charles of Aniou, King of Naples
and Sicile: for whose release Philip the father and sonne, Kings of France, had beene earnest
solicitors, and taken armes, and euen at that instant Philip the faire did presse the
Kings of Castille and Arragon, and in regard of Charles the Limping, E^ward King of
England did labour to make a peace betwixt him and the Kings of Arragon and Sicile
brethren. In the meane time there was continual warre in Italy, whether Robert Earle of
Arthois had beene sent, who with the aduise of a Cardinal the Popes Legat, and Mary
Princesse of Salerne, wife vnto Charles, who was prisoner, gouerned the realme of Naples.
They were then vpon termes of a good accord, when as these Gouernors hauing
sent a great army into Sicile, vnder the command of Renaud del Balso, Earle of Auellin,
tooke the towne of Cattanea; whereof king D. Alphonso being aduertised, he sent backe
Roger de Loria Admiral of Sicile, to succor and defend his brothers country. The Earle of
Auellin hauing made this prize, hee sent the galleys, which had transported his army,
backe to Naples, to bring the rest of his troupes which were yet on land: and at the same
instant, Guy of Montfort, Earle of Languillare, with the Earles of Boullen and Flanders,
hauing leauied men in Tuscany, were ready to imbarke vpon the bankes of Sienna,
when as Roger de Loria the Admiral arriued in the Italian seas, who hauing descouered
the fleet which went to transport the souldiars at Naples, hee pursued them, and tooke
them easily, hauing none to make any defence, and soone after hee espied about sixty
gallies sayling towards Sicile, which was the army of those French Noblemen aboue
named, which had imbarqued in Tuscany, whose Admiral was called Arrighin, a Geneuois.
Roger charged them courragiously, and put them to rout, without any great difficulty,
for the souldiars in the French fleete could fight better at land then at sea: the
Commanders were taken, all which paied their ransoms, except the Earle of Montfort*
who was detained prisoner, and there died.
These two victories were the recouery of Cattanea the which was yeelded to the Arragonois,
by the Earle of Auellin, who with his compagnions, returned with their bag
and baggage to Naples. By this meanes the treaty of peace which Edward made was
broken, but he desisted not, vntil he had drawne them to those conditions: That Charles
should be set at liberty, paying twenty thousand, or (as some say) thirty thousand markes
of siluer for his ransome. That he should procure the Pope to inuest King Iames in the
realme of Naples,Conditions of peace betwixt the King of Arragon and Naples prisoner. that he should take away the Interdict, and absolue the two brethren
of Arragon, and that he should be a meanes to make Charles Earle of Valois quit the interest
he pretended in Catalogne, by vertue of a donation made vnto him by Pope Martin:
for the execution whereof hee should haue three yeeres time, and in case he could
not performe them, hee should returne againe to prison: for assurance whereof, hee
should giue his three sonnes, Lewis, Robert and Iohn in hostage, with forty gentlemen of the county of Prouence. The which Charles hauing promised, and the hostages deliuered,
he was released foure yeeres after his taking. He came into France, and labored
in vaine with Charles of Valois,Charles of Valois wil not yeeld vp his right to Cattelogne. who would neuer relinguish the title hee had to Cattelogne.
Pope Nicholas also would not yeeld vnto that which Charles had promised
touching the realme of Sicile, the which hee sayd was a fee belonging to the church,
wherefore he past speedily into Italy with good troupes of men, led by Emery of Narbone.
Being in Tuscany, he spent some time to fauour the Guelphes party, against the
Gibilins, the which were two frantike factions, afflicting Italy since the dissention betwixt
the Popes and Emperor Frederic, continued among the Italians without subiect or
sence, with horrible examples of Impiety and inhumanity. The French which delt in
these quarrels, held the Guelphes faction.
Charles beeing come to Rome, Pope Nicholas the fourth crowned him in the yeere of
our Lord 1289. King of both Siciles, from the which he could not be disswaded:An. 1289. wherewith
they Arragonois held themselues much wronged, and fell to armes more violently
then before. Suritez affirmes that this yeere King Charles the Limping came and
presented himselfe armed betwixt the valley of Ionquera and the hill of Panizace, making
a shew as if he came to yeeld himselfe to the King of Arragon, according to the treaty,
and that hee returned sodainely to Perpignan. The Calabrois, neighbours to Sicile,
were daily sollicited to reuolt; the which the Inhabitants of the Cathenzan did, who
gaue themselues to King Iames: wherevpon king Charles beeing accompanied by the
Earle of Artois, led an army thether, to succor which place, king Iames beeing come with
his Admiral, and hauing landed his men, hee was incountred and defeated by the
French, and forced to saue himselfe in his galleies, yet without any great losse; wherefore
the Arragonois desiring to diuert this siege, they sailed towards Gayete, where hauing
seized vpon a hill neere vnto it, they gaue many assaults, but without any effect.
King Charles, and the Earle of Arthois, leauing sufficient troupes to entertaine the siege
of Cathenzan, marched towards Gayete, being resolued to giue battaile to the Arragonois:
but they kept themselues from fighting, beeing lodged in a place of aduantage and
neere vnto their galleys.
There was a mediation for a true betwixt the two kings and the realmes of SicileTruce for fiue yeeres betwixt the French and Arragonoiz.
and Naples, the which king Charles yeelded vnto for fiue yeeres, against the aduice
of the Earle of Arthois, who held the victory in his hand, assuring himselfe to force the
enemy to fight: wherevpon hee grew much discontented, and leauing Italy, returned
into France with his troupes; vpon this truce Cathenzan was yeelded. This first conquest
which the kings of Arragon made out of Spaine, was the cause of great broyles,
warre and ruines in Christendome, for which they chiefely smarted, whereof the Popes
were the subiect, as they stood well or ill affected to those Princes, of whose miseries, and
of their ruines they were secure spectators, beeing defended from all daunger through
the opinion of their holinesse and authority.
At the death of Pope Martin, his successour Honorius the fourth, had setled and confirmed
D. Iames of Arragon, and absolued the King D. Pedro, but Pope Nicholas the
fourth, malitiously and without any feare of the shedding of Christians bloud, did kindle
a new warre betwixt the French and Arragonois, whereas hee would not crowne Charles
King of Naples alone, but of Naples and Sicile together. D. Iames of Arragon holding
Sicile at that time, at his coronation he tooke the armes which the realme hath since carried,
which are in Eagle sable in a field argent, the which Manfroy was wont to beare,
and the bends geules in a field Or of Barcelona.
8 The King of Castille being sollicited,Castille. and much troubled to resolue vpon the deliuery
of his Nephewes of Cerde, detained in Arragon, and to recompence them in
such sort as his soueraignty might remaine entire and peceable to him and his successours,
hee sent to that end Ambassadors to Philip the faire, King of France, beeing
at Lions: but what they could not then effect by treaties and negotiations, occasion
did afterward bring to passe, for there happened a great excesse in the court of
Castille, wherevpon ensued the deliuery of the Infantes of Cerde: the which notwithstanding
was as much displeasing to the King of France, who had pursued it, as to
him to Castille, who feared it, and auoided it all hee could. A most daungerous
freedome for them that were deliuered, but of the restraint of their persons, as shall
appeere.
The King Don Sancho being at Alfaro, with the Queene his wife, Don Goncalo Archbishop
of Toledo, with many other Prelats and Noblemen of his realmes, hauing alwaies
a desire to retraine and punish the pride of the Earle Don Lope Diaz de Haro,
and of the Infant D. Iohn his sonne in law, who were there present, hee sayd vnto them,
that if they would not remaine both prisoners,Quarrels in court where D. Lope Diaz de Haro is slaine. they should deliuer vp the forts which
they held within the realm, whereat the Earl and D. Iohn grew into such choller and rage,
as beside words of contempt which they vsed, they laied their hands vpon their swords
before the King their Lord, threatning to kill them that should offer to lay hands vpon

them, and called to their friends for aide: but instantly all the Noblemen and Knights
there present, drew their swords and slue the Earle vpon the place, whose right hand
was cut off at the first blow (this was the reward for the seruice he had done in raysing D.
Sancho to the crowne) the Infant D. Iohn did hurt D. Sancho Martines de Leyua, and Goncalo
Gomes de Mancanedo, and made great resistance, by reason hee was somewhat spared,
for that he was the Kings brother: but when he saw his father in law slaine, hee beganne
to flie for safety towards Queene Mary, who staied the King (that pursued him
with the rest) from killing him with his owne hand. Beeing taken hee was put into a
straight prison and fettered in the towne of Logrogno, from whence the King went
with some troupes, to Treuigno and tooke it, and after that the castle of Haro. Queene
Mary remayning at Saint Dominicke de la Calcada, shee was visited by the widow of
the Earle that was slaine, whom the King D. Sancho let vnderstand, that her husbands
rashnesse had brought him to that desaster, aduising her to perswade D. Diego Lopes de
Haro her sonne to lay downe armes, and not to minister any further occasion of trouble:
that if he did containe himselfe within the duty of a subiect, the King would forget what
was past,The mother perswads her sonne to reuenge his fathers death. and both cherish and honour him, as his predecessors had beene honoured.
This Lady promised to doe her best endeauor for a peace, but shee did the contrary: for
she ceased not to incense her sonne, who was full of rage and desire of reuenge: so as
hee retired into Nauarre, with his sister Donna Maria Diaz, wife to the Infant D. Iohn,
who was prisoner, where hauing left her, he past into Arragon to the King Don Alphonso,
 whether also came Gaston, Lord of Bearn, who was no lesse desirous to reuenge the
death of the Earle his cousin. These Noblemen wrought in such sort, as the King
Don Alphonso,King of Arragon sets the Infants of cerde at liberty. set Don Alphonso and Don Fernand, Infants of Cerde, at liberty, who had
beene detained ten yeeres in the castle of Xatiua: and the King sending for them to Iacca,
hee caused D. Alphonso the elder to take vpon him the titlle of Castile and Leon, to
whom D. Diego Lopes de Haro did instantly doe homage, and acknowledged him for his
soueraigne King.D. Alphonso de la Cerde saluted for King of Castille.
The King D. Sancho beeing aduertised of these things, was much discontented, and
sought to dispossesse D. Diego Lopes of al his lands. Parting from Victoria, whereas the
Queene was brought in bed of a sonne, who was called D. Henry, hee came to Vrdugna,
the which he tooke, and then he forced la Bastida and Ocio in Rioje, where they had proclaimed
D. Alphonso de la Cerde. The King D. Sancho beeing in this perplexity, Ambassadors
came vnto him from Philip King of France and of Nauarre, who concluded an
enterview of the two Kings at Bayone. Thether also came Ambassadors from Iacob
Aben Ioseph King of Maroc, to renue the alliances past. D. Diego Lopes Gouernor generall
of the Moores frontiers, brother to the Earle D. Lope Diaz, beeing aduertised of
his death, beganne to grow fearefull, and to fortefie himselfe within Carmone, and notwithstanding
all the promises and assurances, which the King D. Sancho could giue him,
hee could not bee satisfied: so as hee was forced to passe into Arragon, where his Nephew
was, who died there sonne after his vncles arriuall: wherevpon the Estates of Biscay,
being without a Lord, fel into great combustions.
The King of Castille sent Don Diego Lopes de Salcedo thether, who tooke all the castles
and forts of the country, except the towre of Vncuera, the which was so well defended
by the Lord thereof, as all the batteries and assaults which Salcedo could giue,
could not force it. The King D. Sancho beeing much perplexed at these broiles, came
to Burgos, whether he caused the Infant D. Iohn to be brought and put into the castle, and
being confident that he should haue warre with Arragon, he sought to fortefie himselfe
by Portugal, wherefore hauing sent to intreat D. Denis his Nephew for an enterview,
they met at Sabugal.
There D.Portugal. Sancho demanded aide against the King of Arragon, and made a relation vnto
the King of Portugal of all that had past betwixt him and his subiects in Castille. About
that time the king D. Denis had by his wife D. Isabel of Arragon one daughter,
named D. Constance, who was afterwards married to the Infant D.Genealogy of Portugal. Fernand of Castille.
Afterwards the king D. Denis had by her the Infant D. Alphonso, who was king of Portugal.
Others adde a daughter named Isabel.

The warre which the Nauarrois had against them of Arragon,Nauarre. gaue some respight to
that betwixt Arragon and Castille, for King Philip intertayning strong garrisons of
French in Nauarre during the pretensions of Charles of Valois in Cattelogne, there was
no truce could hold, but they were stil at blowes, the French and Nauarrois taking from
the Arragonois the towne of Sauveterre,An. 1290. in the yeere 1289. The yeere following 1290.
Queene Iane of France and of Nauarre was brought was brought in bed of a sonne, named Lewis,
who was heire of both realmes, and surnamed Hutin.
This yeere was the entervew betwixt Philip King of France and D.Castille. Sancho of Castille
at Bayone, little fauorable to the Infants of Cerde, for the King of France being iealous
that they were aided and supported in their quarrels by the King of Arragon, whom hee
loued not, abandoned the^, and made a strict leage with him of Castille, yea in such sort,
according to the Spanish Histories,Renenciation reiterated of the right which the Kings of France comming from Saint Lewis haue to castillle. as to take away all occasions of quarrell betwixt
them he did againe renounce in fauour of D. Sancho, all the right hee had to the Realme
of Castille. The King of Arragon desirous to come to some accord with the French,
imployed Edward King of England, who vsed great dilligence to reconcile them, as
we will shew. After the conference of Bayone, the King D. Sancho returning by Guipuscoa
he granted priuiledges for the foundation of Tolouse, Segure and Villefranche,
townes in that country.
10 During these broiles, the inhabitants of Badajos, by meanes of a quarrel betwixt
two factions, reuolted against the King D. Sancho, and imbraced the party of D. Alphonso
de la Cerde, who intituled himselfe King of Castille. The Bejarans and Portugalois, factions
among the inhabitants of Badajos, fel to great contention among themselues, for
that the Portugalois against all right had vsurped many possessions belonging to the
Bejarans, through the fauour of the King D. Sancho: whereof many complaints beeing
made by them that were dispossest, the King commanded Iustice should bee done them,
and that they should bee restored to their goods:Tumult at Bada^os. the which beeing decreed, they that
were in possession would not obey: wherefore the Bajarans hauing taken armes, and
slaine many of their aduersaries, and chased the rest out of the towne, they recouered
their owne in this manner: but the excesse and violence which they vsed was such, as
fearing to bee seuerely punished, as they deserued, they seized vpon the high towne,
and beeing fortefied there, they proclaimed D. Alphonso King of Castille and Leon.
In the beginning the King D. Sancho sent the Maisters of the Knights of Saint Iames,
Calatraua and Alcantara, with the priors of Templers and Saint Iohn, who wrought in
such sort as they retired the Bejarans from their folly, with assurance of their liues, but
afterwards the King neglecting his faith promised by his Lieutenants, caused this
people to be cruelly murthered, to the number of foure thousand, sparing neither women
nor children, for the which he was iustly blamed.
There was also an other massacre at Talauera,Cruelty of the King D. Sancho. for the like faction; proclayming
Don Alphonso de la Cerde for King of Castille, whereas one of the ports of the townes
is called at this day Quartos, for that there were aboue foure hundred of the chiefe
inhabitants slaine there. The continuall griefe wherein hee was by reasons of these
difficulties, both at home and abroad, made him to commit these outrages, contrarie
to all reason, the which was no signe of magnanimitie, besides, that the furies
(if wee may so say) by r^^son of his impietie and disobedience towardes his father did
pursue him.
In the yeere of our Lord 1291.An. 1291. Queene Mary was brought in bed of her fourth sonne,
who was named D. Pedro, and the warre being now begonne with Arragon, the King D.
Sancho came to Cuenca, and sent good troupes against D. Iohn Nugnes de Lara, who
spoiled the countries of Cuenca and Alarcon, who were defeated, and many Ensignes
and Guidons carried to Valencia, whereas the king of Arragon and D. Diego Lopes de Haro
were: these with other discontents made the King of fall into a double Quartane,
which brought him in danger of his life. In the meane time the King of Arragon D.
Diego Lopes and D. Iohn Nugnes beeing returned to Albarrazin, they did ouerrunne
the territories of Molina, Siguenca, Atien^a, Berlanga and Almacan, where they
committed great spoiles, and carried away a great booty finding no resistance. D. Iohn

Nugnes was fed with hope to recouer Albarrazin. The Queene who was come to
Cuenca, to see the King her husband sicke, wrought meanes to winne Don Iohn Nugnes
de Lara, whom they had often attempted to draw vnto the Kings seruice, but hee trusted
him not, but now hee was perswaded, vpon a promise to giue in marriage to his sonne,
called also D. Iohn Nugnes, D. Isabella, the heire of Molina, and the Queenes Neece,
the which was performed: but hauing his head euer fraught with iealousie and distrust,
hee was so easily induced to beleeue any aduertisment, as hee was still ready to dislodge:
so as the King beeing at Palenca, and discontented with D. Nugnes carriage, beganne
also to distrust him. And for that hee had need of captaines, hee drew the Infant Don
Iohn his brother out of prison, in the yeere of our Lord 1291. to imploy him against
his rebels, hauing caused him to take a new oth, to be faithfull vnto him, and to his sonne
D. Fernand, whose hands hee caused them all to kisse, as to the heire of the crowne.
From Palenca hee went in pilgrimage to Saint Iames, and by the way reduced vnder
his obedience D. Iohn Alphonso d' Albuquerque, a knight of great authority in Gallicia,
who had beene wonne by D. Iohn Nugnes. At his returne to Vailledolit, he found that his
second sonne D. Alphonso was dead.
The same yeere a peace was concluded betwixt the Kings of France,Arragon. Naples and Arragon,
the Ambassadors of these Princes being assembled with the Popes Noncio at Tarascon,
at the instance of Edward King of England. For the King of Arragon came D.
Nugnes Mataplane Bishop of Sarragossa, Raymond Anglesol, Berenger Puchuert, William
Lunfort, and Bernard william Pinelio all Lawiers, who treated and agreed vpon these
conditions.Peace betwixt France and Arragon. That the donation, made by Pope Martin to Charles of Valois, of the
realme of Arragon and the appurtenances, should bee voide and of no force, paying a
tribut of thirty ounces of gold yeerely to the Church of Rome. That the Island of
Majorca should bee restored to the lawfull Lord, vpon condition that hee should acknowledge
the King of Arragon for his soueraigne. That the Arragonois should depart
out of the Island of Sicile, and leaue the free possession vnto Charles King of Naples.
That D. Alphonso King of Arragon should bee at Rome on Whitsonday that present
yeere, and lead an army against the Infidels. That he should perswade his brother D. Iames,
and his mother D. Constance, to quit the realm of Sicile, or else to make war against them.
These were the principall Articles of this peace the which the Arragonois held infamous,
accusing their King of impiety towards his mother, and treason to his brother:
yet it was concluded and signed. And for the confirmation thereof, the bishop of Sarragossa
and Berenger Puchuert went to Rome. Some doubt whether the full conclusion
thereof were made during the life of King D. Alphonso, or at the entrance of the King D.
Iames: for D. Alphonso died about this treaty, as hee made preparation to marry the
daughter of Edward King of England, called Leonara: yet it is likely this peace was made
in the life time of King D. Alphonso, yea some Authors affirme, that King Charles the
Limping and he met in the valley of Iunquera, either of them beeing accompanied with
twelue gentlemen onely, who carried no other armes then their swords, and that there
they ratefied and signed this accord: as for the effects and execution thereof, it is credible
they followed in the time of his successor. King D. Alphonso died in the seuen and twentith
yeere of his age, hauing raigned fiue yeeres and seuen monthes. Being nere his end he
would bee attired in the habit of Saint Francis, for an opinio^ which raigned then, that
there consisted some great vertue in that weed, and so hee was carried to the conuent of
Franciscans at Barcelona.
About that time the King of Granado,Moores. had conference with the gouernor of the frontier
of Castille, for the King D. Sancho being called D. Fernand Perez Ponce de Leon, and
renued the treaty ad league with Castille, for the cofirmation whereof there was a
Moorish knight sent to the King to Burgos. Isoeph Aben Iacob had succeeded his father
Iacob Aben Ioseph, in the realme of Maroc, since the yeere of our Lord 1285. he hauing
raigned fiue and twenty yeeres, with the reputation of a generous Prince, and a good
Iusticer. This yeere he past into Spaine, and came to besiege Bejar, but hee could not
take it, wherefore he returned into Affrike with little honour. Meaning to returne some
time after into Spaine with greater forces, he could not passe, beeing stayed by the fleete

of Castille, which was great and mighty, for feare whereof he stayed vpon the bankes of
Tanger, for Benoist Zachary, Admiral of Castille, had taken thirteene galleys from him:
by fauour of which victory the King D. Sancho marcht into Andalousia, to make an enterprise
vpon Tarriffe.
By the way he conferred with D. Denis King of Portugal, made a new league withCastille.
him, and a future marriage was concluded betwixt D. Fernand of Castille and D. Constance
of Portugal, who were both very young. And for the fulfilling of all promises in
due time, there were townes and castles deliuered in pawne of either side, yet the King
D. Sancho had no aide from him of Portugal, in this expedition. Being come to Seuile,
and hauing their ordained what was needful for the siege, Tariffe was battred, and furiously
assaulted,Tariffe taken by the Casillans. and in the end taken, the gard whereof was giuen to D. Roderigo, maister
of the Calatraua. A little before a marriage had beene treated of by Ambassadors,
betwixt Don Iames the new King of Arragon, and the Infant D. Isabel of Castille,
daughter to D. Sancho, beeing onely nine yeeres old. For confirmation whereof,
pacification of the troubles, and other alliances, the two Kings of Castille and Arragon,
met together in Calatajub, in the yeere of our Lord 1292.An. 1292. but the marriage tooke
no effect.
For as much as D. Iohn Nugnes de Lara the elder, continued still to trouble the realm,
the King D. Sancho hauing taken Canette and Moya from him, hee forced him to retire
into France, whether Ambassadors were sent soone after, to renue the league with
King Philip, Don Sancho fearing that by some sinister reports hee might bee diuerted
from his friendship, Don Iohn Nugnes beeing absent, Don Isabel of Molina his
daughter in law, died without any children, whose inheritance fell to the Queene
Donna Maria her aunt. The Infant D. Iohn carrying still a hatred in heart against
the King his brother, rebelled againe, ioyning with Don Iohn Nugnes de Lara the
younger; and drawing vnto his partie many Knights, but the King pursued them in
such sort, as D. Iohn de Lara was forced to yeeld vnto his mercy, and the Infant to flie
into Portugal.
11 About that time D. Alphonso Perez de Guzman liued in great reputation in
Spaine, beeing a wise and valiant Knight, who had long serued the Miralmumin Aben Iacob
of Maroc and his father, leading their armies in qualitie of Lieutenant generall in
the warres which they had against the other Moores of Affrike, where hee had wonne
honour and great riches, with the which being returned into Spaine he purchased much
land and great Seigneuries. This knight and Donna Marra Alonco Cornel gaue beginning
to the family of the Dukes of Medina Sidonia, famous in our time in Spaine,
the Lords whereof in the beg^inning intituled themselues Earles of Niebla.Beginning of (...) of Guzman and Dukes of Medina Sidonia. To
this D. Alphonso Perez de Guzman the King D. Sancho gaue the gouernment of Tariffe,
the which hee promised to keepe safely with lesse charge by two third parts then the
Maister of the Calatraua had done. The Earle Don Iohn Nugnes de Lara hauing continued
some time in France, had meanes to make his peace with the King and so returned
into Castille, where they did presentlie imploy him against the Infant Don Iohn
of Castille, and Don Iohn Alphonso of Albuquerque, who with many other of their
confederates spoiled the whole countrie of Leon: but in an incounter hee was defeated
and taken: afterwards beeing but slieghtly garded, hee found meanes to escape,
and came to the court at Toro, whereas Queene Mary was deliuered of D. Beatrix
her daughter, in the yeere of our Lord 1293.An. 1293. The King Don Sancho beeing aduertised
that Mahumet M^r Almus Lemi King of Granado was like to make some attempt,
hee sent the Earle Don Iohn Nugnes de Lara, with Don Iohn Nugnes his sone,
and Don Nugno Goncales vnto the fronter. The Earle of Lara the father beeing come
to Cordoua died.
This motion of the Granadin Moore was but an idle brute, wherefore the troupes
returned. And for that Don Denis King of Portugall died receiue the Infant Don Iohn
of Castille and the other rebelles, the King D. Sancho sent him word, that according to
their capitulations, hee could not giue any retreat vnto his enemies, and therefore
he intreated him to cause them to depart his Countrie with all speed, the which he did.

The Infant D. Iohn going to sea, meaning to passe into France, was driuen by a storme
to Tanger, from whence hee went to kisse the hands of the Miralmumin Aben Iacob,
who entertained him courteously, and hauing conferred with him of the affaires of
Spaine,D. Iohn of Castille brings the Moores into Spaine against the King his brother. knowing that he was desirous to annoy the King of Castille his brother, hee offred
him fiue thousand horse to make the enterprise of Tariffe, the which D. Iohn did
willingly accept, returned into Spaine, and besieged Tariffe, thinking to finde it vnfurnished,
but D. Alphonso Perez de Guzman had wisely prouided, and defended it valiantly.
It is not knowne by what accident a sonne of D. Alphonso Perez was fallne into
the Moores hands: but some Authors write that D. Iohn seeing there was no meanes
to take this place by force, hauing demaunded a parle, hee led this child vnto the ditch,
and told the father, who was vpon the walles, that if hee did not deliuer the fort, hee
would cut his sonnes throat: wherevnto D. Alphonso answered,Act of great constancy of D. Alphonso Perez de Guzman. that the towne was
the Kings, who had giuen it him to keepe, and that it was his duety to defend it: as for
his sonne, hee might doe what hee pleased, adding moreouer, that to let him vnderstand
that he ment not to preferre the loue of his house, before that of his Prince,
and the crowne of Castille, hee would rather giue a knife, if hee needed one, and
at the same instant threw him his sword from the walles, and so retired to his lodging.
The Infant Don Iohn incensed at this disdainefull answere, presently caused this
poore Innocents head to bee cut off:Cruelty of D. (...) at which spectacle the souldiers which were vpon
the walles gaue a great shout, the which was heard by Don Alphonso Perez, beeing
at the table with his wire: whereat beeing mooued, hee tooke his armes, and commaunded
them to follow him.
Beeing come to the place where they had made this noyse, hee beganne to incourrage
the souldiers, saying that hee was there to succour them, if they were prest, thinking
it was some assault which the enemie gaue vnto the towne: but the souldiers tould
him that no man prest them, and reported vnto him the cruelty which they had seene
executed vpon his onely sonne: If it bee no other thing, sayd Don Alphonso, bee carefull
of your gard, and so returned without any outward shew of alteration, and without
speaking any thing to his wife, hee sat downe at the table with her. This is honoured
amongst the Spaniards for one of the most generous acts in this house of Guzman
that hath beene seene in Spaine. The Moores and their captaine Don Iohn, seeing
that they had to deale with resolute men, raysed their siege, and returned into Affrike.
Heerevpon the Miralmumin deliuered vp Algezire to the King of Granado, for
that the entertayning of so great a garrison was both chargeable and preiudiciall
vnto him. Thus the Kings of Maroc were dispossessed of all they held on this side
the sea.
Soone after there arriued in Spaine the Infant Don Henry, sonne to the King Don
Fernand the third, and vncle to this King D. Sancho, beeing freed from a long imprisonment
with the French at Naples. Hee was well receiued, and did accompany the King
into Biscay, whereas D. Diego Lepes Diaz, being come out of Arragon, had caused some
^oubles, the which were pacefied by the Kings presence. The country did then belong
vnto D. Maria Lope de Haro, wife vnto the Infant D. Iohn, who was banished out
of Castille. The King being returned to Vailledolit, and from thence to Alcala de Henares,
he fell sicke, which made him to dispose of the affaires of his realme: hee left Don
Fernand his sonne and successor, vnder the gouernment of the Queene Donna Maria, to
whom hee would haue all the Noblemen which held the chiefe dignities, and others
which had charges within the realme,Death of the King D. Sancho. sweare: wherevnto hauing obeyed in his presence,
he caused himselfe to be carried to Madrid, and from thence to Toledo, where hee died
in the yeere of our Lord 1295.An. 1295. hauing raigned eleuen yeeres, and was buried in the great
church of that city.
Whilest these things past in Castille,Nauarre. the realme of Nauarre was gouerned in the
name of King Philip and of the widowe D. Iane, by a French Knight called Hughe
of Con^^ans, after the accustomed manner, notwithstanding the great Estates of
the Realme, gouernments and other charges, were for the most part giuen to the Nauarrois,
all which were entertained with the Kings money, and then they made their

accompts by Liures, Solz, and Deniers, after the manner of France. Aboue al things
the fronters towards Arragon were carefully garded, in which country in the latter wars
they had made a great breach, and taken many places which they held by the treatie of
Tarascon, or at the least in making a peace there was no mention made of yeelding them
vp. Diego Sanches de Garriz beeing Merino or Prouost of Pampelone, the towne was set
on fire in the night by Symon of Ardaiz, Michel of Alcanegui, and Garci-Sanches, men of
base condition, desirous to do ill, wherewith many houses were burnt: these men beeing
taken, were hanged. the Gouernor did fortifie many places and houses within the realm,
especially vpon the fronters, and caused the English to dislodge out of the country, about
the yeare 1295. by reason of the ciuill warres betwixt the kings of France and England:
vnto that time continued the League betwixt France, Nauarra, and Castile, which was
vnto the decease of the king D. Sancho: but then by reason of the factions which were reuiued
betwixt his children and them of Cerdes, al leagues were broken.


D. Iames the 2. of that name, 11. king
of Arragon.
12 IN Arragon presenly after the death of King D. Alphonso,Arragon. D. Pero his brother assembled
the Noblemen and Deputies of the Townes at Sarragossa, to consult least
the Realme should receiue some preiudice, during the absence of the King Don Iames his
elder brother: thither came Don Symon of Vrrea, Bernard William Entenza, Pedro Cornes,
Philippes Fernandes de Castro, Athon de Fosses, Iohn Ximenes of Vrrea, Sancho Antillas,
Artal and Blasco of Alagon breethren, Lope Ference, Pedro Martines, Roderigo Ximenes de
Luna, Gombadd Entenza and others. The king beeing arriued at Sarragossa, hee was there
receiued and crowned, hauing sworne and promised the obseruation of the rights and
priuiledges of the Country: protesting that he tooke possession of his fathers kingdome,
belonging vnto him by right, as the elder, and not as an increase by reason of his brothers
death, the which he declared, to the end he might keepe his interest to the Realme
of Sicile, against his brother Don Frederick, who murmured, that the intention of the
deceased king was to leaue him this Iland for his portion, being discontented at the peace
concluded with Charles king of Naples and the French: the which D.Peace confirmed betwixt the French and Arragonois. Iames desired might
take place, confirming it as soone as he came to the crowne, seeking by all means to haue
peace with the French, but especially with the Sea of Rome, held at that time by Boniface
the 8. who then did much fauour he French king.
13 By the meanes of Pope Boniface the eight a finall accord was made, about the coming
of Don Iames to the Crowne of Arragon, with Charles king of Naples, the King
Don Iames promising to deliuer his children, who were detayned in Cattelogne for Hostages:
and moreouer to marry one of his daughters called Blanche, and to quit him the
Realme of Sicile, which was but a charge or losse to Arragon. The Pope and king Charles
for their parts, promised to procure Charles of Vallois to relinquish the right which hee
might pretend in Cattelogne, by the Inuestiture made vnto him by Pope Martin the 4.
for the accomplishing of which accord King Charles stayed some time in France, and
also by Commission from the same Pope to mediate a peace betwixt France and England:Frederick of Arragon seazeth vpon S^cile.
but returning into Italy, and thinking to haue free possession of Italy, hee found
that Don Fredericke, brother to the king Don Iames of Arragon, had seazed thereon, by
reason whereof there began a more violent warre then before. The Pope hauing cited the
two breethren of Arragon, Don Iames came to Rome, and purged himselfe by oath, that
he was ignorant of his brothers enterprise, offering to king Charles (who was present)
ayde to recouer the Iland: whereupon they continued friends. Thither also came queene
Constance, widow to Don Pedro, and Roger de Loria the Admirall, who were much honored
by king Charles, intertayning Roger into his seruice.
14 The king D. Iames was made Standard-bearer of the Church by the Pope,Robert sonne to K. Charles put to rout by the Sicilians. who
moreouer did inuest him in the Ilands of Corsica and Sardinia, which were held by the

Pisans and Geneuois: vpon condition, that he should conquer them by armes at his own
charge, and a certaine rent, which (some say) was two thousand markes of siluer to the
Church of Rome, with other burthensome conditions. According to the offer which the
king of Arragon had made vnto king Charles, he gaue him thirty gallies, with the which
hauing ioyned his fleet of forty gallies, whereof Roger de Loria was Admirall, they sayled
all towards Sicile, and hauing incountred D. Frederick with 60. gallies, commanded
by Frederick d' Oria a Geneuois,D. Fred cricke put to route by the French. they gaue them battell, put them to route, took 22. gallies,
and about 6000. prisoners, and if the Cattelans, who tooke part with Charles, had
not made way, to giue D. Frederick meanes to escape, he had beene also taken. Roger de
Loria was depriued of his goods in the Iland of Sicile, and condemned as guilty of high
treason. Don Frederick saued himselfe in Cattelogne, where he did somewhat repaire his
forces, and then returned to Messina. There hee found that the Sicilians had had their reuenge
vpon the French, for they had fought with them, and taken Iohn de Loria, nephew
to Roger, with sixteene gallies, and had cut off his head as a rebell, which caused Roger to
shew himselfe cruell vnto his prisoners. Afterwards king Charles hauing sent Robert his
third sonne with commission into the Iland, and hauing taken Cattanea, as he resolued to
go and meet with a fleete of 60.Robert sonne to King Charles put to rout by the Sicilans. Gallies, which Philip Prince of Tarentum, his brother
did leade the Sicilians, vnderstanding that Roberts gallies were in the port of Cattanea;
vnmanned, went and assayled them, tooke some, and disperst the rest in the view of Philip,
against whom hauing directed their prowes, they also gaue battel to his 60. gallies,
whom they put to route, tooke him prisonser, and carried him to Palermo: wherfore Robert
their king after these two routes, thinking that he should not be safe in Sicile, abandoned
Cattanea, and returned to Naples. Whilest these contended for Sicile, the King
D. Iames did quietly enioy his Estates of Arragon, hauing in the yeare 1295. made a new
league with the Kings of France, Portugal, and Granado, against the new King of Castile
in fauour of D. Alphonso de la Cerde, the titularie king of that Realme.


D. Fernand, or Ferdinand the 4. of that name, 12. king
of Castile, 33. of Leon.
15 IT is a scourge greatly to be feared,Castile. with the which God (beeing displeased) doth punish
nations, when he giues them children for Princes, and women for Gouernors:
for the young age and weake sexe beeing alwaies little respected, and these instruments
easie to gouerne by flatterers, and to be terrified by the violent, wee haue alwaies seene
in such raignes, Maiestie in contempt, Iustice troden vnder foot, the people opprest, the
good recoyled, Truth banished, and the Country in prey to their neighbors. D. Fernand
of Castile being a child, the yeare 1295. when his father D. Sancho dyed, the gouernment
of him, and of his Realme by the will of the deceased King, should remaine in the hands
of the Queene D. Mary his mother. A little before D. Henry his great vncle was come
into Spaine, who hauing beene chased out of the country for his turbulent spirit, during
the raigne of Don Fernand the third had runne through many countries, both Christians
and Infidels, and tryed diuers conditions: so as after many yeares he brought backe into
Spaine the same qualities which had expelled him, yea far worse: by whose aduice the
Queene was forced to gouerne her selfe, so as in effect he was Regent himselfe which the
Earle D. Iohn Nugnes de Lara, and his brother D. Nugno Goncales did enuie. Besides the
Noblemen who during the life of the deceased king were out of the Realme, hoping in
this new raigne to be restored, through the fauour of their partisans and friends, were
now returned,D. Alphonso de la (...) and D Iohn of Castile cont^nd for the realme. which did not a little trouble the Queene mother, who for these considerations
was forced to giue D. Henry great authority against her will. D. Diego Lope Diaz de
Haro had vsurped the authoritie in the ancient patrimonie of his house of Biscay, and there
were newes that the Infant D. Iohn came out of Affricke, to contend for the kingdome:
Besides, that on the other side D. Alphonso de la Cerde, fauoured by the forces of Arragon,
France, and Nauarre, carried himselfe openly or king of Castile.

Notwithstanding all these crosses and dangers, this Princesse who was of a great courage,
caused Don Fernand her sonne to be proclaimed and crowned King of Castile, Leon,
and other lands depending in the city of Toledo, writing vnto the Nobleman and
Prouinces to acknowledge and receiue him: and to the end they should doe it the more
willingly, she did release them of a tribute called Sica, which the deceased king, beeing
prest with great necessittie, had imposed. In the beginning no man refused it, but the Noblemen
mentioned bread such a confusion, as she had almost sunke vnder the burthen. D.
Henry to settle his authoritie of Regent,Troubles ^aised D. Henry which he sayd did belong vnto him, stirred vp
the townes of Casile to open rebellion, so as the Queene mother and her sonne being
come toVailledolit, where she had called an assembly of the Estates, they shut the gates
against them, and caused them to stay without vntill night: neither would they then suffer
such as had accompanied them to enter, but onely she, her sonne, their Officers and
houshold seuants. Don Henry came thither, who hauing scarce saluted the Queene, he
began to perswade her to end this dangerous warre, and to disperse the conspiracie of so
many Princes against her and her sonne by her marriage with Don Pedro of Arragon, to
whome this Princesse gaue a courragious and sharpe answer, reiecting this marriage as
vnfit and pernitious.
The Infant Don Iohn the Kings vncle, beeing arriued in Granado, came to Extremadura,
and seazed vpon the towne of Pont, or Alcantara, and then entred into Portugal,
where by the fauor of the King Don Denis, he tooke vppon him the title of King of Castile,
both of them writing to the Inhabitants of the frontier, that they should hold him
for their Prince and Soueraigne Lord: and Don Denis not content herewith, sent to proclaime
warre against the Queene D. Maria, and Don Henry. The wise Queene mother
withstood all these dangers, and preuented them as well as she could, yeelding to the malice
of the time, resisting some, and giuing contentment to others, with the least preiudice
she could.
The king of Portugall came to Cite Roderigo, whereas the afflicted Queene mother
with her sonne and puple were, and there they did in some sort renew their old allyan^es:
they imposed silence to the Infant Don Iohn, who seemed to relinquish: and they did againe
conclude a future marriage betwixt the king Don Fernand, and D. Constance Infanta
of Portugal. To these intestine troubles, were added the enterprises of the Nauarrois
and Arragonois,D. Alphonso de (...) into (...) who led by Alphonso de la Cerde, calling himselfe King of Castile,
entred the country by S. Esteuan de Gormas, and passing vnto Leon, hee was there receiued
without any difficultie. There Don Iohn, who was rebelled againe, caused himselfe
to be crowned king of Leon, diuiding betwixt them the Realmes of Spaine: so as Don
Alphonso should be king of Castile, Toledo, Cordoua, Murcia, and Iaen: and the Infant
Don Iohn of Leon, Gallicia, Extremadura and Seuile. Into this confederacie entred the
Kings of Arragon,Consederacy against (...) Portugal, Granado, and the Queene D. Violant, widow to the king
Don Alphonso, with whom there also ioyned Philip of France and Nauarre, with many
Noblemen and Knights of the Countrie: in all whose names Don Iames, king of Arragon,
had spent to proclaime warre against the Queene D. Maria and her sonne Don Fernand,
in the yeare 1269. so as there was a pittifull reuolt in all parts of Spaine: these afflicted
Princes, mother and sonne,An. 1296. hauing no entrance into any towne without great difficultie.
Afer this inuasion of Leon, the Nauarrois and Arragonois led by D. Alphonso entred
into Sahagun, where they crowned him king of Castile, and tooke Villagarcia, Tordesillas,
Medina del Riosecco, la Mota, Villa Fafila, with many other places and forts.
Notwithstanding beeing at the seege of Maiorga, a place distant fiue leagues from Sahagun,
he continued there three moneths, and finding no man to make resistance, God
shewed his power, for the plague falling in the Nauarrois and the Arragonois Campe,
they were forced to rayse their seege, and make a truce with the Queene widow to return
home, who beeing opprest with infinit miseries, without counsell, ayde, or support, n^t
onely made a truce, but also sent them linnen, carpets, and such like things, to the end
they might carry away the bodies of many Noblemen and Knights which were dead of
this contagion,Plague in Don (...) de la (...) campe. the more honorably, among the which were the Infant D. Pedro of Arragon,
Don Symon, of V^rea, and Raymond Anglesol Arragonois, giuing commandement

that they should suffer them to cary them away without any let or hinderance. Thus some
retired into Nauarre, and others into Arragon. The king D. Iames on the other side, being
entred by the fronters of Murcia, had conquered the greatest part of that kingdome. Hee
of Portugal, notwithstanding the conference and league made at Cite Roderigo,
shewed himselfe in armes vpon the fronter, and had spoiled the countrie vnto Simanca,
and neere to Vailledolit; where beeing aduertised of the Nauarrois retreat, hee returned
also,Inn^sion of Castile by the king of Granado. hauing taken most of the places of Alfajates and Sabugal, with some othes about
those quarters: but the king of Granado thinking to effect some great matter in Andalusia,
was repulsed by D. Alphonso Perez de Guzman Gouernor of that Prouince.
16 During these warres, many Iewes, mooued with feare more then with deuotion,
turned to the Christian Religion in Spaine, whree they had dwellings and Synagogues almost
in all good townes. The occasion was, that in the citty of Auila, there rose vp a
certaine man of the Iewish nation, who tearmed himselfe a Prophet; with whom another
of the town of Aillon, thrust on with the like spirit, did ioyne: who telling of many secret
reuelations, prophesied vnto the Iewes that the time of their deliuerance did approch.
The authority of these two personages, well knowe, was not little among them, and
therefore they were easily credited; and the rather, for that they did accompany their
preachings and discourses, with modestic, grauitie, and holinesse in their outward behauiour:
so as these newes running throughout all Spaine, the people gaue themselues to
prayers, fasting, almes, and all other commendable good workes, attending the day of
their redemption, the which was foretold them by these Prophets, and appointed the last
day of the fourth moneth: on the which (sayd they) should appeare many signes in heauen,
with a loud sound of a trumpet. Thus hauing past the time in great repentance, feare
and terrour, vnto that day, they were throughout all the townes, earely in the morning,
all attired in white before their Synagogues, as they are accvstomed to do the day of
their expiation, to pray vnto God to see those celestiall signes, and to receiue their Messias:
but seeing nothing, they returned to their houses, whither beeing comes, as they say,
there appeared many crosses on the walles and vpon their garments; whereof some made
good vse, thinking it came from our Sauiour Iesus Christ, who reprooued their hardnes
of heart: and therefore acknowleding the error wherein they had liued, receiued the holy
baptisme; among the which was a great Phisition called Alphonso, who did afterwards
write against the Iewes obstinacie. Others persisting in their impietie, did beleeue that
these crosses were illusions of the diuell to deceiue them.
The storme wherewith Castile had beene beaten from Nauarre, Arragon, Portugal,
Granado, and her owne rebels, beeing somewhat pacified, the Queene-mother ledde an
armie into the country of Leon, whereas the Infant D. Iohn raigned, and beseeged Paredez:
and on the other side D. Henry went to the fronters of Granado, where hee was defeated
and put to flight, and without the speedie assistance of Alphonso Perez de Guzman,
he had beene taken. This losse which did much preiudice the Realme of Castile was accompanied
with combustions and practises, which Don Henry made, to the hurt of the
king Don Fernand, in the city of Toledo, and the Diocesse of Auila and Segobia, where
hauing gathered some troupes together, he marched to the campe before Paredez, and
wrought so, as he made them raise the seege, vnder colour of holding a Parlament which
was called at Vailledolit: and in the meane time he sought vnderhand to corrupt the Deputies
of townes and commonalties, and of the other orders of the countrie, to the preiudice
of Don Fernand. The Queene D. Maria preuented all these disorders, which were
not hidden from her, but with great paine, seeking to content Don Henry. During these
garboiles, they had newes, that the Nauarrois breaking the truce, had seazed vppon the
Iuifuerie of the cittie of Nagera, a place strong by nature, the which they fortified, saying,
that they held it in the name of the Infant Don Alphonso de la Cerde, whome they called
king of Castile,Alphonso de Ronay Gouernor of Nauer. and as they would haue gone on along the riuer of Oja, they were repulsed
by Don Iohn Alphonso de Haro, who beseeged them in the Iuifuerie, and prest them
in such sort,An. 1297. as they were forced to leaue it, and to yeeld: this was in the yeare 1297. when
as the kindgome of Nauar as gouerned in the name of the King and Queene of France
by Alphonso de Ronay.

At which time Don Iames king of Arragon was in Italy,Arragon. where the peace made in the
yeare 1295. betwixt him, the king of Naples, and the French king, was renewed and confirmed
in the towne of Anania, in the presence of Pope Boniface, and the better to confirme
the friendship betwixt these Princes, the king of Nauarre yeelded vp the townes of
Lerda, Vlfirera and Sauueterre vnto the king Don Iames, beeing taken from the Crowne
of Arragon: so as for this cause, the peace and amity betwixt Nauarre and Arragon was
firme and vnited against Castile. By these treaties the fort of Albarazin was yeelded vppe
to D. Iohn de Lara, to entertaine him, and was taken from D. Fernand bastard brother to
the king Don Iames, as if it had beene vniustly taken from the father of Don Iohn, who
did homage to the king of Arragon.
The widow Queene of Castile seeking by all meanes to preserue her sonnes RealmeCastille,
from so many imminent dangers, renewed againe the treatie of mariage betwixt him and
the Infanta D. Constance of Portugal, in the towne of Alcaniz, whether the Infanta was
brought by the king her father, and accorded for a future spouse vnto the young king D.
Fernand, and to make a more strict League of friendship,Accord betwixt Castile and Portugall by marriages. the King D. Denis concluded a
marriage betwixt D. Beatrix Infanta of Castile, and his eldest sonne D. Alphonso, who
was then but eight yeares old. These marriages were made with great disaduantage for
the king of Castile, for the conuentions made in consideration thereof, were these. That
the king of Portugal should hold in pawne Oliuencia, Conguela, Campo Moya, and S.
Felix de los Gallegos, places belonging to the Crowne of Castile. Then did the king D.
Denis renounce the league which he had with the Infant Don Iohn, who raigned in Leon,
and gaue vnto the widow-Queene three hundred horse to go against him, but they returned
soone after, hauing not done any thing. The Infant Don Alphonso de la Cerde on the
other side seazed on the towne of Almacan, and the troupes of Don Iohn Nugnes, and of
the Infant Don Iohn had almost surprized Siguenca; who finding themselues in great
want of siluer, coyned great store of false money, vnder the stampe of the king Don Fernand,
and did many other acts which were not commendable, the which necessitie, and
ambitious obstinacy do force men vnto: so as D. Denis king of Portugal, at the instance
of the widow and the young King, entred into Castile by Cite Roderigo, in shew to
make warre against the Rebels, but it was all counterfeit: for the effects did shew he came
more to fauour them then otherwise: whatsoeuer it were, hee did no act of an enemy against
them, but propounded some conditions of peace, fauourable for them; beeing of
opinion, that to retire the Infant Don Iohn from his pursute, and to draw him to the king
Don Fernands seruice, they should grant the Realme of Gallicia to him and his for euer,
and that of Leon for his life time; the which beeing disliked by the Councell of Castile,
the king of Portugal grew thereat discontent, and so returned into his countrie: after
which the Rebels tooke heart, and it was the cause of a new reuolt of many knights and
townes, and protestations of others to do the like, if they did not what they demanded:
wherefore the Queene D. Maria and her Councell, were forced to yeeld to many vnworthy
things, and was rather gouerned with her sonne and her Councell, by her subiects,
then she did gouerne them.
To this was added a new care which came from Nauarre,Nauarre. where as Alphonso de Roleed
was Gouernor in the yeare 1300.An. 1300. who sent an Ambassador into Castile, in the name of
king Philip the Faire, and D. Ieanne his wife, Queene proprietarie of Nauarre, to demand
the lands and ancient patrimonie of the Crowne of Nauarre, vsurped by the precedent
kings of Castile, extending from the limits which were then betwixt he two kingdoms,
vnto Atapuerca, and places neere vnto the cittie of Burgos; which Ambassadour beeing
a knight of Nauarre, was sent backe to the Queene D Maria and her Councell, with the
best words they could giue him. The French king was then much troubled with the Flemings
of Bruges and others, by whom he had receiued a notable route, with the death of
many Noblemen among the which were Robert Earle of Artois, Renald of Nesle Constable
of France, and aboue two hundred men of esteeme. The Ambassador beeing returned,
the Gouernour held a Councell with the Infant. D. Alphonso de la Cerde, D. Iohn
Nugnes de Lara, and other enemies to the king of Castile, at a place called Duegnas,
where they resolued to send D. Iohn Nugnes vnto King Philip, with other Ambassadors,

to the end he should authorize the promises made in this assembly, to ayde one another
to conquer the lands of the riuer of Oja for the Crowne of Nauarre, and the Realme of
Castile, for the Infant D. Alphonso de la Cerde. These Ambassadors were well receiued in
the Court of France, and present dispatches were made, with approbation of all that had
beene done, the king writing vnto the gouernor, that he shold giue all ayde and assistance
to them that were fled out of Castile against the King D. Fernand.
17 At that time we find,Castile. that the towne of Bilbao was built by Don Diego Lapes de
Haro, who had made his peace with the young King Don Fernand, and did enioy Biscay.
This place is built vpon a riuer called in the country language Ybay Cabal,Foundation of Bilbao. which signifieth
Great-riuer: for it is the greatest in all those quarters, and some affirme, that it is the
riuer which was anciently called Neruium, very nauigable, the which falls into the sea at
Portugalette, two leagues from Bilbao. This towne retained the name of a little hamlet
neere vnto it so called as that time, but they now call it Bilbao the old, to make a difference
betwixt it and the towne, where there is at this day as good trafficke for the Northerne
parts, as at any vppon that coast. It was first peopled by men borne thereabouts.
Beyond that towne the Bascangado language is no more in vse, which they will haue to
be the ancient Cantabria.
In the assembly of Vailledolit, the Queen D. Maria had obtained great summes of money
from some of the townes and Commonalties, to make warre against the rebels, and
D. Henry had beene made Gouernor of the Mores fronter, who notwithstanding sought
to entertaine the troubles and diuisions, where he tooke great delight, neither did hee
care if that Tariffe had fallen into the king of Granados hands. Don Iohn Nugnes de Lara
beeing returned out of France, hee beganne to ouer-runne the Bishopricke of Calaorra,
with the Nauarrois and French, against whom D. Alphonso de Haro aduanced with some
troupes leuied in hast, and finding him in a conuenient place, he fought with him, defeated
him,D. Iohn Nugnes de Lara defeated and taken pris^ner. and tooke him prisoner, deliuering him into the hands of the Queene D. Maria,
who hauing recouered from him all the places he held of the Crowne of Castile, and
made him sweare that he shold from thencefoorth faithfully serue her sonne D. Fernand,
she gaue him his libertie.An. 1301. In the yeare 1301. the King of Portugall came to Plaisance to
meet with the Queene D. Maria, where they did treat to sue vnto the Pope for a dispensation
of the marriagse which they had contracted betwixt the Infants of Castille and of
Portugall, conferring of the charges they must be at, not onely to obtaine these dispensations
from Pope Boniface, but also the legitimation of the King D. Fernand, for that the
marriage betwixt the deceased King D. Sancho, and D. Maria of Molina, had neuer beene
dispenced withall. For the effecting whereof they must haue good store of doublons: for
Pope Boniface although he were of a Spanish race, yet would he not do any thing for
them without a good fee. After the taking and composition of D. Iohn Nugnes de Lara,
the Infant D. Iohn seeing himselfe abandoned of his best friend, reconciled himselfe vnto
the widow Queene, and to the King Don Fernand her sonne, quitting the title of king of
Leon, and all that he held in that country: and for that D. Diego Lope de Haro held the
country of Biscay, which did belong vnto his wife D. Maria Diaz de Haro, hee had in recompence
therof the towns of Mansilla, Paredes, Medina de Riosecco, Castro-nouo and
Cabreros: for the Councell were not of opinion, that they should discontent Don
Diego Lopes in dispossessing him.
These things thus repayred, it seemed that all troubles had beene pacified within the
Realme, but those which were entertayned by the Infant Don Alphonso de la Cerde: wherfore
it was resolued to repell him couragiously, beginning by the seege of Almacan,
which held for him: but D. Henry who desired no peace in Spaine, disappointed this enterprise,
and afterwards the King of Arragon and he hauing met at Ariza; they made
leagues and confederacies, without acquainting the Queene or her Councell therwith.
The King of Arragon tooke Lorca, both towne and castell, by the sufferance of Don
Henry and Don Iohn also. Thus was this couragious Queene opprest with a thousand insupportable
difficulties in her Gouernement and Regency, which were procured by her
owne subiects, besides the feare she had of forraine enemies.
There was a new assembly of estates called at Burgos, and afterwards continued at

Zamora, where there were granted a subuention of great summes of mony for the war,
and also for the dispensations which they demanded from the Pope, who by that meanes
granted them, and they were published. The Infants D. Henry, and D. Iohn beeing still discontented,
did soone begin to make new practises, to diuide the king and his mother,
whose wisedome and iudgement did displease them. The Queene beeing at Burgos, there
came other Ambassadors to her from the French king, to aduise her to do him reason for
the lands of Nagera, the riuer of Oja, and others that were held by the precedent kings
of Castile, otherwise they did protest in their Masters name, that he would haue recourse
to armes: whereat the Queene was much perplexed, apprehending greatly the forces of
such a king as Philip the Faire was. Hauing conferred with D. Henry, D. Iohn of Castile,
and D. Iohn Nugnes de Lara, it was concluded with the Ambassadors, that the Queene of
Castile, and the Gouernor of Nauar should meet at Victoria, where they should treate of
all differences. Whilst that this poore Princesse did labor to maintaine her sons estate, the
Noblemen aboue-named carried away the king to Leon, and did separate him from her:
neither was there any thing concluded at the interview of Victoria, for the great differences
of either part.
The king D. Iames sent a knight vnto D. Maria Queene of Castile beeing at Victoria,Arragon. to
tell her, that if she would be a meanes, that he might hold the towne of Alicante without
any controuersie, he would restore all that he had taken in the Realme of Murcia: wherunto
she would not consent: for hauing (like a Lady of iudgement) intelligence what was
done by her neighbours, she did not now so much feare the king of Arragon as shee had
done, seeing him in trouble with his Nobility, by reason of a tribute which he had imposed
as well vpon the Nobility as the rest of his Realme,Selga a tribute Diuisions in Arragon. called Selga: wherefore she sought
to haue intelligence with the malcontents of Arragon, to intertaine and augment these
diuisions. About this time dyed the Queene D. Constance, mother to the king D. Iames
and D. Frederick at Barcelona.
The Queene-mother of Castile hearing the wrong they had done her,Castile. in carrying away
her son, she came with all speed to Vailledolit, and to disappoint her aduersaries desseigns,
she sent vnto the king of Portugal, to effect the marriage betwixt the king her son,
and the Infanta D. Constance, that by this means she might get from him the places which
he held in pawne of the Crowne of Castile, wherunto the Portugois yeelded But they
which held the youg king D. Fernand, desirous to entertaine the king of Portugals fauor,
to the end they might be supported by him in their tyrannies, aduised him not to yeeld vp
any thing, promising that the marriage should be accomplished when he pleased: whereat
he was very glad, and stayed not long to put the married couple together, but did not
giue vp the townes. Hereupon the king D. Fernand called an assembly of the Estates at
Medina del campo, whither the Deputies wold not come, without the expresse commandement
of the Queene-mother, but she appointed them to go, promising to be there her
selfe. The Deputies made great complaints, that the kings person was detained by the Infant
D. Iohn, and D. Iohn de Lara. They for their part obiected many things against the
Queen: In the mean time the king being practised by his mother, stole from the knights
which had debaucht him, and followed her, holding the way to Burgos, but as he was
yong and inconstant, before they came vnto the city, he abandoned her, and D. Henry,
who was newly made great Master, and returned with the others; by reason whereof there
was much dispute. The Queene bearing and dissembling all, being wise, and excusing her
sons youth, who went to winter at Leon.
Whilst these things were in question,Moores of Granado. Mahumet Myr king of Granado, hauing alwaies
entertained the friendship of the seditious Prince D. Henry of Castile by rare and continuall
presents, after that he had tryed all meanes to recouer Tariffa, in the which D. Henry
had alwaies fauored him, propounding it in the open Estates, and aduising them to yeeld
it vnto him: but seeing he could not preuaile by these meanes, he vsed open force, assayling
Andalusia, which was neere vnto him, an laying seege to Alcaudete, the which hee
tooke thinking to do the like at Baena: Alphonso Peres of Saauedra was Captaine of the
castell, and D. Fernand Alphonso of Cordoua, Payo, Arias, Iohn Martines of Argote, and others,
being in garrison in the towne, he was repulst, and forced to returne into Granado:

But soone after hearing that the towne of Iaen was not well manned, and that a peece of
the wall was fallen, he came with greater forces, and gaue a furious assault, so as many
good souldiers dyed in the defence thereof: and among them Henry Perez of Arana, a
Knight of a noble house, yet it was preserued from the furie of the Moores: and king Mahumet
seeing he could not take it, went to Quesada, the which hee forced. This king of
the Moores was strictly allyed, and a great friend to D. Iames king of Arragon, to whome
he had promised to ayde Don Alphonso de la Cerde with all his meanes to recouer the
Realme of Castile, demanding for his part of the conquest of Tariffe, Medina Sidonia,
Alala and Bejar, which were wont to belong to the Crowne of Granado, the which was
granted,An. 1302. but he did not see it effected, for he dyed in the yeare 1302. the thirtith year of
his raigne, and of the Arabians 685. In whose place raigned his sonne Mahumet the third
called Aben Alhamar, or Alamir Aben-Azar. About that time dyed Raymond that great
Philosopher, (yet had he no great learning, but in opinion) he was borne in the Iland of
Maiorca, and in his younger yeares was a merchant. Beeing wearie of the world, hee retired
into the deserts, and there composed that briefe Art, or abridgement of diuine and
humane sciences, whereby they haue beleeued that men in an instant might become very
learned: the which (he sayd) he had by reuelation. He was religious, and thinking to draw
the Mahumetists to the knowledge of Iesus Christ, he past into Affricke, where preaching
the faith with an inconsiderate zeale, he was stoned by the Moores. Notwithstanding his
writings being examined and censured some yeares after his death, by the Iudgement of
Aimeric a Iacobin, and other Inquisitours Spaniards, they were condemned by Pope
Gregory, sitting at Auignon, as dangerous and full of ill doctrine, contrary to our
faith.
The king of Castile,Castile. beeing (as he thought) at libertie, for that he was from his mother
desired to confer with D. Denis king of Portugall his father-in-law, the which the Queene
D. Maria,Enterview of the kings of Castile and Portugall. D. Henry, and D. Diego Lopes de Haro fought by all meanes to hinder, but they
could not: for these two kings met at Badajos. The apparent colour of this interview was,
that the king D. Fernand had of his father-in-law a present of a million of Marauidis of
 mony currant in those times; but what was treated in secret was suspect to D. Henry, to
Diego Lopes de Haro, and euen to D. Iohn Manuel, son to the Infant Manuel with others,
who fearing lest they should plot something against them, made a league with the king
of Arragon, and D. Alphonso de la Cerde, and would haue comprehended the Queene-mother
in their league, but she refused it, and gaue good reasons for her excuse: wherefore
they receiued the Infant D. Alphonso de la Cerde for king of Castile, the which the
Queene seeking to hinder, she laboured in vaine, and retired to Medina del campo, the
Inhabitants of which towne were faithfull to her sonne. Thereupon, being in the yeare
1304. Don Henry,An. 1304. who was very old, dyed, whose inconstant and turbulent spirit had
troubled both himself and others, and so this league vanished: he was buried in the church
of Saint Francis at Vailledolit. This death did much content the king, who was then at
Cordoua, and hauing there setled his affaires with the new king of Granado, who made a
league with him vpon the same conditions, and paying the same tribute which his father
had done, he departed, leauing D. Iohn Nugnes de Lara for Gouernor general of the fronter,
diuiding all the goods and possessions which D. Henry had held among his Knights,
whereof a good part fell to D. Iohn Nugnes, although the king loued him little, but he feared
him. The Queen-mother was then forced to follow his humors, yet she did all things
for his profit and good. By her meanes D. Diego Lopes de Haro reconciled himselfe vnto
him. But there fell out another contention betwixt D. Diego and the Infant D. Iohn, who
notwithstanding any accord that had beene made, would haue the Country of Biscay,
which did belong vnto him in the right of his wife. The Queen and the Noblemen of the
Councell sought to pacifie them, but not able to do it, they stayed the decision of this
controuersie, to end matters more important to the realm, with the king of Arragon, and
the Infant D. Alphonso de la Cerde: for the one held in a manner all the Realme of Murcia,
and the other intitled himselfe still king of Castile: for the which Don Iohn of Castile
was sent to the king of Arragon, to take some good course with him, to end their pretensions
and quarrels, who preuailed so, as the king of Arragon put that which concerned

himselfe to compromise,Compromise betwixt the Christian Princes of Spaine. choosing for Abitrators the King of Portugall, who had married
his sister Donna. Izabel, the same Don Iohn, and the Bishop of Sarragossa. The
Infant Don Alphonso content in like manner that his right should be friendly decided, did
choose and elect for Arbitrators, the kings of Arragon and Portugall, and the same
Don. Iohn: the which, the King Don Fernand did willingly allow of, but not the
Queene his Mother, who did fore-see, that the end of this compromise would fall out
to her sonnes preiudice.
This election of Arbitratours signified to the King of Portugall, and accepted by
him, hee went to Tarrassone in Arragon, passing by Medina del Campo, from whence
the King Don Fernand did accompany him vnto Soria. To Tarassone there also came
the King of Arragon, Don Iohn, and the Bishop of Sarragossa, who imployed themselues
to examine the rights and pretensions of the parties, whilest that the King Don
Fernand, and the Queene his Mother, attended their sentence in Agreda. In regard of
the Realme of Murcia, the King of Portugall, Don Iohn, and the Bishop did pronounce:
That the riuer of Segura should make the separation betwixt the Lands of Murcia and
Valencia, so as that which is to the South of Murcia, should be of the Iurisdiction of Don
Fernand: and from the sayd riuer towards Valencia, should belong to the King of
Arragon: so as Don Iames did not onely get the towne of Alicante, which hee had
demanded, but also many other places.
As for the differences betwixt the king Don Fernand, and Don Alphonso de la
Cerde, which were greater, for the Don Alphonso pretended the whole Relame of
Castile to belong lawfully vnto him, it was iudged and arbitrated by the kings of Arragon
and Portugall: That for the right and interest which the sayd Don Alphonso
pretended, by an arbitrarie sentence pronounced vppon the pretension of Don Alphonso
de la Cerde, the king Don Fernand should giue and surrender vnto him the
places which follow: Alba de Tormes, Bejar, Val de Corneja, Gibraleon, Gargantalaolla,
Torremenga, Passaron, el Reall de Mancanares, Algaua, Mont de la Grede
de Magan, the Towne of Sarria, with the appurtenances thereunto adjacent,
Moncon, Lemos, Robayna Aliadra, Almonia, Canall, and la Barka Estercolina,
Torre Blanca, Rodo Eledia, Hornacuelos, las Hazennas of Corduba, the
Royall right and inheritance of Bonilla, with the appurtenances thereunto belonging,
Colmenar of Sepulueda, and Aldea maior, with Sal de Campos, Vencos,
Gaton, Ferran, Moliellas, the Salt-pits of Rubio, Belbimbre, Castro Caluon, the
Port of Vizagra of the Cittie of Toledo, and the Martinengas of Madrid, and of
Medina del campo.
All these fore-mentioned places were adiudged and giuen by the Arbitrators,
to the Infant Don Alphonso, into the possession whereof, hee should (without any
opposed contradiction) bee actually put and inuested by the king Don Fernand, by
our Lady day (otherwise called the Natiuitie of the blessed Virgin Mary) in September
following: and in consideration thereof, the Infant Don Alphonso should no
more intitle himselfe king of Castile and Leon, nor carrie the armes quartered of
Castile and Leon, as hee had done before, and continued it to that present day: and
hee should deliuer vp, and surrender vnto the king Don Fernand, the Towne of Almacan
with the appurtenances adiacent, and some other places which hee had taken
during the warre.
This arbitrarie sentence was giuen and pronounced by the Arbitrators in the
yeare one thousand, three hundred and foure, whereunto were added and annexed great
penalties and forfeitures to the partie that should infringe or violate the same: at the
which were present Don Raymond Bishops of Valencia, Don Martin Bishop of Lisbon,
the Bishop of Huesca, and the Bishop of Cordoua: Don Iohn Osorio Master of the
knights of Saint Iames, Iohn Ximen, Diego Goncales Secretarie of Tarassone, Goncalo
Goncales, Raymond Altar of Aguilar, Pero Lopes of Padilla, Fernand Guttieres of Quixada,
Goncalo Diaz de Cauallos, Lope Garcia of Hermosilla, Martin Fernandes,
Porto Carrero, Alphonso Perez of Saauedra, Sancho Ruis of Escalante: moreouer,
there were also present at that time Velasco Peres of Leyua, Stephen Peres of Auila, Lope

Peres of Burgos, with many other Noblemen and Knights; and it was written and signed
by Andrew Perez of Corbera, publike Notarie of Tarrassone. In this last sentence D.
Iohn was no Iudge, but Agent and Atturney for the king D. Fernand, in whose name hee
yeelded. As for the Infant D. Alphonso, what shew soeuer he made, he was nothing pleased,
as it will appeare by the euent. The kings hauing beene some daies together as well
at Tarassone, as at Agreda, parted good friends.
These matters beeing ended they resolued to determine the controuersie betwixt the
Infant D. Iohn, and Don Diego Lopes de Haro: to which end D. Diego was cited to come to
Court, which was then at Medina del Campo, to answer to the demands of Don Iohn
and of his wife D. Maria Diaz de Haro, heire proprietarie of Biscay: D. Diego would not
plead in the Court of Leon, but he appeared in that of Castile, which gaue ninty dayes
respite to the defender, notwithstanding if he let the thirtieth day passe and did not present
himselfe, or giue a lawfull excuse, they might seaze vpon their sheepe, oxen, cowes,
and swine, and eate them, tying the feete against the walles and trees, in signe of the demanders
possession.
Don Diego appeared, and pleaded for his defence, that considering the accords
and transactions made heretofore, betwixt him, Don Iohn, and Donna Maria his
wife, by the which they had yeelded vnto him the possession of the Segneurie of Biscay,
in regard of the recompences which they had receiued, wherewith they were contented,
and had sworne and confirmed it by oath: they were now fallen from all the right they
could pretend to the sayd Segneurie, and the dependances. The cause beeing pleaded of
either side, with allegations of maine reason, they were referred to councell: and in the
meane time, the Queene D. Maria foreseeing some new trouble, laboured by all meanes
to accord them, or to vndergo an arbitrarie and friendly sentence: but Don Diego Lopes
would not yeeld thereunto, but departed without the King or Queenes priuitie, and returned
into Biscay, the which was very ill taken. The assembly beeing ended, the king
came to Vailedolit,Sentence giuen by the king against D. Diego Lopes de Haro. where he was so importuned by the Infant Don Iohn, as he pronounced
sentence, by the aduice of his Councel, contayning, That D. Iohn and his wife Donna
Maria Diaz should be put in possession of Biscay: yet he did suspend the execution of the
sentence, thinking that Don Diego would grow thereby more tractable: but he was resolued
to hold his Segneurie: so the king seeing his obstinacie, would haue dismembred
the country of Guipuscoa from his Crowne, to giue it to his vncle in recompence: wherunto
he yeelded, to end all quarrels: but D. Maria Diaz de Haro beeing obstinate, sayd resolutely,
that she demanded nothing of another mans, and that she would neuer quitte
her fathers inheritance, no not if they would giue her ten times as much as the Segneury
of Biscay was worth.
These poursuites did so trouble and disturbe euery man, and euen Don Iohn himselfe,
as they all thought it fit and conuenient (the King so commanding) to surcease the processe
for two yeares; during the which the parties should haue truce, and not attempt
any thing one against another. And for that the great loue and friendship betwixt Don
Diego Lopes de Haro, and Don Iohn Nugnes de Lara, was suspect vnto the king, he sought
in the meane time to breede and stirre vp some iealousie and diuision betwixt them, gratifying
Don Diego in many things, making his Sonne Don Lopes Diaz de Haro Lord
Steward of his house, but it was not possible to diuide them: neither could Don Diego by
any meanes bring Don Iohn Nugnes in fauour with the king, who was resolued to make
warre against him, against the opinion of the Queene his mother, and all his Councell:
so as hee was forced and constrained to dislodge hastily in the night from Aranda of
Duero, and came to Don Diego Lopes and his sonne, who altogether made a league
and confederacie against the king: Whereuppon there were many enterprises and incounters,
without any great effect: so as beeing returned to Aranda, and the king not
able to draw Diego from that partie, there was a day appointed to meet at Cerezo,
and in the meane time a truce was made.
There Don Alphonso Perez de Guzman who did negotiate for the king, preuailed so
with them of the league, and the Queen-mother with the king D. Fernand her son, who atattended
the resolution of this assembly in the towne of Pancoruo, that all these, that

is to say, the Lords of Haro father and sonne, and D. Iohn Nugnes, should remaine his
seruants, and he receiued them into grace, yeelding vnto them all they were wont to enioy,
and they for a gage of their faith deliuered some places in pawne. Don Iohn of Castile,
who pursued the Seigneurie of Biscay, was not pleased with this accord, wherefore
he did presse the king to haue the sentence giuen by him in fauour of D. Maria Diaz his
wife, put in execution, wherewith the king was much troubled; and both he, the Queene
and others of the Councell, sought by all meanes to agree these parties contending, who
were resolued to go to armes: to preuent the which, the king made many great offers vnto
Don Diego Lopes, the which he refused: but afterwards he repented it often. There was
so great labouring for a peace, and especially by the Queene-mother, as in the end they
yeelded to this composition. That Don Diego Lopes should, during his life, enioy the Segneurie
of Biscay, and lands belonging thereunto, and that after his decease the possession
should be giuen to Don Iohn, and to D. Maria his wife, or to their heires, except Vrdugna,
Val de Balmeseda, and S. Olalla, which three places should remaine to Don Lope
Diaz de Haro sonne to D. Diego: to whom moreouer the king should giue for the entertayning
of this peace, Miranda of Ebro, and Vilalua of Losa. D. Diego Lopes yeelded to
these conditions, to please the king though vnwillingly.
The troubles and seditions wherewith the Realme of Castile was afflicted at that time,Miserable Estate of Castile.
was a plague which humane policie could not preuent: for when as one fire was quenched,
another was suddenly kindled: so as these miseries continuing, men perished, the
treasures were wasted, and Christians ruined one another in these cuill warres, giuing
meanes and leysure to the Moores of Granado to assure their Estates, who furnished
themselues with such store of munition, and built so many forts, towers, and castels, vppon
the sea coast, as they maintained themselues for many yeres, against all the attempts
of their enemies. D. Iohn Nugnes de Lara was not pleased to see an accord made betwixt
D. Diego Lopes, and the Infant D. Iohn of Castille: wherefore he retired from Court, and
fortified himselfe in Tordehumos, where he was beseeged by the king: but in the end the
King was forced to giue him Moja and Cagnette, and to receiue him againe into fauour,
seeing his vncle D. Iohn, to hinder the seege vnder-hand, caused the Knights to disband:
yet for all this they liued not long in peace, for all these seditious men, although they had
many quarrels among themselues, yet they agreed in this point, to keepe the Realme in
perpetuall combustion. The Infant D. Iohn, and D. Iohn Nugnes did afterwards make a
league against the king, vppon a false aduertisement, that the king meant to kill them:
whereupon they troubled the State againe, so as they had great difficulty to retire the Infant
D. Iohn from this enterprize: but as for D. Iohn Nugnes, he continued in his rebellion,
and would not come to the Estates held at Burgos, where there was question to treate of
the kings patrimony, and the reuenues of the Crowne; which were greatly impaired.


Mahumet Aben Alhamar, the third
king of Granado.
THe Moores (as I haue sayd) during these garboiles,Granado. did fortifie themselues in Granado,
ouer whom raigned Mahumet Aben Alhamar the third king, and third of that
name, by the decease of his father Mahumet Myr, who at his death had left two sonnes,
the which raigned one after another, and one daughter. The younger was called Mahumet
Aben-Nacar Aben-Lemin Abeadille. King Mahumet during his raigne was blind by
an accident, his sister was married to a great kinght, a Moore, called Ferrachen, Arraez, or
Captaine of Malaga, who was alwaies much esteemed by the king, and honoured for his
vertue. This Ferrachen vsurped the towne of Ceuta in Affrick and did great exploits both
by sea and land. He had many children by his wife, who was Infant of Granado, among
the which were Ismael and Mahumet, who raigned in Granado, as we will hereafter shew.
This king Mahumet Aben Alhamar being blind, had from his entrance continued the war
by his captaines against the Christians; the which had been begun in his fathers life time,
and tooke Bethmar and other places, during the broyles in Castile.

Wherefore for a time he exempted himselfe of the tribute, which his predecessours had
payed to the kings of Castile: but the king Don Fernand in the yeare 1304. hauing (as
hath beene sayd) renewed their League, and sent Fernand Gomez of Toledo his Chancelor,
with a Iew called Samuel, to Granado, to demand the tribute, where they treated a
truce with Mahumet, whereat Mahumet was well pleased, and they did agree that either
should enioy the places which they had taken one from another: that is, the king of Castile
Tariffe, and the king of Granado Alcandete, Quesada, Bedmar and others, and that
the yearely tribute should be payed to the king of Castile. Which Articles were signed
by king Mahumet and the Ambassadors, and afterwards confirmed by the king D. Fernand
in the citty of Cordoua, whether was sent to that end from the king of Granado, an Alfagui
called Mahumet. This truce continued about foure yeares, during the which the
Moores were carefull to furnish their countrie with all things necessary, to repell the inuasions
of their forraine enemies: yet had they troubles among themselues: for Mahumet
beeing growne contemptible among his subiects, by reason of his blindnesse, Aborrabe
an audacious Moore, who was Gouernour of Almery, began to tyrannize, and to
vsurpe the title of King: and although he were chased away, and forced (the towne being
taken) to flie into Affricke, yet he left not to call himselfe King, and would haue surprized
Ceuta.
During these things,Nauarre. Arnaud of Puyane, Bishop of Pampelona, a Basque by nation,
held their Synods for reformation of his Clergie,Priests allowed to keepe Concubines. which was very needfull. Two yeares
before their had beene a Synode held of many Bishops at Pegnafiel, where it was decreed
that Priests might keepe Concubines secretly, but not openly.
In Arragon a marriage was treated betwixt the Infant D. Maria,Arragon. daughter to the king
Don Iames and Lewis Hutin the eldest Sonne, and then with the Earle of Poictiers second
sonne to King Philip the Faire, and of the Queene Don Ieanne his wife, but it tooke
no effect. We haue sayd before, that the King Don Iames, the better to entertaine the
peace which he had made with the French raigning in Naples, had promised to marrie
Blanche the daughter of Charles the Limping,Genealogie of Arragon. the which he did. By this Ladie he had the
issue which followes: Don Iames his eldest, who was married to D. Leonora Infant of Castile:
but hauing not touched her, he sent her home, and made himselfe a knight of the order
of Saint Iohn of Hierusalem, and was afterwards Master of the order of Monteca. D.
Alphonso his second sonne was king after him. Don Pedro the third, Earle of Ampurias, D.
Raymond Berenger Earle of Prages and Ribagorca, Don Iohn who was Archbishoppe of
Toledo, and afterwards Patriarch of Alexandria, and Arch-bishop of Tarragone. Moreouer
D. Constance married to Don Iohn Manuel of Castile, sonne to the Infant D. Manuel:
D. Maria who was wife to Don Pedro Infant of Castile, sonne to Don Sancho the 4.
D. Blanche a religious woman, and a Prioresse of Sixena: D. Violant married to the prince
of Tarentum: and D. Isabella wife to Don Frederick Arch-duke of Austria: these were his
lawfull children: and by his stolne loues he had a daughter, which dyed young, and Don
Iames of Arragon, who hauing married the daughter and heire of Don Lope de Luna, was
Earle of Luna.
The marriage treated betwixt D. Maria of Arragon,Nauarre. and the second sonne of France,
by the meanes of Pope Boniface, tooke no effect, for that the conditions propounded semed
very preiudiciall to Lewis Hutin, to whom the succession of Nauarre by right belonged
as the eldest, the which the Pope and the king of Arragon would haue transferred to
the Earle of Poictiers, with the Earledomes of Champaigne and Brie, and other
lands belonging to Queene Ieanne their mother, This Donna Ieanne Queene of Nauar,
a little before her death, caused that famous Colledge of Nauarre to be built in Paris, endowing
it with good rents in Champaigne, as well for the entertayning of Regents and
Professors in Diuinity and Humanity, as of the chappell and Ministers thereof. The same
Princesse built the towne called Pont de la Roine in Nauarre, otherwise called Cares, and
hauing liued in France one and thirty yeares, and neuer returned into Nauarre, she died
in the yeare 1305. leauing Lewis,An. 1305. Philip, and Charles, who raigned in France and Nauarre
successiuely one after another, and Isabel who was Queene of England, married to Edward
the second, her children. She was buried at the Franciscans in Paris. A yeare alter

the decease of this Lady King Philip desired to make an allyance with Castille, demaunding
by his Ambassadors D. Isabel, sister to the King D. Fernand, but this marriage tooke
no effect, for some reasons not written, some say it was three yeeres after the death of
Queene Iane.


Lewis Hutin the first of that name, six and twentith
King of Nauarre.
19 LEwis, sonne to King Philip and Donna Iane, surnamed Hutin, first of that name amongst
the Kings of Nauarre, succeeded his mother in the sayd realme: he did not
intitle himselfe King, vntill hee had beene crowned at Pampelone, but onely the eldest
sonne and heire of the Realme: his surname of Hutin signifies mutin or riotous, which he
purchased after his comming to the crowne of France, or as some say, before, whether
it were that he had beene the cause of contentions, or that hee had pacefied them. The
Queenes death being knowne in Nauarre, the Estates assembled at Pampelone, where
they resolued to send Ambassadors into France, to beseech King Philip, to send them
Lewis his sonne, their naturall Prince, and hauing written letters to that effect in the name
of the Estates, they dispatched D. Arnaud of Puyana, Bishop of Pampelone, and Don
Fortun Almorauid,Nauarrois send Ambassadors to the King of France and to Lewis Hutin their King. who were well and honorably accompanied: who being come to the
court of France, they gaue the Kings to vnderstand the great griefe the people of Nauarre
had for the death of their Queene, and Soueraigne Lady; for whose consolation,
they besought them that their new King Lewis might goe thither as soone as might bee,
accompanying this extreame desire of the Nauarrois, with necessary reasons, for that
they had great complaints to make of the gouernment of their Viceroys, who had gouerned
the affaires of the realme, to the great preiudice thereof. Whereof the continuall
absence of their soueraigne Magistrate was the cause, who could not visibly see the
Estate of his country and people, but was serued by the eyes and eares of others, whose
reports are commonly false, and the truth either concealed or dissembled. This request
seemed iust vnto the Kings, both father and sonne: yet King Lewis came not into Nauarre
but two yeeres after, and in the meane time hee married Marguerite daughter to
Robert Duke of Bourgongne, with whom hee had in marriage fifty thousand Liuers
in siluer, and the lands of Gyen vpon Seine: of which marriage issued Ieanne,
who was Queene of Nauarre, maried to Philip Earle of Eureux, son to Lewis of France,
by whom the Kings of Nauarre haue pretended right to the Dutchy of Bourgongne against
the Kings of France:Genealogy of Nauarre. for Robert Duke of Bourgongne, father to this Marguerite,
hauing had many children, most of them left not any heires, and their posterity which
had children, failed soone, there remayning no issue of the house of Bourgongne, but that
of this Lady, married to Lewis Hutin.
20 Whilst that the King of Nauarre delaied the time to come into his Realme, there
were Gouernors, or Viceroies, after the accustomed manner. The great quarrels which
had happened in France some yeeres before, betwixt King Philp the faire and Pope Bontface
the eight, had caused many disorders, by reason whereof there was a great famine
throughout all the realme. Pope Boniface had excommunicated King Philip, and giuen
his realme in prey to him that could take it; but hee was a prey to the French, who
being led by Nogaret of Saint Felix, and by the inteligence of Sarra Colonne, surprized the
Pope at Anania, and intreated him so il, as soone after for rage and spight hee died at
Rome: whose successor Benedict the eleuenth, absolued the King, his house and his
realme, who held the sea but eight monthes. After whose decease there grew great
factions for the election of a new Pope, so as the sea was voide aboue tenne monthes,
for that the French and Italian Cardinals, beeing assembled at Perugia, could not agree,
who in the end concluded, that three French Cardinals should be named by the Italians,
or else three Italians by the French, one of the which should bee chosen Pope by the other
faction.

The Italians would needs name three French prelats, whom they knew to bee discontented
and enemies to King Philip, among the which was the Archbishop of Bourdeaux,
called Bertrand Gor, sonne to Bernard, a Basque by nation, who was chosen Pope by the
French, and that at the instance of King Philip, who during the delay of forty daies, which
had beene reserued for the two parties, after the nomination, to aduise which of the three
they should choose, was aduertised of all: and they say that hee aduertised the Archbishop
that he was one of the three named, and that if hee would promise and sweare vnto
him to doe many things which he propounded, and among others to change the Popes
sea from Italy into France, it was in his power to make him Pope. The good Archbishop
desirous to attaine to that dignity, promised it, and did effect it being chosen, causing
all the Cardinals and Officers of the court of Rome to come to Lions, where he was
crowned in the Church of Saint Iust, that yeere 1305. There were present the French
King, with many other Princes and Noblemen, and an infinite multitude of people of
all sorts.
During the pompe of this coronation,Duke of Brittany slaine at the ^opes coronation. Iohn Duke of Brittaine was slaine with the
ruine
of an old wal, on the which there was a world of people to see this spectacle, and the
King and Pope himselfe were in great daunger. Hee was called Clement the fifth, who
sent three Cardinals to Rome, to gouerne the city, and other places of the territories of
the Church. Hee made his residence in France, for the most part in Auignon where other
his successors remained for the space of seuenty yeeres, which were Clement the fifth,
Iohn the two and twentith, Benedict the twelfth, Clement the sixth, who bought Auignon
of Queene Iane, Innocent the sixth, Vrbaine the fifth, and Gregory the eleuenth, who returned
the sea to Rome: It is called by the Italians the new transmigration, and captiuity
of Babilon. This Pope granted to the French King the tithes of the Clergy, for reparation
of the spoiles which the warre had caused, and the right of patronage of many
Churches which were vacant, to prouide Ministers and Pastors worthy of their charges.
King Lewis Hutin did accompany his father during all the alterations, so as he could not
so soone goe into his realme of Nauarre, as he desired, besides hee was very young: notwithstanding
all dispatches were made in his name. After that the Kings of France had
vnited the crowne of Nauarre to theirs,Pretention of Soueraignty in Nauarre by the Kings of Castille. all quarrels for precedence, which the King of
Castille pretended, ceased, the which hauing in former times gotten ouer France by
their great power, they now lost by the same right of a greater power, which was that of
France. Philip Earle of Poictiers, brother to King Lewis Hutin, to whom the King of
Arragon had sought to marry his daughter Mary, vpon condition that they should make
him King of Nauarre,An. 1306. was married in the yeere 1306. to Lane daughter to Othelin Earle
of Bourgongne,Lewis King of Nauarre comes into his realm. the marriage was celebrated at Corbeil, after the which Lewis King of
Nauarre went vnto his realme, well accompayned with French Noblility; beeing at
Pampelone, hee was crowned, to the ioy of his subiects, in the yeere of our Lord 1307.
and then he beganne to stile himselfe King,An. 1307. beeing about sixteene yeere of age. Hee
sware to obserue the lawes and rights of the realme, and then hee went tovisit the towns
and places thereof, with a great concourse of his vassals and subiects, who had not of
long time seene their Kings and Soueraigne Princes, to whom the King shewed himselfe
milde and affable: Notwithstanding being in the towne of Estella, hee caused D.
Fortun Almorauid and Martin Ximenes of Ayuar to bee put in prison, who had
mutined for the preuiledges of the Nobility of Nauarre, against the French Gouernors,
and had medled in the gouernment, for the preseruation of the country: whereat the
Nauarrois were somewhat discontented, but he paied them with reasons, and parting
out of Nauarre, to returne into France, he carried these two prisoners with him: D. Fortun
died in prison, but Martin got his liberty through the fauour of the Earle of Vallois,
who notwithstanding liued not long after. Hee was followed by aboue two hundred
gentlemen Nauarrois, whom he aduanced in France, both to make them more affectionate
by his bounty,Pope Clement the fifth transports the Papal se^ into France. and to accustome them to the manners of the French, and also to
haue so many hostages, of those whom he distrusted.
21 Pope Clement the fifth, hauing (as we haue sayd) done a memorable act, which did
much import the Italians and other nations, to haue transported the Papal sea into

France vndertooke an other businesse worthy of no lesse fame, the Knights Templets
being growne very rich, were by consequence insolent; they were enuied by great men,
and generally hated; so as the people either mooued in conscience, and desire to reforme
and roote out vice,An. 1308. Pursutt for the abolition of the Templers. or seeking to haue partof the spoile, in the yeere of our Lord 1308.An. 1308.
made informations against them through al Christendome: sending word to the Bishops
to make inquiry in their Bishopriks, of their liues, manners and religion, citing them generally
to appeere at a councell which he had called to that end at Vienne in Daulphine,
in the yeere of our Lord 1310. Before and after this councel, many of them (after informations
made) being attainted and conuicted of greeuous crimes of heresie, Apostasie,
and other impieties, against God, nature and al good manners, great executions followed,
many being conuicted were put to death by fire, and other punishments: many
(whose accusations were not well verefied) being cruelly tortured, confessed greenous
crimes, whereof they would discharge themselues, being at their executions; and of this
number was the great Maister of the Order, called Iames Mole of Bourgongne, many also
without any confession, were put to death: wherefore the Pope hauing made a strict
serch, resolued to abolish this Order, and pronounced this sentence against them, in the
presence of the Kings of France and Nauarre,Sentence giuen by the Pope against the Templers. of Charles Earle of Vallois, Philip and
Charles brethren to Lewis Hutin and others. The execution of this sentence was suspended,
in regard of the Knights Templers of Castille, Arragon, Majorca and Portugal,
the suppression of whom the Pope reserued to the disposition of the Apostolike sea, to
prouide according vnto reason.
Thus ended the Order of the Templers, which had continued about two hundred
yeeres: a president which should be followed in other things, which hauing beene instituted
to a good end, and whose beginnings were not wholy to be blamed, are since so
degenerat, as the professions of Christians is made odious and abominable to other nations.
In time the knights Templers of Castille, Portugal and Arragon were supprest
with the rest, being growne the more odious to all men, for that they had beene condemned
by a councel. The Knights of Saint Iohn of Ierusalem were enriched with the
spoiles of these Templers, who had in the yeere of our Lord 1308. taken the Island of
Rhodes,Hospitaliers inricht with the spoiles of the Templers. or at the least hauing beene conquered by other Christians, were put in possession
by Pope Clement the fifth. These Rhodiens (as they were afterwards called) made
profession of the order of Saint Augustine, and obtained great preuiledges from the
Popes, enioying this Island aboue two hundred yeeres. They had helpt to ruine the
Templers, and therefore had part of the spoile. Pope Clement and King Philip the faire
diuided their mouable goods betwixt them.
22 Other Orders of holy knight-hood had their beginnings by the ruines of this,Portugal. as
those called of Christus in Portugal, by the deuotion and dilligence of the King D. Denis:
who assigned them rents and reuenues of Templers Comanderies and benifices:Order of Christus in Portugal.
and it was ordained that they should carry for a marke or badge, a white crosse with a
red. This King of Portugal wrought so, as the knights of Saint Iames were seperated
and exempted from the subiection of the Mastery of Castille, wherein hee was assisted by
the Apostolike Authority, who made Alcacar de Sal the chiefe place of the order of
Saint Iames, the which was afterwards translated to Pamela, D. Fernand King of Castille
seized vpon the places, townes and forts, and all the reuenues of the Templers in his
country, to dispose thereof as should be thought fit.
23 The Order called our Lady of Monteca tooke its beginning by the ruine of the
Templers,Arragon. in the realme of Valencia which is like vnto the knights of Calatraua, and vnder
the Order of Cisteaux, vnto whom were rents assigned out of the Templers confiscations.
This Order was afterwards confirmed by Pope Iohn the two and twentith, successor
to Clement the fifth. In the time of this Clement, Robert King of Naples sonne to
Charles the Limping, was crowned in Auignon, being before Duke of Calabria, a great
enemy of D. Frederic King of Sicile, of which Kingdome of Naples, we will forbeare to
speake, for that it concernes not the affaires of Spaine, vntill that the Arragonois
were called to that crowne by Queene Ioanne the two and twentith, as we shall heereafter
shew.

24 The accord betwixt the Kings of Castille and Granado,Castille. as soone as the King D.
Fernand saw his estate somewhat setled, was broken: for the Kings of Castille and Arragon
hauing met at Monreal,An. 1309. in the yeere of our Lord 1309. besides the marriage which
was treated betwixt the Infant D. Iames of Arragon, and the Infanta D. Leonora of Castille,VVatre made by Castille and Arragon against Granado.
they concluded to make warre against King -Mahumet Aben-Alhamar the blinde:
and although the conquest of Granado did belong to Castille, yet a sixth part thereof
was granted to the King of Arragon, who made preparation to besiege Almery, whilest
that the King D. Fernand should besiege Algezire.
The King of Granado aduertised of this plot,Moores. was much incensed against these Princes,
which had not kept their words, but especially against the King of Arragon, who had
no interest to Granado, the diuision being made betwixt the ancient Christian Kings,
and by the Popes authority. He sent a good garrison to Algezire, and to all other places,
attending the euent of this warre, the which was begunne by the King of Arragon,
who sent some galleys in fauour of Aborrabe the Moore, who was expelled, stiling himselfe
King of Almery, who besieged Ceuta in Affrike, and tooke it by meanes of these
succors; at the same time the King of Arragon came and layed siege to Almerie, and he
of Castille to Algezire.
The Moores incensed most against the Arragonois, went to field on that side, and
gaue many routs, and hindrances to them that held the siege, and to them that came to
it. Algezire being well furnished, defended it selfe in such sort, as the King D. Fernand
finding the siege would bee long, sent the Archbishop of Seuile, D. Alphonso Perez
de Gusman,Gibraltar taken. and D. Iohn Nugnes de Lara, with part of the army to Gibraltar, the which
place was yeelded, and the Inhabitants and souldiars transported into Affrike, with their
baggage, in ships which the King of Castille did furnish, according to the accord: for
an old Moore being there, who complayning vnto the King of diuers alterations, wherevnto
he had beene forced, all the people were resolued to passe into Affrike, and not to
liue any more in Spaine. This Moore beeing come thether at the newes of the taking
thereof, sayd vnto the King: I was an Inhabitant of Seuille, when thy Great grand fatherof,
sayd vnto the King: I was an Inhabitant of Seuille, when thy Great grand-father
D. Fernand tooke it, from whence being expelled, I came to remaine at Xeres, from
thence D. Alphonso thy grand-father chased me, and I retired to Tariffe, the which being
taken by the King D. Sancho thy father, I thought to liue here in peace, from whence you
dislodge mee: Wherefore I will passe into Affrike, to spend the remainder of my
daies, with all the Inhabitants of this place, where wee shall haue no cause to feare the
Christians.
The King Don Fernand being returned to Algezire, and seeking by all meanes possible
to force it, the Moores by commission from their King made an accord with
him, to yeeld vnto him all the places taken in the former warres in Andalusia, and moreouer
fifty thousand doublons, so as hee would raise the siege from before Algezire.
This accord was made when as the King could not doe any more by reason of the discommodities
which his army suffred,Accord betwixt Granado and Castille. through the continual raine, and other crosses,
so as many Noblemen died of infirmities, amongst the which was Don Diego Lopes
de Haro; by whose decease the Siegneurie of Biscay went out of the familie or Haro,Biscay falles to D. Iohn of Castille. and fell into the possession of them of the bloud royal of Castille, by D. Iohn husband
to Donna Maria Diaz de Haro, daughter and heire to Lope Diaz de Haro, slaine at Alfaro.
During this warre D. Alphonso Perez de Guzman died also in an incounter against
the Moores, beeing shot through with an arrow, hee lest one sonne and heire, Don
Iohn Alphonso de Guzman, Lord of Saint Lucar.
These losses were increased by the retreat of Don Iohn of Castille, who carried many
knights away with him, the which did much weaken the army: wherefore the King resolued
to agree, and receiued the sum of gold aboue mentioned, with the places of Quesada,
Bedmar, Quadros and Chungin.
Thus Algezire was deliuered, and a truce made betwixt the Realmes of Castille and
Granado: but when as the King D. Fernand found himselfe seized of these townes,
and of a good summe of money, hee did not much care to maintaine that which hee
had promised, but sent Don Pedro his brother with the rest of the army, to the casile

of Tempul, neere to Algezire, the which he tooke, and then returned to Seuille, where
D. Iohn Nugnes de Lara was newly arriued out of France, from Pope Clement, of whom
he had obtained permission for the King, to take the tithes for the warres against the
Moores. King Mahumet the Blinde was soone after deposed by his own brother Mahumet
Azar Aben Lemin,The King of Granado deposed. being fauored by many great men Moores, who were discontented
to be gouerned by a blinde King, who could not lead them to the warres in person.
He was taken and dispossessed in the yeere 1309. hauing raigned seuen yeeres, the
six hundred ninty and two of the Arabians.
As for the siege of Almery,Arragon. it was nothing fortunat for the Arragonois, who were beaten
both by the succors that were sent from Granado, and by the besieged which sallied
out vpon them, so as they lost many good knights and valiant souldiar. Such was the
religious duty of vassals to their Lords, and of subiects to their Prince, and so holy and inviolable
the military discipline in those daies, that Martin Ximenes of Ayuar, holding a
fee of Symon Perez of Arenos, slaine in that warre, was accused of felony, for that he had
not succored his Lord in fight: but he prooued his alibi, and that he was not in that incounter:
and D. Pedro Martines de Luna being accused of the like crime, purged himselfe
by oth, before the King and Noblemen, that he was not at the charge whereas Symon Perez
had beene slaine, D. Fernand Infant of Majorca was at this siege, where he gaue great
proofes of his valour.
Some Authors make mention of memorable exploits, done about that time in Grece,
by some troupes of Arragonois and Cattelans, the which we may not omit. It happened
about the yeere 1302. that in Italy betwixt Charles the Limping King of Naples, and
D. Frederic of Arragon, holding the Island of Sicile, contrary to the treaty of peace made
at Tarascon, after many routs giuen and receiued of either part, there was an accord
made by the meanes of Charles of Valois and others; the conditions were. That D.
Frederic should enioy the realme of Sicile during his life, the which after his death
should returne to King Charles of Naples, or to his successors. That the Princes treating
this peace, and hauing interest therein, should bee a meanes that the Island of Corsica
and Sardinia should be giuen to D. Frederic and his descendants.
The townes taken by the Arragonois and Cattelans on this side the straight
should bee yeelded vp. The Mediators should bee sutors that the interdict of Sicile
should be discharged, and the prisoners should be deliuered, amongst the which was Philip
Prince of Tarentum, sonne to Charles, and Gautier Earle of Brenne, which accord was
ratefied by Pope Boniface,Tribut imposed by the Pope vpon the realm of Sicile. who imposed a tribut of fifteene thousand florins of gold vpon
the realme of Sicile, paiable yeerely vnto the church of Rome. Vpon the conclusion
of this peace, the captaines and souldiers of either part retired into other countries.
Roger de Loria, who had beene in great reputation to bee ^n excellent sea captaine, yea
the best of his age, retired himselfe into Spaine, where he died in the city of Valencia, in
the yeere 1305. and left an honorable posterity. About foure thousand Cattelans and
Arragonois, and amongst them some Sicilians sayled towards Greece, vnder the command 
of Roger Florio,Cattelans and Arragonois in Greece and Thrace. Berenger Entenza an Arragonois, and others, to serue the Emperor
Andronicus Paleologus then raigning, whose sonne Michel Paleologus slue Roger Florio
in treason at Adrianople, a man of valour, of a Germain race, but borne at Brindisi,
much lamented; wherevpon the troupes of Cattelans and Arragonois did choose for
their General Berenger Entenza, being commanded vnder him by Fernand of Ahones,
Corbaran of Leet, Bernard of Rochfort, Raymond of Montanero, William Sichar, Symon
Albert and others. Being mutined by reason of these Grecian Princes, they fortified
themselues vpon the straight of Calipoli, and there made warre with all violence against
the Emperor Andronicus,Grecians defeated by the Cattelans. and cut in peeces Caio Iean one of his children, with
foure hundred horse, which were sent against them at a place called Pont Roial, six miles
from Constantinople. But soone after Berenger Entenza beeing incountred at sea, and
taken by Edward de Oria, was carried prisoner to Pera, and from thence to Trebysonde:
yet the rest of his army held the fort of Calipoli stil.
The strength of this army consisted in two thousand fiue hundred horse at the most,
who being led by Bernard of Rochfort, who was chosen their head after the taking of

Entenza, gaue a notable defeat to Michel Paleologus, sonne to Andronicus (who had
with him all the Cauallarie of Constantinople) neere to the towne of Apros in Thrace,
so as Michel being wounded was forced to saue himselfe by flight, and shut himselfe into
Adrianopoli, whereas the Cattelans beseeged him long.
Their fort of Calipoli being afterwards assailed by Andriol Moro (who led Theodore
Paleologus Marquis of Montferrat into Italy with an army) was so well defended, as there
were aboue sixe hundred with their commander Andriol slaine there. Yet necessity
in the meane time did consume these Cattelan troupes being in an enemies countrie,
few in number and farre from all succors, so as finding themselues in extreame despaire,
D. Fernand, Infant of Majorca, arriued happely, being sent by D. Frederic King of Sicile,
to giue them some releefe. Then was Berenger Entenza returned from prison, who
seeking to resume his authority of captaine generall, against Bernard of Rochfort, there
grew such a quarrel betwixt them and their partisans, as Entenza was slaine; wherefore
the Infant of Majorcca detesting so rash and mutinous an army left them, and
thinking to returne into Sicile, fell vpon the Isle of Negrepont, where hee was staied and
carried prisoner to Saint Omer, a fort of Athens: being put into the hands of Gaultier
of Brenne, ruling in that country.
Soone after Bernard of Rochfort and Albert his brother, commanding the Cattelans
at Calipoli, suffred themselues to bee surprized by the Gouernor of Negrepont called
Thiba^d of Sipoise, who deliuered them to Robert King of Naples, who caused them
to die in prison: by reason whereof the Cattelan troupes beganne to ouerrunne the
country, like made men, without commanders, and without order, and falling vpon the
country of Macedonie which was nere, they past through it like a lightning, ouerthrowing
all they incountred, vntill they came into the territorie of Athens, whereas the
French commanded; staying there they demaunded to bee entertained in pay by Duke
Gaultier, but hee desirous rather to chase away this vagabond people, who were poore
and insolent,The French deseated by the Cattelans in Greece and Gaultier of Brenne slaine. went to incounter them with his forces, to fight with them, by whom notwithstanding
hee was defeated and slaine, and almost all his men. By this victory the
Cattelans made themselues Maisters of all that the French held in that country, and
lodged themselues there, whereas since they had many commanders successiuely, as D.
Manfroy son to D. Frederic King of Sicile, then D. Frederic Alphonso his brother, who remained
Gouernor there, and married the daughter of Boniface of Verona a Nobleman
of great power in Negrepont, with others: from thence is come the title of Dukes of
Athens to the Princes of Arragon. D. Fernand Infant of Majorca being deliuered out
of prison through the fauour of Robert King of Naples,Genealogie of Maiorca. his kinsman, married Isabel the
heire of Morea by whom he had D. Iames who was King of Majorca after D. Sancho his
vncle; hee tooke Clarence, and made many other conquests in Morea. D. Fernand to
to his second wife married a Princesse of Cypres, of whom Fernand was borne, who was
husband to Eschiue daughter to Hugues King of Cypres. After this second marriage,
and the birth of this sonne, D. Fernand of Majorca Prince of Morea, hauing performed
great matters both in the East and West, died in the floure of his age, about the
yeere of our Lord 1315. so as the affaires of the Arragonois in that countrie went to
ruine.
He was the third sonne of D. Iames King of Majorca the first of that name, whose posterity
we haue gathered out of histories, after this manner. He had by his wife Esclermonde
of Foix, Iames his eldest sonne, who being wholy giuen to deuotion, left the succession
of the realme, to his yonger brother, and became a Franciscan friar. D. Sancho
the second sonne was King after the father, in the yeere of our Lord 1312. who hauing
married the daughter of Charles the second King of Naples, named Marie, had no children
by her, wherefore dying, hee left the Realme of Majorca, to Don Iames sonne to
his brother D. Fernand aboue named. Of this first stemme of Majorca, wee finde there
issued these three sonnes, D. Iames, D. Sancho and D. Fernand, and one daughter named
D. Sancha, married to Robert Duke of Calabria; to the which some adde D. Philip
the fourth sonne.
But returning to Spaine,Nauarre. we finde that about the time of these last wars of Granado,

whereof wee haue newly made mention, or soone after, the Nauarrois renued their
old quarrels against them of Arragon, to whom (notwithstanding any accords) they
were neuer good friends: so as going out of Pitiella, a place then of the Kingdome of
Nauarre, they entred the neighbour country of Arragon, and committed great spoiles,
whereat D. Iames King of Arragon being incensed, hee sent an army to beseege that
place, but they were dislodged by the Inhabitants of Sanguesse, a frontire towne of Nauarre,
being assisted by some French troupes,Arragonois defeated. who fought with them and they were defeated.
The Arragonois being returned againe into Nauarre, and hauing runne as farre
as the towne of Olite, and forraged the country, they were againe charged by them of
Sanguesse and other neighbor places, being ready to passe the riuer of Arragon, at the
ford of Saint Adrian, and were there defeated with great slaughter of their men, and the
losse of the Standard royal of Arragon, which they of Sanguesse carried away, by reason
whereof, and in remembrance of their vertue and valour, they carry for their armes, by
grant from King Lewis Hutin, the bands gueules of Arragon, but in a field argent.
26 In the yeere of our Lord 1312.An. 1312. were the troubles of Lions vpon Rhosne,Troubles at Lions. betwixt
the Inhabitants of the towne and their Archbishop Peter of Bresse, by reason that he did
vsurpe vpon the Kings Iustice: King Philip sent his sonne the King of Nauarre thether,
who tooke this Prelat prisoner, and sent him to the King his father, for which cause, and
for that he durst presume to lay his hands vpon an Archbishop, he was called Hutin, or
mutin as some say. The citizens of Lion beeing pacefied, they mutined againe, by reason
of the differences which they had with their Archbishop, but they were supprest, and punished
by the same King of Nauar, and reduced vnder the King his fathers obedience. It
was at that time that Marguerite Queene of Nauar, the Countesse Ieanne of Poictiers and
Blanche of la Marche, who had married the three brethren of France, Lewis Hutin, Philip
and Charles, were accused of adultry, and put in prison at Chasteau Gaillard, of the which
the Countesse Ieanne of Poictiers, was found innocent and absolued: but Marguerite
Queene of Nauar, and the Contesse Blanch being conuicted, were condemned to perpetual
prison, whereas Marguerite died soone after: the adulterers were put to death with
cruel torments: the which were Philip and Gaulter of A^noy brethren. An vsher of the
chamber, who serued as baud and messenger of their loues, was hanged. It is reported of
this Queene of Nauar, that seeing any faire yong man passe by, shee caused him to be taken,
and brought secretly at night into her chamber, and that after she had taken her dishonest
pleasure with him, she caused him to bee cast into the riuer of Seyne, to the end hee
should not vaunt thereof: the which was discouered by a scholler, who saued himselfe by
swimming, being not wel bound. Thereof grew that ambiguous sentence. Reginam interficere
nolite timere bonum est. This vnchastnesse is attributed by some to Ieanne mother
to Lewis Hutin, Queene of Nauarre, who was a scourge to the Flemings, and the cause
of al the wars betwixt the King and them.
The king D. Fernand about the end of the war of Granado,Castille. gaue order for the building
of Sauveterre, and Azpeity in Guipuscoa, granting then the rights and preuiledges of Victoria:
he married his daughter Isabel to Duke Iohn of Brittaine, and made D. Iohn Manuel
of Castille, sonne to D. Manuel, Lord Steward of his house, taking that dignity from
his brother D. Pedro, to whom in recompence he gaue Almacan and Berlanga: whereby
it appeeres that these offices depended on the kings pleasure. This D. Iohn Manuel had
two daughters, which were both Queenes, the one named D. Ieanne, wife to Henry the
second King of Castile, and the other D. Constance, married to D. Pedro King of Portugal.
During the marriage of Duke Iohn of Brittaine, and of D. Isabel at Burgos, the Infant
D. Iohn of Castile, alwaies like himself, turbulent and seditious, came nere vnto the city,
accompanied with soldiars,Distrust of D. Iohn of Castille, and treachery of the King D. Fernand, the cause of great trouble and would not enter without assurance, the which was giuen
him: yet notwithstanding the King commanded he should be taken and slaine; whereof
beeing aduertised by the Queene mother, vpon whose word hee was chiefely entred
into the Citie; hee went forth verie earely in the morning, seeming for to goe a
hunting, and so escaped: Beeing pursued in vaine by the Kings men which hee had
sent after him. Many knights and among others D. Iohn Nugnes de Lara, detesting the
Kings treachery, and withal ill affected to him, followed D. Iohn, and beganne new

troubles in the Realme of Castille. The Duke of Brittaine gaue them leaue to end
their quarrels, and carried away his spouse into Brittaine. The Queene mother, with
the Archbishop of Saint Iames, and the Bishops of Palence, Lugo and Mondognedo,
labored to pacifie, and content these rebels, and in the meane time D. Constance the
Queene raigning was brought in bed of her sonne D. Alphonso, in the city of Salamanca,
who was heire of the Realmes of Castille and Leon. The King of Castille and Arragon,Alliance renued betwixt Castille and Arragon.
had an enterview at Calatajub, where a promise of marriage was made betwixt
D. Leonora of Castille, who was but three yeeres old, and the Infant D. Iames of Arragon,
and an other marriage was concluded betwixt D. Pedro brother to the King of Castille
with Donna Maria daughter to the King of Arragon, and there the two Kings made
a new league and confederation against the Infidels, to make warre against whom the
King of Castille called an assembly of the Estates of Castille at Vailedolit, from whence
D. Pedro the Kings brother was sent with an army, to beseege Alcaudete. In the
meane time the King staied in Castille, making seizures, and taking by force certaine
castles which did belong vnto his Rebels. Afterwards hee came in person into Andalusia
where being arriued at Martos, hee caused two knights brethren to bee apprehended,
being accused for a murther commited on the person of Don Iohn Alphonso de Benauides,
who had beene slaine at Palence, going out of the Kings lodging. These
two brethren whom they called Peter and Iohn of Carauajal,Two brethren e^ecuted vniustly. beeing condemned without
any great proofes, to bee cast downe head-long from the top of the rocke of Martos,
as they were at their execution, protesting of their Innocency, they adiourned
the King to appeere before the Tribunal seat of Almighty GOD,Alcaudete taken by the King of Castille. within thirty daies
after, to giue reason of the death which he made them suffer vniustly: notwithstanding
all this, they were executed.
The King beeing come to the Campe before Alcaudete, hee beganne to be ill, and
came to Iaen, where hee remained some daies, little regarding his Physitions, in the
meane time D. Pedro tooke Alcaudete.


Mahumet Aben-Azar the fourth King.
of Granado.
IN the realme of Granado,Moores. the yonger brother hauing dispossest the elder, had much ado
to be receiued, and obeyed by the Moores Granadins, who resisted him, especially
Farrachen his brother in law, captaine of Malaga: so as Alcaudete could not be releeued.
The new King Mahumet Aben-Azar. Aben-Lemin, being in some sort setled and assured
of his Kingdome, caused his brother that was prisoner to be cruelly slaine, and sent to
the King D. Fernand being at Iaen, to renue the league which the Kings his predec^ssors
had with Castille, the which was done, the Infant Don Pedro beeing present, where
amongst other resolutions, it was concluded, that all together should make warre
against Ferrachen of Malaga: but the sodaine death of Don Fernand, crossed this
deseigue.
The King being laied to sleepe one afternoone,Castille. the thirtieth day from the assignation
which was giuen him by the two gentlemen which were executed at Martos, when as
they of his chamber thought that he slept more then was fit, they entred into his chamber
to see what he did,Death of King F^r^and the four^o. where they found him starke dead, the which was attributed to the
iudgement of God. This vnexpected death which happened in the yeere of our Lord
1312. did much trouble the Realme, he was about fiue and twenty yeeres old, he had raigned
aboue seuenteene, and was buried in the great church at Cordoua.
Soone after Philip the Faire the French King died,Nauarre. leauing the Crowne and Scepter
to Lewis Hutin King of Nauarre his sonne. Some hold that this King Philip had the like
adiournement to the Iudgement of God, in the towne of Bourdeaux, where there was a
knight of the Templers executed in his presence, beeing borne at Naples, who seeing

the Pope and the King at a window, to behold this execution, cried out with a loud voice,
seeing there is no worldly power to the which I may appeale from the sentence giuen
against the Templers by the Pope, at the Kings instance, I doe adiorne them both to appeere
before God within one yeere,An. 1313. so as that yeere being 1313. they both died.
Lewis Hutin had then raigned eight yeeres in Nauarre, when he came to the crowne
of France, King Philip the faire his father is noted to bee very vnfortunat in many things,
both in religion, in the gouernment of his realme, and in his owne house. Hee was neuer
in peace with the Church of Rome, in the which (although he were the eldest sonne)
he caused many scandales, hauing had deadly hatred with the Popes, especially with 
Pope Boniface the eight,Vnfortunat obseruations in Philp the Faire and his posterity. whom hee forced to die miserably: hee transported the Sea of
Rome into France, Clement the fifth being made Pope, whom he vsed as a fit instrument,
in many bad practises, as hatred and couetousnesse did mooue him: hee did ruine with a
strang cruelty and without discretion the Order of the Templers, which sect, admit it
were corrupted yet many deserued better vsage: he falsefied the money in France, exacted
tithes of the Clergy, imposed the tribut called Maletosts, and the fifth penny vpon
all Marchandise: he was prodigall without iudgement: hee intreated the Flemings
vniustly, and their Princes cruelly, by captiuities and vnworthy vexations, not sparing
the innocent virgin Philip daughter to Cont Guy, who had beene giuen him in hostage,
whom they say he caused to be smothered: others affirme he caused her to be poisoned:
some say shee was drowned, with many gentlewomen and maidens of honour which
did attend her, others, and it may be the most certaine, write, that she died for griefe. All
this Kings children died young, their wiues were accused and conuicted of adultery, and
his own suspected to haue beene vnchast: yet he instituted the Court of Parliament of
Paris, and caused the palace to bee built, which may bee numbred amongst his memorable
deeds.
The first notable act which his sonne Lewis Hutin did after his comming to
the crowne of France, was that he caused Enguerrant of Marigni, Earle of Longueuille
to be hanged, being accused to haue hindred the King from subduing the Flemings, but
the chiefe occasion was, for that he was suspected to haue robbed King Philips treasure,
the which was found empty by his children Lewis, Philip and Charles: he had no greater
enemy then Charles of Valois the Kings vncle, to whom Enguerrant had once giuen the
lie debating in councel of the bad gouernment of that treasor as they say. There is no
great memory of that which past in Nauarre, after that King Lewis came to the crowne
of France, his daies being but short, for eighteene monthes after he died at Bois de Vincennes,
being about foure and twenty yeeres old, leauing Clemence his second wife,
daughter to Charles the second King of Naples and sister to King Robert,Marriage of Lewis Hutin and his death. great with
child of a sonne, which liued not. Hee had married Clemence presently after the condemnation
of his first wife Marguerite, by whom hee had one daughter, named Ieanne,
who was Queene of Nauarre, but not so soone: for attending Queene Clemences deliuery,
Philip of France, Earle of Poictiers, was chosen Regent of the two Realmes of
France and Nauarre, to gouerne them vntill the child which should bee borne, if it
were a male, should come to the age of foureteene yeere; and if it were a daughter, that
to her and her sister Ieanne should belong the Realme of Nauarre, with the counties of
Champaigne and Brie: but he should succeed to the crowne of France, by vertue of the
law Salique, as some Authors thinke: but rather by the right of custome inueterat amongst
the French, conformable to the order which God hath set in nature, and according
to the good constitutions of ancient Estates, not to receiue a woman to the
crowne, who is made to bee gouerned, and not to command. Whatsoeuer it were, this
law was then practised, as well in regard of France, as of Nauarre, whereas Philip the
Long, brother to the deceased King raigned, in the yeere of our Lord 1315. not without
great troubles and tumults amongst the Nauarrois.



D. Alphonso the twelfth of that name: thirteenth King
of Castille and foure and thirtith of Leon.
28. THe vnhappinesse of the house of Castille,Castille. continued the minority of King D. Alphonso,
being numbred by some the eleuenth, by others the twelfth of that name
for the Infant D. Iohn of Castille, and D. Iohn Nugnes de Lara (two firebrands which had
often put the Realme into combustion) hearing of the Kings death, were returned, the
one from Valencia, the other out of Portugal, whether they were fled, to ruine the Estate,
after their accustomed manner; and seeing that the Infant D. Pedro, brother to the
deceased King, by the consent of the Queenes, was entred into the mannaging of the affaires,
and the gouernment of the King, who was at Auila, they came to Vailledolit, and
could the Queene Donna Maria, and that they were well content she should gouerne, but
that they would neuer endure that D. Pedro should haue that authority: and from that
time they sought all meanes to get the King into their hands, but the Inhabitants of Auila,
and D. Sancho, their Bishop elect, gaue him so good gards as they labored in vaine,
being resolued not to giue the possession and gouernment of this yong Prince to any
one that were not appointed by the assembly of the Estates: imitating therein the fidelity
and care of their ancestors towards King Alphonso the ninth, whereof followed great
factions, and tyranous ciuil warre throughtout the whole realme: the ring-leaders wherof,
on the one side, were the Infant D. Pedro, fauored by the Queene Donna Maria: and
on the other the Infant D. Iohn, a warlike and factious Prince, who had ioyned vnto him
D. Iohn Nugnes, and the fauor of Queene Constance the Kings mother: either of them being
followed with a great number of knights: a generall assembly beeing called at Palence,
the deputies of the Estates were also diuided, some desyring that the Queen D.
Maria and her sonne D. Pedro should haue the gouernment of the King, and others demanding
that D. Iohn alone should haue this charge: so as there was nothing done, but
to animate them more to ruine the publike, and their priuat enemies. The Inhabitants of
Auila, without any further respect, did acknowledge the Queene Donna Maria D.
Pedro for tutors to the King, and Gouernors of the realme, yet would they not suffer
them to lead the King out of their towne. D. Pedro with this aduantage made a progresse
throught out the Realme, and comming to Toledo, and from thence into Andalusia, hee
was receiued, and generally obeyed.


Ismael the fifth King of
Granado.
IT happened that in the realme of Granado,Moores. the citizens of Granado had rebelled against
King Mahumet Aben-Azar, the murtherer of his brother: the Author of which
rebellion was Ismael, the sonne of Ferrachen, and of the Kings sister, who held Malaga.
He with the fauor of his father, and of a mighty Moore,Sedition in Granado against King Mahumet. of the lignage of the Merins of
Maroc, called Ozmin, pursued King Mahumet in such sort, as he shut him vp, and besieged
him in the fort of Granado, called Alhambra, the which notwithstanding was well
manned with Moores of his party, and strong both by nature and art. D. Pedro aduertised
of this disorder by King Mahumet, who was a friend and ally to Castille, and intreated by
him to succor him, went to field with such troupes as he could gather togither in so short
a time: but before he could come to Granado, hee had newes that the fort was yeelded
to Ismael, and that King Mahumet had reseigned the realme vnto him, beeing contented
to liue in a priuat Estate in the towne of Guadix, without any other title, then Lord
of Guadix: wherevpon D. Pedro returned, and came and assaulted the castle of Rute,
a verie strong place, and which hee tooke, whilest that the affaires of Granado were
yet in disorder. Thus King Mahumet was dispossest of his crowne, which hee had

gotten by tyranous cruelty, hauing enioyed it about foure yeeres.
The faction of Castille which followed D. Iohn,Castile. assembled in the towne of Sahagun,
whereas Queene Constance fell sicke, and died so poore, as shee had beene forced to sell
her Iewels to feed her. This death and the prosperities of D. Pedro, made D. Iohn to propound
some meanes for an accord, so as he and D. Pedro agreed, that the nourishment of
the King should be at the disposition of the Queene Donna Maria his grand-mother, and
as for the gouernment, it should be common betwixt them two, as it seemed the Estates
of Palence had thought fit: wherewith the Queene D. Maria seemed wel pleased: for
at the least shee got by this accord, that the Kings person was deliuered vnto her, whom
she led to Toro,An. 1314. in the yeere 1314. where she caused him to be bred vp, vnder the care of
a noble Lady, grand-child to Theodore Lascari, sometimes Emperor of Greece, her name
was Vataca. An other assembly of the Estates was called at Burgos, where it was decreed
that the gouernment of the King, and the regency of the realme should be reduced al into
one body betwixt Queene Mary, D. Pedro and D. Iohn, and if any one of them should
die,Death of D. Iohn Nugnes de Lara. it should remaine to the two others, that did suruiue, and to one if two died. There
was an order set downe for the augmenting of the reuenues of the crowne, with many
other decrees, for the good of the King and realme. D. Iohn Nugnes de Lara died then being
come to the assembly of the Estates, and left no children.
The Estates being ended, D. Pedro came into Andalusia,Moores. to assist Mahumet Aben-Azar,
who held Guadix, being depriued of the realme of Granado, leauing the Queene D. Maria,
and the Infant D. Iohn to gouerne in Castille. D. Pedro had an incounter vpon the
frontiers with the Moores, whereas he slue a thousand fiue hundreth, and did afterwards
take from them the castle of Cambil and Ardauados. Mahumet Aben-Azar, caused himselfe
to bee stil called King of Granado, notwithstanding that hee had promised to leaue
this title Ismael: but this victory of D. Pedros freed him, hauing in his company the
maisters of the knights of Saint Iames and Calatraua. They write that among the
Moores which were slaine vpon the place, there were aboue forty captaines, and almost
al the floure of Granado, so as King Ismael found himselfe much weakened, wherefore
D. Pedro and his captaines, both this yeere,An. 1315. which was in the yeere of our Lord 1315.
and the next following, made many courses and enterprises in the territory of Granado,
spoyling the vignes and fields, euen vnto the city gate, King Ismael making no resistance
in field, nor any pursuite, when as they retired charged with spoiles. After this the King
of the Moores hauing tried to besiege Gibraltar, hee was repulst, and forced to retire
with shame, by D. Pedros army, the which surprized the towne of Belmes, which was
ill garded, and then forced the Moores of the castle to yeeld, at which siege they lay
three weekes, and yet no succours came from Granado, (being but eight small leagues
from thence) but too late, after the yeelding which succours returned notwithstanding
without fighting. During this warre Ismael laboured to haue a truce, or to make
an accord with the Christians, but D. Pedro would not harken to it, desyring to roote
that race of Infidels out of Spaine, whereof hee seemed to bee in a good way, and in
great hope, wherefore they anoyed one an other all they could, but King Ismael seeing
that in the end he should not be able to subsist, he sent to solicite the King of Maroc, for
the community that was betwixt them in sect and nation, to aide him to defend the
realme of Granado against the Christians, the which beeing lost hee must not thinke
that euer the Arabians should haue any accesse or entry into Europe, for assurance of
which Affrican Kings armies, he not onely offred Algezire, but also al the places which
are from Algezire vnto Ronde inclusiuely; Ronde, Castellar, Axuneua, Estepona,
Marbela and others.
29 Whilest that Christian Princes made warre against Infidels, the Clergy and
pillers of the Romish Church were not well vnited amongst themselues. After the
death of Pope Clement the fifth, the Cardinals beeing assembled at Carpentras for the
election of a new Pope, they grew into so great a fury, as two of them were murthered
in the Conclaue, the rest disbanded, and were dispersed throughout France, abandoning
all, seeing there was no meanes to accord them.
King Lewis Hutin who liued then, was very carefull to pacefie this scandale, causing

them all to come to Lions where they held their conclaue in the conuent of Iacobins,
where after his death, there was chosen by two and twenty Cardinals, Iames of Oca,
Cardinal of Saint Ruffinus,Sarragosse and Tolousa made Archbishopriks. Bishop of Portuense, borne at Cahors, who was called Iohn
the two and twentith. This Pope made Sarragossa an Archbishoprike, and likewise
Tolouse, and erected Cahors, the place of his brith, to a Bishoprike.


Philip the long, the second of that name, the
seuen and twentith King of
Nauarre.
30 IT was in the yeere of our Lord 1315. that Philip the long came to the crowne of
France and Nauarre,Nauarre. at whose entrance they beganne to dispute of the law Salique:
for many Noblemen were of opinion, that Iohn Posthumus, the sonne of King Lewis Hutin
being dead, the realmes of France and Nauarre did belong by right of succession, to
Ieanne of France his daughter, by Marguerite of Bourgongne.
Those which held this partie, were Eude Duke of Bourgongne, Lewis Earle of Neuers,
Himbert Daulphin of Viennois, and other of their faction: but Philip, who for
the diuersity of opinions and interpretations feared that the law Salique did not extend
to the succession of Kingdomes, and that possibly his right was not grounded thereon,
contrary to the custome receiued in all other nations, and especially in Nauarre, whereof
he pretended to disapoint Ieanne the heire thereof as well as of the crowne of France,
hauing also many noblemen which fauoured him, hee wonne his cause, by meanes of
greater efficacy then disputes, and allegations of rights: for hee gaue Ieanne his eldest
daughter in marriage to the Duke of Bourgongne, and for doury the countie of Bourgongne
her patrimonie: To the Earle of Neuers his second called Marguerite, and
Marie the third to the Daulphin: in this manner hee stopt their mouthes, and made
them consent with the rest, recoyling Ieanne his Neece not onely from the crowne of
France, but also from the Realme of Nauarre, which was not to bee questioned with.
Force and authority preuailed in this point; besides this Princesse was not gratious with
the French, by reason of her mothers fault. The Nauarrois followed the authority of
the French, because they could not withstand it, and receiued Philip the long for their
King, that yeere 1315.
The Kings Tutors,Castile. and the Gouernors of the realme of Castille were required by the
Estates in an assembly made at Carrion, to giue caution for their gouernment, and
to giue an account what they had done, Don Pedro obtained liberty from the Pope
to receiue the tithes, and to proclaime a Croisadoe against the Moores, against whom
hee made violent and succesfull warre, as hath beene sayd, whereof his fellow Tutor
was enuious, and gaue him many crosses, to draw him into daunger; of such force is
enuie, that to preiudice an other, hee doth often bring ruine vnto himselfe, and to a
whole Estate.
Thus the affaires of great Monarkes are often times ill mannaged by them, who haue
the most important charges, who being loth to yeeld one vnto an other, in that which
concernes the good and proffit of the State and the seruice of their Prince, and being alwaies
enuious of the honour and glory of their companions, let slippe occasions, dissemble,
delay, and had rather incurre the perpetuall infamy of traitors, cowards and peruerse
emulators, then to aide one an other in a good action.
Thus did D. Iohn against D. Pedro, crossing and hindring his gallant deseignes and enterprises
of warre, vpon the Moores frontiers, whilest that hee gouerned within the heart
of the Realme; sometimes staying the Nobility of Castille and Leon from going to D.
Pedro, sometimes keeping backe the treasure, and alwaies finding meanes to crosse him,
and to make the people lesse obedient vnto him, so as the Queene Donna Maria,
who was a verie wise Ladie, and saw cleerely into these troubles and bad affections,

had much toyle to keepe them from an open diuision: and did often and wisely call an assembly
of the Estates to that effect, sometimes at Vailledolit for the Castillans, and somtimes
at Medina del campo for them of Leon and Extremadura.
In their yeare 1317. Don Berenger Arch-bishop of Saint Iames,An. 1317. brought a commandement
and censures from the Pope to put Don Alphonso de la Cerde in possession of the
lands and goods which were adiudged by the Arbitrators at Tarassone: whereunto the
Gouernours would not obey, but sent their reasons to the Pope, excusing themselues,
that the Infant had not for his part kept the conditions set downe in the sentence.
31 Don Pedro notwithstanding the enuie which his vncle Don Iohn bare vnto him,Moores.
did still seeke to annoy the Moores all he could, and in the beginning of the yeare, 1319.An. 1319. Tiscar a strong place taken by Don Pedro.
he resolued to beseege the towne of Tiscar, which was held by a Moore, called Mahumet
Andon, and was one of the strongest places in Spaine: yet the happines, iudgement, and
good fortune of Don Pedro were such, as (notwithstanding it was with great toyle and
danger of the souldiers) it was taken: whereat euen the Christians themselues wondered,
considering the strength of the place. The castell made some resistance after the taking of
the towne, but in the end it yeelded by composition: That the Moores which were within
it with their Lord Mahumet Andon, should depart with bag and baggage, the which
was granted and kept. 4500. soules went out of the place, and were put in safety into Baca.
This did increase Don Iohns enuie against the prosperities of Don Pedro: wherefore
he approched then vnto the fronters, beeing thrust on by iealousie, to attempt somthing
against the Moores for his part: hee came to Baena, euen as Don Pedro prepared to beseege
the towne of Belmar, beeing aduertised of Don Iohns comming, he marched that
way, that they might ioyne their forces together, and do some notable exploite in the enemies
countrie. Hauing ioyned at Alcaudete with great demonstrations of loue, they
led the armie ioyntly through the champian countrie towards Granado, whereof Don
Iohn led the foreward, and hauing taken the castell of Yllora, they presented themselues
before Granado, standing a whole day in battell in the sight thereof, and yet king Ismael
neuer sallyed foorth, not sent any one forth to skirmish with them, nor to discouer them.
Don Pedro was of opinion to begin the seege, but Don Iohn held it fittest to retire, saying,
that they neither had men enough, nor munition sufficient to beseege such a towne:
whereas the king was in person, accompanied with all the flower of his Knights and souldiers,
and an incredible multitude of people: for at that time they thought there liued
within that cittie aboue 200000. persons, although there were scarce 500. heads of families
Moores by race, for all the rest were Christians Renegados or their descendants,
or Christian slaues.
Vpon these perswasions, the Princes and Captaines began to turne head, hauing changed
the order of their march, Don Iohn beeing in the rereward. When as the Granadins
saw them dislodge, king Ismael sent forth his men, commanding them to charge the enemie
in the rereward, and to presse them in such sort, as they might put them out of order,
if it were possible, and that they should not then forget that which the discipline of warre
required: the which they did execute resolutely, so as Don Pedro was forced to turn head
with the foreward to succour Don Iohn: but the disorder was such amongst Don Pedros
men, as he could not bring them to march in Battaile, nor to keep any good order: where
he tormented himselfe in such sort, hauing his sword drawne, crying sometimes to one,
sometimes to another, as he was out of breath, and lost his speech, and in an instant by
this strange accident he fell downe dead from his horse: the which beeing reported to D.
Iohn who saw himselfe in danger,Strange death of D. Pedro of Castile, and D. Iohn his vnkle the contrarietie of passions wherewith he was afflicted,
were of such force, as it happened to him as to his nephew, so as loosing his speech, he fel
amazed from his horse. The armie hauing lost their two Commanders, notwithstanding
any indeauour of the Arch-bishop of Toledo, and the Masters of the militarie Orders
of S. Iames and Calatraua, all were put to rout, and were pursued farre by the Mores
with great slaughter; who spoyled their campe, and ceased their poursute: wherefore the
Christians which were about Don Pedro that was dead, and Don Iohn drawing towards
his end had meanes to escape, laying him that was aliue on an horse, and the dead bodie
vpon a moyle: but beeing surprized by the night, they which conducted Don Iohn marching

more slowly then the rest, saw him expire: wherefore fearing to be pursued, they
left the bodie vpon the field, and saued themselues as they could. Don Iohn left one son
of the same name, who for that he had lost an eye, was called the blind, and was his heire
and successor in the Segneurie of Biscay. He sent to intreat King Ismael to send him his fathers
bodie. The King caused it to be sought for, which being found, hee commanded it
should be brought to Granado, where it was layed in a great hall, in the fort of Alhambra,
vpon a herse couered with rich cloth of gold, setting a great number of waxe tapers
about it; the king commanding the Noblemen, and knights Moores, with all the Christian
captiues that were in Granado, to pray about the dead body: doing many other solemnities
after their manner, then he sent to D. Iohn, that he should send for his fathers body,
the which he gaue him willingly, being sorry for the accident which had happened, for
Don Iohn had neuer done him wrong. Don Iohn the blind sent many Knights thither, to
whom the bodie was deliuered, and they were accompanied to the first towne of the
Christians, then they tooke their way to Cordoua, from thence it was trasported to
Burgos, whither they had carried D. Pedro, and there they were interred. By this vnexpected
victorie the affaires of Ismael king of Granado grew in reputation and force, recouering
many places which had beene lost before. Don Iohn Manuel the sonne of D. Manuel
of Castile maintaining the warre against the Moores. Towards Murcia Ismael tooke
Huescar, Ores, and Galere, places belonging to the Order of Saint Iames: and returning
towards Andalusia, he beseeged Martos, and tooke it by force, commanding them to kill
all they found aliue in it: yet most of them saued themselues in the fort, and defended it
against the Moores, who lost many of their best men: and among others, a Nephew to
Ozmin, the which gaue great occasion of murmure against king Ismael, for that he did so
hazard his Nobility in these dangerous assaults. In this estate stood the warre of Granado,
the which was ended with them fo Andalusia, vpon king Ismaels returne to Granado,
vpon condition, that the Castillans, being ready to chuse new tutors for the yong king D.
Alphonso, should not receiue nor acknowledge any, but that should confirme this truce.
During these alterations,Castile. the Q. D. Maria was gone into Portugal, where she had conference
with her son-in-law, D. Alphonso Infant of Portugal, at Font dAugilero,
a Bourg of Cite Roderigo, and fro^ thence was returned with the yong K. of Castile to Toro, where
she had newes of the moserable end of D. Pedro and D. Iohn: whereupon she made present
dispatches to all the chiefe townes of the realme, and to the Noblemen, aduertising them
of this disaster, and exhorting them to continue faithfull vnto the king her grand-child,
and not to receiue commandement from any, but from him or them that should bee appointed
by the Estates: for she feared D. Iohn Manuel, who was rich and mighty, an desirous
of innouations, would seeke to attaine to the Regencie of the king and Realme: and
saw on the other side, that D. Iohn the blind had the like ambition: against whom the Q. opposed
D. Philip her son,Tumults in Castile for the gouernement. (but as the most certaine Authors say D. Alphonso) vncle to the
king D. Alphonso. All these Noblemen being well followed, and keeping the field with
good troupes of soldiers, they wre ready to ioyne in battell neere vnto Auila, the which
was preuented by D. Iohn Manuel. The Infant D. Fernand de la Cerde, who was Lord Steward
to the king, was an actor in these ciuill seditions, so as the realmes of Castile, Leon,
and their appurtenances, were full of all excesse, violence, and insolencies, the which continued
long: notwithstanding that the Estates had chosen for tutors D. Philip or Don Alphonso*
D. Iohn Manuel,An. 1320. and D. Iohn the blind in the yeare 1320. In the meane time the K.
D. Alphonso to make his name more reuerent amongst his subiects, granted certaine priuiledges
vnto townes, and among others, to wall in a Bourg, called Renteria, the which
was named Villanoua of Ojarcum in Guipuscoa, and gaue it the title of a town, and the priuiledges
of S. Sebastian from whence it is but a league distant. The Infant D. Philip, or Alphonso
sware the truce made betwixt the king of Granado and them of Andalusia, wherein
the Cittie of Cordoua was comprehended, for that they had giuen their voice for
the gouernement of the King to Don Iohn Manuel, against whome King Ismael was
incensed.
This yeare D. Iohn, Infant of Arragon, son to the king D. Iames the 2. was consecrated
Archb. of Toledo, in the towne of Lerida in Cattelogne, in stead of D. Goncales deceased,

many Prelates beeing present, and namely, D. Ximenes de Luna Arch-bishop of Tarragone,
and Don Pedro de Luna, first Arch-bishop of Saragossa, erected to that dignitie in
the yeare 1318. by Pope Iohn the 22. ouer the Bishops of Pampelona, Calahorra, Calcada, Tarassone, Huesca, Segobia, and Albarazin. These two Arch-bishops of Tarragone
and Saragossa did watch if the new Arch-bishop of Toledo, as Primate of Spaine,
would march through their Dioceses with his crosse before him, to the end they might
oppose themselues by vertue of a certaine Constitution made at the Councell of Tarragone,
and so it happened: whereupon the Arch-bishop of Toledo and all his followers
were excommunicated by them, for entring into their Iurisdictions: which censure and
excommunication was published by him of Sarragossa: whereat the King Don Iames was
much offended, and did write vnto the Pope, making great complaints of this manner of
proceeding: but being afterwards perswaded that it was done to maintaine the dignity of
the Churches of his Realme, he was pacified. The Primate appealed from their sentences
and proceeded against them. The Pope calling the deciding of this question to the Apostolicke
sea, absolued the Arch-bishop of Toledo in the meane time, and gaue him facultie
to absolue his followers and seruants. He was the seuen and fiftieth Arch-bishop of
this sea, Primate of Spaine.
At the same time,Arragon. Order of Montesa. or litle before, the king of Arragon had giuen to the knights of Monteca, the towne and castell of Monteca, wherof this Order carries the name: the first Master
was William of Errill, who tooke the white habite of Galatraua, in the yeare 1319. in
the Monasterie of Santa Cruz, from the hands of the Commander of Alcaniz. These
knights had some yeares after facultie to leaue the habite of Cisteaux, and in stead thereof
to carrie a redde crosse vpon their brests granted by Pope Benedict the thirteenth, and
confirmed by Pope Martin the fifth. The King. D. Iames by the aduice of his Estates held
at Tarragone, did make a perpetuall vnion of the Realmes of Arragon and Valencia, and
the principalitie of Cattelogne, the which from that time, should not for any occasion 
be dis-united. In which assembly,Vnion perpetuall (...) Estates of (...) Va^encia, and Ca^^e^ogne the Infant Don Iames the eldest and heire to the Crown,
beeing readie to marrie D. Leonora of Castile, suddenly, by a strange affection, quitting
both his wife, and so goodly a succession as that of the Realme of Arragon, told the
king his father, that he had made a vow neither to marrie nor to raigne: so as notwithstanding
all the perswasions of the king and Noblemen, he quit his birth-right to his brother 
D. Alphonso, after the example of Esau. Beeing there set at liberty by the king, he discharged
the Estates of the oath they had made vnto him, and presently put on the habite
of the Knights of Ierusalem,Iames heire of Arragon quits his inheritance the which he receiued by the hands of Bernard Solier, in the
presence of his brother Don Iohn Arch-bishop of Toledo, Don Symon of Luna, Arch-bishop
of Tarragone, Berenger Bishop of Vic, and Raymond of Ampurias, Prior of S. Iohn
in Cattelogne, and others. Afterwards this ill aduised Prince, hauing left this Order, became
one of Monteca, where he spent his dayes in dissolutenes and filthy pleasures. This
age afforded other such like examples in Don Iames, eldest sonne to the king of Maiorca,
and Lewis sonne to Charles the lymping king of Castile, who became Franciscan Friars:
but they were mooued by zeale of religion, and were not giuen to vices. His second brother
D. Alphonso was by the same Estates of Tarragone acknowledged, and sworne heire
of those kingdomes after the decease of Don Iames their father. This Infant had married
D. Theresa of Entenza, and had in her right the Country of Vrgel, which came vnto her
by succession from her vncle Don Armingol of Cabrera, vpon condition she should marrie
the Infant Don Alphonso: of which marriage was borne at that time Don Pedro, who
was king of Arragon, the fourth of that name. At the same Estates of Arragon were pacified
the quarrels betwixt Don Artal of Alagon, and Don Symon Cornel, who kept the
Realme in diuision: and that according to the aduice and order of the Magistrate called
the Iustice Maior of Arragon, called Symon Peres of Salanoua, the parties should vndergo
the iudgement of the King and his Estates. Doubtlesse the authority of this Magistrate
at that time was great who might both censure the King and the Estates, and appoint
them a place, and admit them that did assist, or reiect them.
But returning to the affaires of Castile,Castille. the election of Don Iohn of Arragon to the
Arch-bishoppricke of Toledo, did not much please the Queene D. Maria, fearing hee

would not greatly fauour D. Alphonso king of Castile, but would alwaies hold the partie
of Don Manuel his brother-in-law, who was a mighty Prince in Castile, and wonderfull
factious: but the Pope assured the contrarie, and past his election: and to speake the truth
he neuer supported D. Iohn Manuel in any action that was preiudiciall to the King, although
that Toledo and the iurisdiction thereof were in his gouernement, by reason of
the tutelage: so as they fell to such debate, as Pope Iohn was forced to send a Cardinal Legate
into Spaine, to reconcile them, and to bring the Archbishop into his sea, the which
he had abandoned. The Queene D. Maria hauing called the Estates at Palence, in the
yeare 1322.An. 1322. as she prepared her selfe to go thither, she fell sicke at Vailledolit, whereof she
dyed,Death of Q. D. Mary of Castile. to the great griefe of all good men: for by her wisedome and bountie, she had bene
the support and onely defence of Spaine, against the rebellious and ambitious desires of
Princes and Noblemen, wherein she labouerd wonderfully, with great happinesse and
commendable successe. The young king and the Realme were depriued of this support,
for the which he soone after smarted. The Queenes bodie was layed in the Monasterie of
las Huelgas at Vailledolit, which she had caused to be built, hauing also founded in her
time that of Saint Paul in the same towne, and that of the preaching Friars at Toro, with
others. We read as memorable thing, vpon the religious exercises, and concerning the
diuine seruice, in the Constitutions of D. Iohn Arch bishop of Toledo then liuing, that
the Priests do offer the Hostie at the least foure times in the yere, and that after Morning
prayer.
The same yeare the Estates beeing assembled in the towne of Siracusa in Sicile,Arragon. the
king Don Frederick caused his sonne Don Pedro to be crowned king with him, and they
raigned together in that Iland, Don Pedro did afterwards marrie Izabel daughter to Iohn
King of Bohemia, or of Henry Duke of Carinthia, as some say. It was at such time as the
expedition was made for the conquest of Sardinia, whereof D. Alphonso, Infant of Arragon,
was Generall by the resolution of the Estates, held at Gyrone, and in consideration
of the subuention giuen by them for the charges of that warre. We haue sayed before, that
the Ilands of Sardinia and Corsica had beene giuen in fee by Pope Boniface the eight vnto
 Don Iames King of Arragon, and to his successors males or females paying a certain rent
to the Church of Rome, for an acknowledgement of Soueraigntie, and that hee should
conquer them at his owne perill. The same donation had been confirmed by Pope Benedict
in the yeare 1304. to the same king Don Iames, and facultie giuen him to leauie
the tythes for this conqeust, and a Legate appointed to assist therein: but it was deferred
by reason of other lets. The reasons which moued the Popes to make this donation, were
their passions and hatred against the common-weales of Genoua and Pisa, who commanded
in those Ilands: but the pretext was, that these Ilands lying in the Mediterrranean
sea, as a barre betwixt Affricke and Italy, diuiding it from the North to the South, they
entertained the Potentates of Italy, especially these two common-weales of Genoua and
Pisa, who were then very strong at sea, in continuall quarrels and warre, most pernitious
for Christendome: sighting for the possession thereof, with great effusion of bloud, and
wasting of their forces and treasures, the which they should haue employed in better occasions,
against the Infidels, vnder his colour, the fame of the Castillans and Arragonois
and of their Princes being then great, it seemed expedient for the suppressing of all
iealousie and quarrell betwixt the Geneuois and Pisans, to take from them the right of
these Ilands, and to transferre them to a greater power, which might be able to keep and
defend them from the inuasions of Satrasins and Arabians, who still made some breach
there. The conquest therefore of the Iland of Sardinia beeing vndertaken in the time of
Pope Iohn the 22. sitting in Auignon, by this king D. Iames the 2. there were many ships
of warre and burthen prepared, as well in a port called Fangoso, vnder Tortosa, at the
mouth of Ebro, as at Barcelona, Tarragone, Valencia and other places of that coast, wherin
they spent much time, whilest that the king D. Iames tooke his fourth wife Eclisende
sister to Othon of Moncada, a woman of good yeares: and he made D. Pedro his son Eatle
of Ribagorca and Ampurias, the last Earle Mangolin being dead without children. And
for that the enterprise seemed difficult, by reason of the Pisans power, who enioyed the
Iland, and had newly made a peace with the Geneuois, the king of Arragon did sollicite

Pope Iohn the 22. by his Ambassador Vidal of Villanoua, to assist him in this warre with
his meanes and fauour, to the Princes of Italy: but this Pope beeing distasted by certaine
Cardinals which fauoured the Pisans, sought to diuert this enterprise all he could: exhorting
the king of Arragon rather to poursue his right by Iustice, then by armes: notwithstanding
the fleete beeing in a manner readie to set sayle, and the king persisted in his resolution,
and bound himself to pay great tributes vnto the Church. At that time the
chiefe men in the Iland were Brancaleon d' Oria, and Hugues Vicont of Bassi: this last being
corrupted by the king of Arragon, shewed himselfe an enemy to the Pisans, and began
the war of Sardinia with happie successe. The king drew vnto his partie Guelphe Earle of
Donoratico, Kinsman to Cardinall Luke Fiesco, and suddenly sent Dalmais Vicount of
Rocabertin, and his vncle Girard, Bertrand of Castelet, and Hugh of S. Paix Cattelans,
with 200. horse, and 2000. foot, to fortifie his partisans in the Iland. Whilest that the armie
assembled in the port of Fangoso, where there met about the end of Iune, in the
yeare 1233. sixty gallies, and 20. ships armed, and aboue twice as many other vessels carrying
victuals and baggage. The Infant D. Alphonso parted with his fleet, vnder the conduct
of Francisco Carroco Admirall, and came with a good wind to the port of S. Marke,
neere vnto the ruines of the ancient cittie of Sulsi, a Colony of the Carthaginians. The
souldiers beeing landed, began to presse the towne from the Church, in the which were
Barnabas d' Oria sonne to Brancaleon and other Captaines, who after long resistance
yeelded it to the Infant D. Alphonso. The cities of Cailleti, Eglise, Aquafredda, Iojosaguarda,
Orguilos,Sardinia inuaded by the Arragonois. Oleastro, Quirrano, Patra and other places, held good for the Pisans:
whilest they battered the towne of Eglise, the Admirall Francisco Carroso, with 20. gallies
beseeged the port of Cailleri, and Dalmais Vicount of Rocabertin by land, seazed vppon
an hill which commanded the castell, or fort of that citty: but this place was releeeud by
Manfroy sonne to Regnier, one of Earles of Donoratico, who came to Terranoua
with 25. gallies of Pisa, and some number of souldiers, the which hauing landed at Decimo,
a Bourg so called, for that it is ten myles from Cailleri: by the fauour of this armie,
he gathered together a great number of Sardes, and fortified himselfe in such sort, as hee
presumed to offer battaile to the Arragonois. Those that were before the towne of Eglise
were wonderfully afflicted with sicknesse, which grew through the bad disposition of the
ayre of Sardinia, and euen the Infant D. Alphonso was in danger of death, yet persisting
at the seege, the towne beeing prest by force, and want of victuals, it was yeelded,Eglise yeelded to the Arragonois. hauing
held out eight moneths: during the which many dyed through the infection of the pestilent
ayre, Don Artal de Luna, and his sonne of the same name, Gambault of Beneuent
D'almais of Chastelnoua, Girard of Rocabertin, Gillebert Centillas, Pedro Querault, Raymond
Berenger Ceruillon, Raymond Alleman, Galcer and S. Paix, and Raymond of Cardona,
all men of note: so as the taking of the towne of Eglise, cost the Arragonois deare. After
this exploit, the Infant D. Alphonso led the armie to the seege of Cailleri, against whome
Manfroy aduanced with those Pisans which he had brought, and some Sardes gathered together,
where there was a fierce and bloudie battell: but the Arragonois had the victorie,
hauing lost D. Alleman de Luna,Defcate of Pisans and Sardes before Cailleri. nephew to D. Symon de Luna Arch bishop of Tarragone,
who was much lamented: Manfroy being wounded, saued himselfe in the fort of Cailleri:
and at that instant there arriued 18. gallies of supplies to the Infant D. Alphonso from Barcelona.
Wherefore the towne and fort of Cailleri were more straightly and violently
battered then before, so as the beseeged beeing reduced to great extremities, following
the aduise of Manfroy their Captaine, and by his leading, made a sudden sally foorth
with all their horse, (among the which were 500. souldiers, the best and most resolute
spirits among all the Pisans) and charged the Arragonois army, with great terrour and
amazement: yet through the diligence of the Infant and his Captains, the enemy was
repulsed, with the losse of three hundred horse. Here Manfroy was grieuously wounded
againe, whereof, and for griefe of this last losse, he died soone after; the which draue the
beseeged into such despaire, that hauing aduertised the Pisans of their estate, and they sending
to demand a peace of the king. D. Iames, beeing at Barcelona, by the meanes and negotiation
of Brancaleon D' Oria, they came to composition vppon these conditions: That
the citty and castell of Cailleri bee yeelded vp to the Infant, and the prisoners of

either part deliuered; which citty and castell should be deliuered againe vnto the Pisans,
vppon condition, that they should hold it, and all they enioyed in Sardinia, in fee and homage
of the crowne of Arragon; Yea some Authors among the Arragonois say, that the
citty it selfe of Pisa, and that it should be lawfull for the trafficke in Cattelogne
and Arragon, and to haue a Consull in the citty of Barcelona. These things being accorded
and performed, the Infant D. Alphonso gaue many castels, lands and reuenues to Noblemen
and Gentlemen which had serued faithfully and valiantly in this warre, in the
which many gallies of Majorca had continued. He left. D. Philip de Salces Gouernour of
Sardinia, and Commander of the men of warre, and D. Berenger Carroso, sonne to Don
Francis, to cammand the gallies which were left there for the guard of the Iland. Hauing
thus disposed of the affaires, the army imbarked at Saint Macaire, and sayled with their
Generall D. Alphonso towards Barcelona, where they arriued with a prosperous wind, about
the beginning of August,An. 1324. in the yeare 1324. There were great signes of ioy made at
the landing of his victorious armie, and thanks-giuing vnto God in the citty of Barcelona;
but some write, that the king Don Iames going foorth to meet his sonne triumphing
and full of glorie, for the warre of Sardinia so happily ended, seeing him attired in the habit
of a Sarde, he grew sad, and would not speake vnto him, vntill hee had taken a more
seemely garment: wherefore in the midst of this pompe, the Infant put on his coate of
armes, and then the king his father imbraced him, and honored him much, saying aloud,
that he tooke great delight to see him attired like the Commander of a victorious warre,
and not in the habite of a slaue. After the conquest of Sardinia, the king D. Iames was sollicited
by Castruccio Castracani, gouerning at that time at Luca, to make the expedition
of Corsica against the Geneuois, promising that he would prouide them such worke in
Italy, as the enterprise of that Iland should easie: but Barnabas d' Oria, who was then in
fauour with the King D. Iames, diuerted him, shewing that it should bee more expedient
and profitable, to practise the chiefe Noblemen of Corsica, and to draw them to his seruice.
The affaires of Sardinia continued not long quiet, as we will shew: but it is necessary
to relate first what past in the other parts of Spaine, during these wars and conquests of
the Arragonois.
35 In Portugal there was then erected the Order of Knights of Christus,Portugal. by Buls from
Pope Iohn in the yeare 1320. by the which it was receiued into the protection of the Apostolike
sea of Rome,Order of Christus in Portugal. and the towne of Castro Marin assigned for the chiefe of this Order,
being neere vnto the Mores, and since the content was transported to Touar. The
knights of this Order carry a red crosse split and opened by the foure branches, with a
white line, so as one crosse makes two, the one red, the other white. The election of the
Master belongs to 13. persons: that is, the Prior, the Commander maior, the Treasurer,
the Secretary, and nine Commanders. The election was made, euery one of these 13. giuing
his voyce; the which being publikely pronounced, he that had most voices was chosen
Master. The first was D. Gil Martines, who had beene Master of the militarie Order of
Auis. The elect is bound (swearing in the Priors hands) to promise to bee in fauour with
the Pope, and the Church of Rome, and to present himselfe vnto the King, to do him the
homage of fealty. The Commanders of this Order, are, the Prior, the great Commander,
the Treasurer, Secretary, Commander of Arquin, of Rodano, Proenca, Olallas,
Castilejo, Sancheyra, Prucos, Segura, Lardoca, and Derosmanichal. Since there hath
beene added the Commanders of S. Michel, and S. Mary in the Ilands, by the king Don
Manuel.An 1323. In the yeare 1323. the king D. Denis endowed this Order with priuiledges fit for
the dignity thereof,Genealogie of Portugall. and the ornament of his religion. The same yeare D. Beatrix wife to
the Infant D. Alphonso, was brought in bed of a son in the city of Coimbra, who was named
Peter, and raigned after his Grandfather and father: This king Denis was in so great
esteeme among the Portugals, as they haue a Prouerbe in vse at this day: El Rey D. Denis,
que fix quanto quiz, that is to say, The king D. Denis who did all he would. It is as well by
reason of the institution of these militarie Orders, as of many foundations and remembrances
he left of him: as the Monasterie of S. Francis of Portalegre, and the Monasterie
of Nuns of the Order of Cisteaux, or S. Bernard: of S. Denis, of Odiuela a league and a
halfe from Lisbone, where he appointed his body should be interred: and other publike

workes, as causeys, towers, castels, walles, fortifications, and reparations of townes without
number. By him the new street of Lisbone, so much esteemed in Portugall, was
made, as also the castels of Serpa, Moura, Oliuencia, Campo maior, Argela and the fortresse:
that of Portalegre, Odiana, Marbar; the castell of Abibe, Alegrete, Monches,
Monfort, Beyros, Arroyolos, Hebora monte, Bosba, Villauiciosa, Montcarraz, Redondo,
Model, Beja, Geromena, Sabugal, Alfayates, Castelrubio, Villamaior, Castellobon,
Castellomejor, Almeida, Castelmendo, and Pinel, most of the which were walled
in by this king. He did also wall in Braga, Guimaranes, Miranda of Duero, with the Castell
of Moncon, and Carastolo. He built new Muja, Saluueterre, Montargel, Atalaya,
Acerceyra, and many others, which we will omit for breuities sake. The king Don Denis
spent his time, and employed his treasure in such things. He had some warre against Castile
in fauour of the rebels and otherwise, as we haue formerly related: and moreouer,
against his owne brother, whom he spoiled of his lands, forcing him to retire into Castile
to his wiues kindred. Towards the end of his dayes, there was no good agreement
betwixt him and his sonne Don Alphonso: for the sonne bred such a reuolt and sedition
throughout the whole Realme, as he was often in armes against the father, and readie to
giue battell, neere to Coimbra, Saint Iren, Albaran and else-where, beeing thrust on by
faltterers and counsellors of iniquity: which disorders Queene Izabel, a Princesse full of
piety,Piety of the Queen Izabel. did happily repaire, and preuented the effusion of bloud, praying continually vnto
God for concord betwixt the father and sonne, the which shee obtayned before the decease
of the king her husband, which was in the yeare 1325. hauing raigned 45. yeares,An. 1325.
nine moneths, and 5. dayes, and the 64. of his age. He dyed at S. Iren, and was interred in
the Monasterie of S. Denis of Oduielas,Death of the king D. Denis. as hee had ordayned by his testament, by the
which he gaue 140000. lyutes of money then currant in Portugall, to be distributed to
poore hospitals, monasteries, widowes, orphelins, maarrying of maydens, redemption of
prisoners, and such like, at the discretion of the Queene his wife, and the Executors of
his testament. Besides, his lawfull children, he had by one, or by diuers concubines, Don
Alphonso, the beginner of the family of Albuquerque, Don Pedro, who gaue himselfe to
studie, and hath compiled a Volume of the great Houses of Spayne, D. Iohn, and D.
Fernand, one daughter that was married to D. Iohn de la Cerde, and one daugther a Nun.
This holy Queene Izabel, daughter to Don Pedro the third king of Arragon, and
of Donna Constance daughter to Manfroy king of Naples, was married beeing but eleuen
yeares old, and carried her selfe so wisely and religiously, as she was admired and honoured
of all men: she shewed in her royall estate a wonderfull humilitie and modestie: shee
laboured with her hands to auoyde idlenesse, and what shee made shee gaue away for
Gods sake, wherein shee did not spare her meanes which were otherwise great: fasting
and prayer were her delights, and she was in continuall anguish for her sins, and for her
peoples: she serued God as she had beene instructed, by gifts, offerings, Masses, and suffrages
without measure. Finally, she was so giuen to contemplation, and to the spirit, as she
tooke no delight in any thing that pleased the sences: shee fledde and forsooke (as much
as possibly shee could) all royall Pallaces, beeing the Magazine of delights, and of peruerse
affections, so as the king Don Denis who was of a contrarie disposition, made
small account of her, giuing himselfe often to vnlawfull and lustfull loues, by whome
hee had children, the which this good and vertuous Queene caused to bee bredde vp as
her owne, although shee were wonderfully afflicted to see this bad course of the King her
husband; fearing, and rightly, that God would punish him: for this consideration she did
pray continually for his amendment, which happened in the end. The K. D. Denis did oft
vse her roughly, wherein she shewed such patience, as she neuer vsed any word of complaint,
but only prayed to God to let him vnderstand the truth: yea when she was in a maner
chased from his presence, and retired to her house at Alenguer, by reason of the quarrels
betwixt the father and the son, wherof the minions of the Court layd all the blame vpon
her, perswading the k. that she intertayned them, against all likelihood of truth. Shee
did wonderfully esteem the Orders of begging Friars, thinking that their estate was the
most perfect among the Christians, and therefore shee gaue as well to them within the
realme as without. She built the monastery of S. Claire the royal of Combra, she finished

the house of the Innocents at S. Iren, the which was begunne by D. Martin Bishop of la
Garde: and did the like to the Monasterie of Almonster of Nunnes, the which was begun
by a Lady called D. Berengnela Ayres: and after the decease of the King her husband, shee
gaue herselfe wholy to a religious life, and tooke vpon her the habit of S. Claire, which
she vsed euer after: she should her Iewels, and conuerted them into Ornaments and vessels
to serue churches, the which she gaue to many Monasteries. Shee went vnkonwne on
foot to visit the Sepulcher of S. Iames, asking almes, and past her dayes in like workes with
great zeale: she dyed in the towne of Estremos, whether she went to mediate a peace betwixt
her sonne and the king of Castile her grand-child, borne of her daughter. Besides
these aboue-named workes, she had built at Torresnouas a Monasterie of repentants, and
at Leyra an hospitall of poore bashfull men. Her body was carried to Coimbra,
and layd in the Monasterie of Santa Cruz. The apparitions which the Spaniards write
happened vnto her in her life time, and at her death, with such like things, are the impostures
of Monkes of those times.
36 As for affaires of Castile, wee find,Castile. that after the decease of the Queene D.
Maria, (who by her wisedome preuented many mischiefes) the troubles grew greater then
euer: all Iustice ceased, and the most insolent were most in credit. King Don Alphonso,
although he were young, was much discontented at these disorders, and sought to redresse
them, but he was not obeyed: so as by reason of the violences, tyrannies, ruine of places,
murthers, and other such wickednesse, which then raigned, he saw his subiects abandon
their houses, and retire into Arragon, Nauarre, Portugall and else-where, there to seeke
peace and rest: the Gouernours were cause of all these miseries, vising the people of
their Iurisdictions tyrannously, beeing in perpetuall discord among themselues. Those
that were of the priuie Councell aduised him to seaze vppon the places belonging to D.
Blanche his Cousin, daughter to the deceased Don Pedro, the which were in the hands
of Garsilaco de la Vega, in the name of Donna Maria of Arragon her mother: for that
(sayd they) it was not fit the King of Arragon should meddle much in the affaires of Castile,
nor that he should know all the vlcers of that kingdome, the which hee did, more
then was conuenient, by the meanes of these places, and vnder colour to procure the
good of Donna Blanche his Grand-child, watching in the meane time to make his profit
with the preiudice of Castile.
He which was most vehement in thsi Councell, was Don Garsilaco himselfe, beeing
Marin Maior of Castile. Don Iohn of Arragon Arch-bishop of Toledo, was by that reason
suspected to them, hauing for his chiefe aduersarie Don Iohn Manuel, one of the
Kings tutors, who had his gouernement in the Country of Toledo, and against whose
disordinate desires, the Arch bishop of Toledo, (a better seruant to the King then they
esteemed him) had alwaies opposed himselfe. So as they treated secretly with the king to
take the royall seales from him, for they held it dangerous,Sea is taken from the Arch bishop of Toledo. that an Arragonois should
be Chancelor of the Realme; who by reason of that dignity was priuie to all that was
treated and resolued in the kings Councell.
According to this resolution, there was an occasion offered: The Arch-bishop beeing
in the Kings Pallace, and beeing demanded of the Affaires of the Bishoppricke, touching
the Estate, and the kings reuenues, hee excused himselfe vppon the actions of
Don Iohn Manuel his brother-in-law, who was there present, who answered very peremptorily
for himselfe, so as there were bitter words betwixt them in the Kings presence.
For this cause soone after the seales were taken away, and giuen to Don Garcylaco
de Vega: whereat the Arch-bishop Don Iohn beeing much discontented, hee neuer
ceased vntill hee had exchanged his Arch-bishoppricke of Toledo, with that of Tarragone,
causing Don Iohn de Luna, to be aduanced to the Archiepiscopall dignitie of Toledo,
and Primacie of Spaine by Pope Iohn.
37 In the meane time came the yeare 1326.1326. when as the King tooke vppon him
the gouernement of his Realme, at a Parlament held at Vailledolit, whereas D. Philip
or Alphonso, Don Iohn Manuel, and Don Iohn the Blind were discharged of their administration,
which they had managed with geat scandall. There did the king sweare to
obserue the fundamentall Lawes of the Realme, and to administer Iustice, maintaining

euery one in his estate, goods, and honour. To whome also the Deputies of the Estates
did sweare fidelitie,Oth reciprocal betwixt the K. and his subiects and offered the rights and ordinarie seruices due vnto the Crowne.
This done, the King did choose two wise Knights to bee of his Councell of State, Don
Garcylaco de la Vega, aboue-named, and Aluar Nugnes Osorio: and for his treasure a Iew
called Ioseph of Ecchia, to whome he gaue the Superintendencie of the Customes, Imposts,
Rents and Reuenues of the Realme.
In the disposition whereof, hee did not gouerne himselfe by the aduice of Don Iohn
Manuel, nor Don Iohn the Blind, nor did much esteeme them: whereat beeing iealous
and discountented, they parted from Vailledolit without taking any leaue of the King,
and made a league together at Cigales. The king was soone aduertised hereof, and did
in few dayes breake this plot, making himselfe sure to Donna Constance Manuel, daughter
to Don Iohn Manuel at Vailledolit: but this marriage tooke to effect: and he gaue
vnto Don Iohn Manuel, (to draw him vnto him) the gouernement of the fronter. Thus
was Don Iohn the Blind abandoned, so as hee was more incensed then before: Thus
Prince entertayned such bad desseignes, as his end was miserable. Hee sought to marrie
Donna Blanche daughter to Don Pedro of Castile, to the end hee might enjoy the places
which shee held vppon the frontier of Arragon, and from thence make warre against
the King Don Alphonso: Hee made a league with the new King of Portugall against him,
and attempted all meanes to annoy his Prince, notwithstanding that the king of Don Alphonso
tryed al waies to pacifie him, so as he was forced to vse more violent remedies.
38 During these home-bred troubles of Castile,Moores. Ismael king of Granado was slaine
by his subiects, vppon this occasion. Among the prisoners which the Moores had
brought from Martos, there was a Christian woman, exceeding fayre, who fell into the
hands of the kings Cousin, sonne to the Gouernour of Algezire, who was called Mahumet.
This prisoner beeing seene by king Ismael, he grew so in loue with her, as he demanded
her of Mahumet: who yeelding more vnto his desires, then to the respect hee ought
vnto his Prince, refused him plainely: whereupon the king gaue him many bitter and
threatning words: Mahumet either for feare or disdaine, to haue beene threatened with
iniurious words, layed a plot with Ozmin, who was already much discontented for the
death of his sonne, whome they had so little spared at the assault of the rocke of Martos,
and resolued together to kill king Ismael, and to place in the royall Seate of Granado, a
Moore called Mahumet Aben Alhamar, or the Vermell, who descended from ithe first
king of Granado, and carried the same name, saying, that the Crowne belonged more
rightly to him, then to Ismael, who was allyed to these kings onely by the Mothers side.
This king was called to this Councell, and they made a new confederacie with Ozmin,
who should bee readie in Armes with his friends and seruants, whilest that Mahumet,
sonne to the Gouernour of Algezire, with his father, and another brother, should execute
the murther vpon the person of king Ismael. These things beeing concluded, the
Conspirators entred into Alhambra of Granado, and addressing themselues vnto the
king, they told him, that they had some matters of great importance to impart vnto him,
desiring him to giue them audience in some retired place: the which the king willingly
graunted, who beeing entred into a gallerie, the father and the sonne marching before
the king, and his brother after, with the great Prouost, or Constable of Granado, whom
they called Alguazil Maior, the two foremost turned suddenly vppon the king, and gaue
him two wouds vpon the head. The Alguazil seeing this disloyaltie, drew his sword
to defend his king, and fought so valiantly against these two traytors, father and sonne,
as hee made them giue backe vnto the end of the gallerie, and to enter into a chamber,
into the which hee shut them, notwithstanding that the brother, who was the third murtherer,
had wounded him behind in foure places, who returning afterwards against the
king, gaue him a mortall wound in the shoulder. The Alguazil hauing shut vp the two
first, came against the third, and forced him to enter into an old cabinet, into the which
he also shut him.Ismael king of Granado (...) by (...). Beeing thus freed of the traytors, this faithfull seruant came vnto the
king, whom he found grieuously wounded, and almost fainting, hauing taken him in his
armes, and carried him into a chamber, in the which were his mother, widow to Ferrachen
and his wiues, where leauing the cure and care of him to them, hee went into the pallace

Court of Alhambra, where as he found many, as well of the conspirators, as of others
which might haue heard the noyse, and vnderstood something of the fact, to whome hee
sayd, there was no great danger, and that the kings wounds were light: and hauing called
some vnto him, whom he knew faithfull vnto the king, he entred with them into those
places where as the traytors were shut, and cut off their heads: then he returned into the
chamber where as the king was in the Phisitions and Surgeons hands, but there was no
more hope of life: wherefore going out of Alhambra, he met with Ozmin, who came running
at this noyse well accompanied, and asked him of the kings life. The Alguazil dissembling
the truth, answered, that all was well, intreating him to accompany him to seaze
vpon those that were suspected to be of this conspiracie, the which Ozmin durst not refuse:
thus of a traytor he became faithfull by constraint, and running through the city
of Granado, they seazed vpon all the friends and seruants of the murtherer Mahumet, and
brought them into Alhambra, where in the heate they were put to death. In the meane
time king Ismael breathed his last, hauing raigned by force about nine yeares: this was in
the yeare 1322. and the 705. of the Arabians.


Mahumet the sixt K. of Granado.
TO him succeeded his sonne Mahomet the sixt, by the meanes and dexteritie of the
Prouost or Alquazil, who hauing seene the kings death, and keeping it as secret as he
could, he gaue the Noblemen and Knights Granadins to vnderstand, that they should
shew themselues in armes before the castell, to receiue the Kings commandements, and
namely Ozmin, who was not well assured in his conscience, but studied what hee should
do: yet he came well followed. The Nobility being assembled, the Alguazil being faithfull
to the king, euen after his death, taking the eldest to three sons (which he had left) in
his armes, he went out of Alhambra, and declared the truth vnto the assembly, how the
king had benne slaine by the treason of Mahumet, and what had followed, and presenting
the child, who was but twelue yeares old, vnto the knights, hee recommended him vnto
them, and perswaded them to acknowledge him for their lawfull king. Ozmin who was of
greatest authority among them, was wonderfully perpelxt, and wauering in his discourses,
yet thinking that he should rule this Infant better then any other, he was the first that
gaue his consent, saying Mahumet is our king. His voyce was allowed by all that were
present, and the brute both of Ismaels death, and of the election of Mahumet his sonne,
was dispersed through the town: and soone after the new king was led through the streets
and shewed vnto the Granadins, who were discontended at this sudden change, as wel by
reason of the King murthered, as of the hasty election of his sonne, beeing so young, yet
it held good: but notwithstanding that this young Mahumet obtained the Realme by a law
full meanes, yet his end was miserable, being a familiar thing among the Arabians, one
to spoyle and dispossesse an other by wicked and cruell treasons, as a people alwaies void
of all good gouernement. Such of the conspirators as were not taken, fled: among the
which was Mahumet Aben-Athamar, who in time returned to Granado, and raigned, as
we shall hereafter shew.
What past in Nauarre during the raigne of Philip the Long,Nauarre. who dyed about the time
of these reuolutions in Granado, we find not any thing worth the relating: only mention
is made of a Gouernor for the king in that Realme, called Ponce of Morentain, whome
some terme Lord of Rossillon: othes, Vicont of Anay, of Arnaud of Barbastan Bishop
of Pampleona, D. Martin of Ayuar Standard-bearer of the Realme, D. Iuigo Peres de Rada
a Knight, D. Iohn Arnaud of Espeleta, of the Abbot of Lerin, of D. Martin Iuanes of
Vrris, D. Pedro Ximenes of Mirafuentes, D. Garcia Martines of Ollaoqui, Diego Martines
of Vrris, and Martines of Arletta, knights, who made the Councell of state of that
Realme.
The end of the thirteenth Booke.




SEMPER EADEMTHE FOVRTEENTH BOOKE
of the Historie of Spaine.

The Contents.
1 CHarles the Faire, first of that name, the 28. king of Nauarre: troubles in the Realm vnder
the Gouernors: his marriages.
2 Excesse, massacres, and spoyling of the Iewes in Nauarre.
3 Ieanne daughter to Lewis Hutin, Queene of Nauarre, and in her right Philip of Eureux,
accounted for the 29. King of Nauarre, and the third of that name: Articles accorded at
his comming to the Estates.
4 Bry and Champaigne hereditarie to the House of Nauarre.
5 The family of Beaumont in Naurarre.
6 D. Alphonso the fourth of that name, King of Portugall.
7 Murther of D. Iohn the Blind, Prince of Castile, by the commandement of King Don
Alphonso the 12. King of Castile.
8 D. Alphonso the 4. of that name, King of Portugal.
9 Disordered affections of Don Alphonso King of Castile: the Kings trenheries, enuie of
Courtiers, murthers and massacres.
10 Loue of the king. D. Alphonso with D. Leonora of Guzman.
11 Ancient custome in choosing the Lords of Alaua, to gouerne the country, vnder the Soueraigntie
of Castile, abolished, and the vnion of that Prouince.
12 Order of the Knights of the band instituted by the king D. Alphonso, their lawes and
orders.
13 Continuance of the kings of Maroc in Affricke: exploits of warre betwixt the Christians
and the Moores.
14 The children of D. Alphonso King of Castile of diuerse conditions. Troubles, and poursuits
of Rebels.
15 Estate of Nauarre, warre betwixt the Castillans and Nauarrois.
16 Estate of Arragon, warre against the Sardes, and the Geneuots their allies.
17 D. Pedro the fourth of that name, and 13. King of Arragon.
18 Troubles in Castile: cruelties of King D. Alphonso the twelfth.
19 Warre of the Moores against Castile, whereof followed the famous battell of Salado.
20 Disposition of D. Pedro king of Arragon, his hatred against Don Iames king of Maiorca
his kinsman.
21 Continuance of the warre betwixt Castile and Arragon.
22 Estate of Nauarre: the voyage of King Philip of Eureux into Andalusia and his death.
23 Seege of Algezire, and the taking thereof.
24 Vniust persecution of D. Iames king of Maiorca, by D. Pedro king of Arragon.
25 Donation of the Ilands of the Canaries to Don Lewis de la Cerde, by Pope Clement the
sixth.

26 Marriages of D. Pedro the fourth king of Arragon: Seditions and rebellions of his subiects
for the succession, and how he sub^^^^ sarragossa and Valencia.
27 Politicke acts of Don Alphonso king of Castile. Estates held in Castile.

Continuance of the royall Families of Spayne, whereof
mention is made in this 14. Booke.

NAVARRE.
28 Charles the Faire
29 Philip of Eureux, by reason of Ieanne
his wife, daughter to Lewis Hutin.


ARRAGON.
12 D. Alphonso 4.
13 D. Pedro 4.


PORTVGAL.
7. D. Alphonso 4.



Charles the Faire, the first of that name, and eight
and twentith King of Nauarre.
TO King Philip, being dead at Fontainbleau without heires male, succeeded
in the yeere of our Lord 1321. his brother Charles the Faire,
in the two Realmes of France and Nauarre, to the preiudice of his
Neece Ieanne, the lawfull heire of Nauarre. Charles when hee was
farre from these successions, had put away Blanche his wife, being
conuicted of adultery, as hath beene sayd, whose life was saued, for
that the marriage might bee dissolued without death, by the Popes authority, for that
there was betwixt the husband and the wife a spiritual alliance, which had made the marriage
vnlawfull, so as by consequent there was no adultery, but simple fornication, for
that Charles the Faire was Godfather to Blanche. Wherefore hee tooke to his second
wife the daughter of Henry of Luxembourg Emperor, and sister to Iohn King of Bohemia,Marriage of King Charles the first.
hauing first demaunded in marriage Donna Violant of Arragon, daughter to the
King D. Iames the second, but could not obtaine her, for some reasons. In the beginning
of King Charles his raigne, Ponce Morantin being Gouernor and Viceroy of the
country, the castle of Gorriti was surprized by them of Guipuscoa from the Nauarrois:
for this and other considerations, the Gouernor hauing raised an army of Nauarrois
and French, entred into Guipuscoa, being resolued to put the country to fire and sword:
and beginning by Tolousa in Guipuscoa, he burned Berastegui, and did incredible harm,
sparing neither holy nor prophane. Marching towards Beotiba, the Nauarrois army
was stayed at the foot of the mountaines by the Guipuscoans, who were gathered together
to the number of eight hundred (some say eight thousand) in armes, vnder the conduct
of Gil Lopes of Ognes, Lord of Larrea, and were seized vpon the Straights and places
of aduantage, where the army should passe, hauing planted some peasants vpon the
tops of the rockes and precipices, who when the body of the army beeing aduanced in
these difficult passages, should march, they should roule downe pipes full of stones,
which they had prepared, the which ouerthrew many,Defeat of Nauarrois in Guipuscoa. and besides put such a disorder in
the army, as that eight hundred armed men which were vpon the passages, presented
themselues, and put all their enemies to rout, with a wonderfull slaughter, and tooke all
their baggage: the which was esteemed worth a hundred thousand liuers, a matter
almost incredible, considering the inequality of their forces, but it is witnessed, not onely
by the records of Guipuscoa, but also of Nauarre, so dangerous is the hazard of warre,
and so great an aduantage doth the scituation of a country giue, when it is well chosen
by a wise and expert captaine.
Amongst the men of marke that were slaine in the Nauarrois army, were found the
Viceroys brother,Men of account slaine. and D. Michel Sanches Alaues, D. Martin of Roncal, Martin Vrtiz,
the Lord of Rosobel, Iohn Corboran of Leer, Iohn Martines of Medrano, Iohn Henriques,
D. Martin de la Pegna, Pero Sotes, Iohn Lopes of Vrros Merin Major of the Mountaine,
Peter of Ayuar, Martin of Vrsa sonne to Martin of Ayuar, who carried the Standard
royal, and others to the number of fiue and fifty knights. Amongst the prisoners was
Martin of Ayuar and an other sonneof his. The number of souldiars that were slaine,
was very great: and of this incounter they doe at this day sing songs, both in Castille
and Guipuscoa, in their country language. Here of grew other warres betwixt Castille
and Nauarre.
In the yeere of our Lord 1324. Queene Mary beeing dead, King Charles married the
third time with Ieanne daughter to Lewis of France,Third marriage of King Charles. Earle of Eureux, and sister to Philip
of Eureux, who was King of Nauarre soone after, by reason of his wife Ieanne, daughter
to King Lewis Hutin, heire of Nauarre. The same yeere Nauarette of Pampelone, by
the permission of Charles, was begunne to be re-edefied, hauing beene ruined eight and

forty yeeres before by Robert Earle of Arthois. This King Charles the Faire, nor his
brother Philip the Long, neuer came into Nauarre,Princes absence cause of liberty and disorder. by reason whereof many grew insolent,
especially vpon the frontiers, against the will of their Prince, the Gouernors, and
Viceroys winking at them, who regarded more their owne priuat proffit and passions
then the honour and seruice of their Maister; wherefore betwixt the Nauarrois and
Arragonois, of the frontiers of Sanguessa Real, and other bordering places, notwithstanding
any accord the Kings had made, there was stil roades and spoyling one of an
other, so as the Arragonois were forced to keepe great garrisons in those parts, whereof
the King of Arragon complayned to King Charles, who commanded still that they
should liue like neighbours and friends, but he was not obeyed.
In the yeere of our Lord 1328. King Charles died at Bois de Vincennes, haing raigned
seuen yeeres and some daies, leauing Queene Ieanne his wife with child, who was deliuered
of a daughter, called Belanche, married afterwards to Philip Duke of Orleance, hee
was buried at Saint Denis in France. After the death of this King, there were great
quarrels and diuisions both in France and Nauarre. In France, for that during the
Queenes being with child Edward King of England, sonne to Isabel of France, sister to
the deceased King maintained that the Gouernment did belong to him: One the other
side Philip sonne to Charles Earle of Valois, cousin germaine to the three last Kings, said
that the regency did belong to him, as next heire to the crowne of France, which did not
belong but to males descended of males, and was regent. The Queene beeing deliuered
at Bois de Vincennes of a daughter, Philip, of Regent was proclaymed King, against
the pretensions of Edward King of England, who was put by, vnder collour of the Salique
law. Herevpon followed great and continuall warres, which had in a manner
ruined France, if God had not releeued it. These contended a doubtfull title, which belonged
to neither of them, if the crowne had fallne to the femal: for Ieanne daughter to
King Lewis Hutin, did precede them al.
2 The death of King Charles beeing knowne in Nauarre, this nation, which was accustomed
to liue licentiously, for that they had not a long time seene the face of their
Kings, thought now they had gotten liberty to doe what they pleased; so as they beganne
to mutine and to raise seditions in all the townes of the realme. In the end they
discharged their choller vpon the Iewes who were dispersed throughout the townes in
great numbers, and very odious to the Christians, as well by reason of the diuesity of
religion,M^ssaker of Iewes in Nauarre. as for their excessiue vsury, whereby they did exhaust al their substance: wherefore
they beganne to spoile them in all places as enemies, at Estella, Viana, Funes, Marzilla
and many other places, with so great cruelty, and greedinesse to get, as it
is sayd they slue aboue tenne thousand persons of that sect, men, women and little
children. To redresse which excesse, and to take away the cause, the Estates of Nauarre
assembled at Puenta la Reyna, to resolue without any respect, to whom the realme
of Nauarre belonged, whether to Edward King of England or to D. Ieanne Countesse
of Eureux. The Estates were referred to Pampelone, the chiefe towne of the Realme,
whereas their opinions were diuers, many holding that King Edward should haue the
Realme of Nauarre, as grandchild (borne of the daughter) to Queene Ieanne, daughter
to King Henry, rather then the Countesse of Eureux, in regard of the sex: others, and
with more reason, held for the Countesse, who was in the same degree, but daughter
to a sonne, and heire to Queene Ieanne, and peruailed, drawing the rest to their
opinion.
3 Thus was Ieanne Countesse of Eureux declared the true and lawfull Queene of
Nauarre,D. Ieanne Queene of Nauarre. in the yeere of our Lord 1328. the realme hauing beene vacant about foure
monthes. And vntill that she and Cont Philip her husband, should come and take possession
of the Realm,An. 1328. they declared Regent and Viceroy D. Iohn Corboran of Leer, Standard-bearer
of the realme, and Iohn Martines of Medrano.



Philip the third of that name, the nine and
twentith King of Nauarre.
PHilip Earle of Eureux, sonne to Lewis of France, who was sonne to Philip the third,
sonne to the King Saint Lewis, is counted by vs for the nine and twentith King of
Nauarre, the third of that name, and was surnamed the noble. As soone as the Election
was made by the Estates of Nauar, they sent Ambassadors to Ph. of Valois the French
King, to let him vnderstand the reasons that the King elected had vnto the realme, which
had mooued the Estates to make this election; and by the same Ambassadors they aduertised
Philip of Eureux and Ieanne his wife thereof, sommoning them to come and
take possession of the realme, and to gouerne it. The French King did no way hinder it,
wherefore the Kings of Nauarre elect prepared for their voiage, and arriued there about
the beginning of the yeere of our Lord 1329.An. 1329. hauing not seene a King in their country
of a long time. The Prelats, Knights and wise men of the realme before their comming,
had set downe in writing the conditions wherevnto they would receiue them in
the succession of the realme, the which before the solemnities of the coronation and
oth, they presented vnto Philip and to Ieanne his wife, the which they yeelded willingly
vnto. The Estate beeing assembled at Pampelone, these conditions were sworne by
them, whereof the principal Articles were.
1 First to the Estates to maintaine and keepe the rights,Articles sworn by the Kings of Nauarre. lawes, customes, liberties
and preuiledges of the Realme, both written and not written, and whereof they were in
possession, to them and their successors for euer, and not to diminish, but rather augment
them.
2 That they should disanull all that had beene done to the preiudice thereof by
the King their Predecessours, and by their Ministers, without delay, notwithstanding
any let.
3 That for the terme of twelue yeeres to come, they should not coine any money,
but such as was then currant within the Realme, and that during their liues they should
not conine aboue one sort of new money, and that they should distribute part of the reuenues,
profits and commodities of the realme vnto the subiects.
4 That they should not receiue into their seruice aboue foure strangers, but should
imploy them of the country.
5 That the forts and garrisons of the realme, should be giuen to gentlemen borne
and dwelling in the Country, and not to any stranger: who should doe homage to
the Queene, and promise for to hold them for her, and for the lawfull heire of the
countrie.
6 That they should not exchange nor ingage the realme for any other Estat whatsoeuer.
7 That they should not sell nor ingage any of reuenues of the crowne, neither
should make any law nor statute against the realme, nor against them that should lawfully
succeed therein.
8 That to the first sonne which God should giue them, comming to the age of
twenty yeeres, they should leaue the Kingdome free and without factions, vpon condition
that the Estates should pay vnto them for their expences a hundred thousand Sanchets
(which was a peece of gold then currant) or in other French money equiualent.
9 That if God gaue them no children, in that case they should leaue the realme after
them free, with the forts, in the hands of the Estates, to inuest them to whom by
right it should belong.
10 That if they infring any of these Articles, or any part of them, the subiects should
be quit of their oth of subiection which they ought them.
These Articles being promised and sworne by the King and Queene, they were sollemnly
crowned, and the Deputies of the Estates, Noblemen and Officers of the crowne

tooke their oth of obedience,Coronation of Philip of Eue^eu^. in the Cathedral chruch of Pampelone. And afterwards
there were orders set downe by the King and Queene for the Gouernment of the
Realme: the which being written were sent into France, and confirmed by King Philip
of Valois at Paris the same yeere of our Lord 1329. After that time the French Kings
 had no command in Nauarre, hauing held that realme eight and fifty yeeres vnited to
the crowne of France: yet King Philip of Valois, retained of the inheritance of his cousin,
the Countesse of Bry, and a while after hee gaue them other lands in exchange, yet
not of that value.
Philip and Ieanne King of Nauarre had these children following,Genealogy of Nauarre. Charles who succeded
in the realme, Philip Earle of Longueuille, Lewis Earle of Beaumont le Royer, and afterwards
Duke of Duras, Ieanne married to the vicont of Rohan, Mary Queene of Arragon,
wife to D. Pedro the ceremonious, Blanche Queene of France, last wife to Philip
of Valois, and Agnes Countesse of Foix married to Gaston Phaebus: some of which were
borne before their Election, and some after. Lewis the third sonne of this marriage was
Earle of Beaumont in Normandie, for that he married the heire of that house, by whom
he had one sonne called Charles of Beaumont, who married the daughter of the Vicont
 of Mauleon in Nauar,Beginning of the house of Beaumont in Nauarre. and was the first Standard-bearer of the realm, through the fauour
of King Charles his vncle. Of this Charles of Beaumont is descended the house of Beaumont
in Nauarre. After the death of the Countesse of Beaumont, Lewis married Ieanne
daughter and heire to the Duke of Duras, vpon the coast of Macedonia, towards the Adriatike
sea, and was intitled Duke.
These things being done in Nauarre, King Philip being aduertised that the French
King marched with a mighty army against the Flemings rebelled, who had chased away
Lewis their Earle, and committed many insolencies against the Kings Officers, both in
words and deeds: he parted out of Nauarre, beeing loath to faile him at need who had
so kindly suffered him to take possession of the Realme, leauing the Queene D. Ieanne to
gouerne. Nauarre. He was present at the battaile which King Philip of Valois gaue the
Flemings at Cassel, whereas twenty thousand were slaine vpon the place: by meanes
whereof Count Lewis was restored to his Estate, and the Flemings subdued. This warre
being ended, the King of Nauarre returned into his realme: It was then that the Infant
D. Alphonso de la Cerde, sonne to D. Fernand, eldest sonne to King D. Alphonso of the Astrologuer,
being ill intreated in Castille,Donation made by the Infant D Alphonso de la Cerde to the Kings of Nauarre. where he pretended the crowne, made a donation
vnto the crowne of Nauarre, of the rights which he pretended in Guipuscoa, Alaua,
Rioja and other lands, the which had in former times belonged to Nauarre, and were vsurped
and retained by the Kings of Castille. Some affirme that this donation was
made in the yere of our Lord 1330. But howsoeuer, King Philip desirous to do Iustice,
and to gouerne his Realm wel, which had great need, and therefore was necessary to entertaine
peace with his neighbours, made no great account thereof at that time, but sent
Ambassadors to D. Alphonso then raigning in Castile,Ambassadors sent from Nauarre to Castille. to seeke his friendship. The
Ambassadors found the King at Talauera la Reyna, who entertained them well. Their
Ambassage was, that the Realme hauing many yeeres wanted the Soueraigne Magistate,
and in a manner abandoned by their Kings, it was no wonder if many things had
happened contrarie to the ancient alliances betwixt the houses of Castille and Nauarre,
for what did the Viceroys and Gouernors, care, beeing strangers (hauing no resemblance
of manners, nor other bond of friendship with the Spaniards) how all things
went, so as they were obeyed in the country, and that they might vaunt they had rather
done wrong, then receiued any, keeping continuall garrisons of strangers, ready to commit
any insolencies: whereof God had some times shewed his Iudgement, euen in the
last incounter neere vnto Beotibar: where by an extraordinary and miraculous punishmen,
God had chastised the negligence of the foure last Kings, which had held the realme
of Nauarre, who had respected it so little as they had scarce looked towards it, yea the
two last neuer came nere it, which had made the bad to grow more insolent, and so to
continue, vntill that the lawfull heires of the crowne of Nauarre were come to
their possession, by the decease of King Charles the Faire, Philip Earle of Eureux,

husband to their true Queene D. Ieanne, being called to raigne, who had sent this Ambassage
vnto him, to let him vnderstand these things, as a neighbour Prince and friend,
with whom they desired to entertaine peace and friendship, by all good offices which
Princes and neighbour Estates may receiue one from an other.
The King D. Alphonso hauing heard this Ambassage, fitted vnto the deseignes of the
new Kings of Nauarre, moderating the things which had past betwixt these two realms,
before their Election, answered, that hee was glad the Nauarrois had had meanes to recouer
them for their Kings, to whom the crowne did by right belong, and that for his
part he desired to entertaine a perpetuall friendship with King Philip and Queene Ieanne,
and to shew it by the effects in any occasion that should be offered, wherewith he would
acquaint his subiects, to the end their Kings vassals, both Nauarrois and French, should
be well intreated in Castille, and if any wrong were done them, it should bee repaired:
and that they should aduertise their Kings on his behalfe, to doe the like in thier countries.
The Ambassadors returning with this answere, gaue great contentment to King
Philip, who to administer Iustice, erected a new Court of Parliament in Nauarre, the
which was called New to distinguish it from the Old, hee and the three Estates of the
realme naming men, worthy of that charge. The like Ambassage was sent by him into
Arragon and Portugal, who were returned with pleasing answers. Matters beeing
thus setled in a better Estate then before,Ambassadors from Nauarre to Arragon and Portugal. the King and Queene returned into France,
leauing for Gouernor a French gentleman, called Henry of Guliac, or of Solibert, but
with a more lymited power then former Viceroys and Gouernors. Such was the Estate
of Nauarre vnto the yeere 1331.
Let vs now returne to the History of Arragon, the which we haue left at the new conquest
of Sardinia,Arragon. in the which soone after the departure of the Infant D. Alphonso they
fel to rebellion, beginning in the towne of Sassari, the which is one of the greatest of the
Island,Sardinia rebels against the Arragonois. by the faction of them of the house and family of Oria, great and mighty Lords,
especially in that towne, whereof the chiefe were Francesquin, Mastin, Branca, and Vinciguerra,
all of the family of Oria. These with their partisans hauing sought many
meanes to expell the garrison of Arragonois which was at Sassari, in the end they rebelled
openly, and by their example, and vpon the first oportunity, the Pisans holding the
city and castle of Caglieri, seemed to haue a desire to doe the like: whereof the King of
Arragon beeing aduertisied, he neglected all other deseignes, and thought of the preseruation
of this Island, which hee had subdued with great charge and losse: and for the
which and for that of Corsica, hee was bound to pay vnto the Pope and to the Sea of
Rome, an excessiue tribut of two thousand markes siluer, and to entertaine a certaine
number of souldiers for the defence of the church.
The decease of D. Sancho King of Majorca without children, had made him desirous
to ioyne the Islands and the Siegneuries which he had enioyed vpon the firme land to
his crowne of Arragon, wherefore he had sent the Infant D. Alphonso into the counties
of Rossillon and Cerdagne, with forces to seize thereon, but he was so careful of the affaires
of Sardinia, as he did easily incline to the request which D. Philip, brother to the
deceased King of Majorca, made in fauour of his Nephew D. Iames, sonne to the Infant
D. Fernand their brother, who as wee haue sayd died Prince of Morea: wherefore the
realme of Majorca,D. Iames King of Majorca, second of that name. and the succession of the King D. Sancho was left vnto this D. Iames
being yet very young, except the right of Soueraignty. Being now forced to send an
army into Sardinia, to his great charge, the Pope was intreated by the Infant D. Pedro
(who was sent Ambassador expresly to that end by the king his father) being at Auignon,
to abate this tribute to fiue hundred markes, and to exempt him from the moity of the
souldiars pay, wherevnto he was liable by reason of the same contract, and for the sayd
Islands, for the defence of the territories of the church. The Infant D. Pedro was courteously
receiued by the Pope, and fauourably heard in the consistory, where he obtained
abatement of halfe the tribute and of the souldiers pay for tenne yeeres, and moreouer
to receiue the tithes for two yeeres.
In the meane time the King D. Iames armed twelue gallies in Cattelogne, and sent
the^ before to Sardinia, vnder the charge of Bernard Cespuiade, to assist the Arragonois,

and others that held for him in the Island: Barnabo who had beene faithfull to the King
of Arragon, was now dead, whose children Cassan, Galeor, Geoffroy and Brancaleon, shewed
themselues enemies vnto him, and so in like manner did Federic, Azon and Iohn Malespina,
Marquises, who were rich and of great power in Sardinia: Notwithstanding that
their vncles Christian Spinola, entertained the friendship of the King D. Iames, and was
acceptable vnto him. These men by general conspiracy, had taken armes, in fauour of
an army which the Pisan and the Gibiline faction of Genoa did raise to send into Sardinia,
the which was newly increased by two and twenty Genoua gallies, which had
beene first entertained by Frederic King of Sicile, making warre against Robert King of
Naples, of the which Gaspar d' Oria was General, who afterwards leauing the party of
the Arragonois and Sicilians, and carrying away the King D. Frederickes money, hee
ioyned with the Pisans, who made him Admiral of all the fleet. Then beganne there
cruel warres betwixt the Cattelans and Geneuois, whom Francisco Carroso, Generall
of the Gallies of Arragon, and a sworne enemy to that nation, did punish seuerly when
as he tooke any one of their Pirats. Hauing imbarked certaine troupes of old souldiars,
Arragonois and Cattelans, he came and presented himselfe before the port of Cailleri,
about the end of August, in the yeere 1325. and held the city and fort as it were
besieged.
This yeere the Estates were called at Sarragossa in Arragon, where were present D.
Pedro de Luna,Estates of Arragon. Archbishop of Sarragossa, D. Sancho de Arragon the Kings brother: Don
Iames of Arragon of Xerica, D. Symon Cornel, D. Pero Martines de Luna, D. Blasco Maza
de Verga, D. Iohn Ximenes of Vrrea, Don Symon de Fosses, Don Raymond of Perault,
Don Martin Gil of Atrosil, Don Gombald Tramasset, Don William Entenza, Don
Michel Peres Gottorio, Don Gil Garces of Atrosil, don Michel Gurrea, Don Blasco
Maza de Celles, Don Symon Peres de Punia, Don Artorella of Ortis, Don Garcia Peres
pegna acuta, D. Pedro Ruis de Sagra, D. Ponce Ignes Entenza, D. Lope Ximenes de Luna,
D. Pedro de Laino, D. Michel Peres Zapata, with other Noblemen and Knights that
were present, and the Deputies of D. Blasco de Alagon, of D. Lopes de Luna, of D. Alphonso
Fernand of Ixar, and others absent, and the Deputies of the townes and commonalties
hauing any place in the sayd Estates.Right of representation. There D. Pedro, sonne to the Infant D. Alphonso,
was sworne presumptiue heire, and successor to the crowne, after the decease of
the Grandfather and father: the which was then decreed and practised, for that Don
Pedro Earle of Ribagorca and Ampurias did maintaine that if his brother D. Alphonso
should die before their father, the realme did belong to him by right of Proximity,
wherefore he refused then to sweare vnto his Nephew, but hee did afterwards. There
the Articles of the generall priuiledges were confirmed, the which had beene accorded
and sworne by the deceased King Don Pedro, and it was ordained for a law, that no
free man shuold be put to the racke, and that confiscations should not bee allowed, but
in cases of coyning, and high treason.
The young King of Majorca beeing vnder the Gouernment of his vncle D. Philip,
was there made sure to Don Constance of Arragon, daughter to the Infant Don Alphonso,
hee beeing eleuen yeeres old, and she fiue: these were the chiefe actes of this
assembly.
The Pisans army, led by Gaspar d' Oria, approaching neere vnto the Gulph of Cailleri,
where as Francisco Carroca laie with the army of Arragon,Battaile at sea before Caillery. there was a cruel and
dangerous battaile for the looser, for their rests were vp: but the Arragonois, were
victors, who by this memorable victory, tooke a part of the towne of Cailleri, called
Stampace; beeing assaulted at sea by Francisco Carroco, and at Land by Raymond of Peralta.
Soone after there fell so dangerous a sedition betwixt the Land and Sea-forces
of the Arragonois, as both captaines and souldiars ranne like madde men one
vpon an other with greater obstinacy then against their enemies, and many were cruelly
slaine: so as this rage had a manner ruined the Arragonois Estate in that Island,
but God had otherwise decreed: for the Pisans beeing very weake, and brought low
with the long precedent warres,Pisans quit the Island of Sardinia. which they had sustained both against the Geneuois
and Arragonois, did quit the Island of Sardinia, by an agreement made betwixt the

King of Arragon, and their Senat, in the yeere of our Lord 1326. so as the towne of Sassari
was yeelded to the Arragonois,Pisans quit the Island of Sardinia. the Marquis of Malespina surceasing, and promising
to be obedient to the King and his Lieutenants. Thus the Kings of Arragon became
Lords of Sardinia without contradiction, for a time: but in their owne country of
Cattelogne, and Valencia, there wanted no troubles and quarrels, which grew amongst
the Noblemen of the country,Troubles and quarrels where is much idle Nobility. beeing an ordinary thing, that whereas there is great
store of idle Nobilitie, there is alwaies (...) and contention; to the oppression of the
people.
D. Arnaud Roger Earle of Palliars, and Raymond Folch Vicout of Cardona, were then
in armes one against an other, by reason of a murther committed on the person of D.
William Queralt, whereof the Earle of Palliars was accused, and either of them hauing a
great troupe of friends and Partisans, held allattelogne in confusion, with their horrible
insolencies. In the country of Valencia, D. Iames Lord of Xerica, was in quarrell
with his owne mother D. Beatrix of Loria, and would haue put her out of her lands and
possessions, so as this quarrel did in a manner diuide the King and his sonne D. Alphonso,
the one supporting the mother, and the other the sonne.The soueraigne should alwaies be a Iudge and not a Partisan in his subiects quarrels. These quarrels were reconciled
with much paine: for when as the Souveraigne Magistrate doth medle in his subiects,
quarrels, and of a iudge becomes a Partisan, his authority leanes to the one side,
and the remedies are more difficult, and lesse effectuall. D. Iames of Xerica, during these
troubles, married the widowe Queene of D. Sancho of Majorca, whose name was Mary,
sister to Robert King of Naples, a woman of an vnchast life.
In the yeere of our Lord 1327. Don Iames the Young of Majorca did homage
for the Islands, and Land which the held, as well in Cattelogne, as on this side the
mountaines to the King of Arragon, as to his soueraigue, in the presence of Don
Philip his vncle and Tutor, Don Pedro and Don Raymond Berenger, the Kings children,
Caston of Moncade, Bishoppe of Huesca, and many others: and within few daies after
Don Iames King of Arragon died in the towne of Barcelona, hauing raigned sixe and
thirty yeeres, foure monthes and a halfe. A Prince rather inclined to good then bad,
to whom learning and learned men owe the foundation of the Vniuersitie of Lerida,
in Cattelogne, seuen and twenty yeeres before his death, which hee endowed with
many preuiledges, and would haue that alone throughout all his dominions, forbidding
all other schooles but for Grammer and Logicke. His bodie lies buried in the
Monastery of Santa Cruz.


D. Alphonso the fourth of that name, the twelfth
King of Arragon.
DOn Alphonso his sonne, succeeded him, to whom was giuen the surname of pittifull.
Hee was not the eldest, but that Don Iames his eldest brother, quitting in
his fathers life time, the succession of the crowne of Arragon, as wee haue said, entred
and inuested himselfe into that Order of Knights of Saint Iohn of Ierusalem: Hee
was King.
This was his issue; During his fathers life,Genealogy of Arragon. hee married first Donna Therefa of Entenza,
Countesse heire of Vrgell, by whom hee had the Infant Don Pedro, borne at
seuen monthes end, who was King, and he Infant Don Iames Earle of Vrgell and Vicont
of Ajar, and moreouer foure other sonnes and one daughter, who died verie yong,
and are interred at Sarragossa in Saint Francis Church with their mother Donna
Constance, who was wife vnto Don Iames the last King of Majorca. Donna Theresa
had not the title of a Queene, for that shee died foure daies before the King Don Iames
her father in lawe. Beeing King, hee tooke to his second wife, Donna Leonora of
Castille, daughter to the King Don Fernand the fourth, who was mother to Don
Fernand Marquisse of Tortoca, who married at Ebora, Donna Maria of Portugal,

daughter to the King Don Pedro, and was slaine by the commaundement of his brother
raigning an Arragon; hee had also by her Don Iohn, who died in Castille, Don
Alphonso beeing come to the crowne, hee gaue the countrie of Vrgel and other Lands,
to his second sonne Don Iames.
Comming to Saragossa where the generall Estates were assembled, hee tooke and
receiued a reciprocall oth according to the auncient custome of Kings his predecessors,
and was crowned King in the yeere of our Lord 1328. in which yeere were crowned
in Nauarre Philip of Eureux, in France Philip of Valois, and at Rome the Emperour
Lewis of Bauaria. At this Coronation of King Don Alphonso did assist with the
Deputies of the Estates, Don Iames of Arragon Lord of Xerica, Don Pedro Iuge of
Arborea, Don Raymond Folc Vicount of Cardona, Don Arnauld Roger of Mataplane
Earle of Palliars, Don Alphonso Fernandes of Arragon Lord of Ixar, Don Lope de Luna,
Don William and Berenger Anglesol, Don Iohn Ximenes of Vrrea, Don Pedro Ceruel
Don William Ceruillon, Don Othon of Moncado, and Don Othon of Fosses, with
other Noblemen. There were aboue two hundred and fiftie Knights made with
the ceremonies accustomed in those times, where there was present the Ambassadors
of Iohn King of Bohemia, called Henry Bomallia, who brought a promise from his Maister
that hee would come into Spaine, to make warre against the Moores, with the King of
Arragon, the which he did not.
The warre which Arragon made against the Infidells,King of Arragon makes warre against the Moores of Affricke. was more in Affrike then in
Spaine: for the opportunity of Sardinia did inuite the Kings of Arragon for to raise
their powers and make warre against the Moores, which commaunded at Tunes, Bugie,
and Tremessen: Notwithstanding beeing mutined againe by the perswasion of the Geneuois,
this yeere a truce was made betwixt the King of Arragon, and Abubacar pettie
King of Tunes and Bugia, and Abduria Hamen King of Tremessen. The Court beeing
at Daroca, about the end of this yeere, an Edict was made, that for tenne yeeres,
no towne, castle, gouernment, nor any customes, imposts or places of Iustice whatsoeuer,
should bee giuen or alyenated from the reuenewes of the Crowne: the which
the King seeking afterwardes for to breake, it caused great alterations and tumults,
Don Iames King of Maiorca did a new homage to King D. Alphonso for his realme, and
other lands, submitting himselfe to the Souveraignty of Arragon.
After all these things they thought to prouide for the reuolts of Sardinia, whereas
Barnabe d' Oria,Reuolts in Sardinia. beeing young and ill aduised, had surprized Castle Geneuois, and
chased away the garrisons which were placed there by the vncles Cassan and Galeaz,
whom Azon Marquisse of Malespina did aide and support: but Cassan and Galeaz
Oria, hauing incounted Azon and his troupes, marching towards Castel Geneuois, they
fought with them, defeated them, and tooke Azon prisoner: wee shall hereafter make
mention of these new broiles, but we must returne to the affaires of Castille and other
countries of Spaine.
The league made in Castille,Castile. betwixt Don Iohn Manuel, and Don Iohn the Blinde,
beeing broken, by a treaty of a future marriage, betwixt the King and D. Constance Manuel:
D. Iohn Manuel went vnto his Gouernment vpon the frontier, wherevnto hee had
beene in consideration thereof newly aduanced, and remained at Cordoua, from
whence hee issued forth one daie, beeing aduertised of a great troupe of Moores Granadins,
led by Ozmin, who was chosen gouernor of the King and Realme of Granado,
and Commaunder of the souldiars about Antiquero, the which hee charged
sodainely, and made a great and cruell slaughter of them, vpon the riuer of Guadal-force,
beeing assisted by the holie Knights of Saint Iaimes, Calatraua, Alcantara and
their Maisters.
Ozmin had beene chosen to his dignity by the Granadins,Moores. who were ignorant, or at
least dissembled, how ill hee had beene affected to the deceased king Ismael, seeing the
power of the realme in his hands, hee brake the truce without any cause, and surprized
Rute beeing il garded by the Christians, beeing lawfull for him to dispose of the affaires
of the kingdome, during the minority of king Mahumet, seeing there was not any man
of authority to contradict him, the good and fathful Alguazil, or Prouost (who had put the

scepter into the hands, of Mahumet, and reuenged his fathers death) beeing dead, in
whose place was substituted a Christian renegado, borne at Calcade, whose name
was Rodnan.
7 King D. Alphonso, during these things, went from Burgos to Toro,Castile. where he sought
by all milde courses to winne D. Iohn the Blinde, seeming to haue a desire to giue him
contentment and to honour him,Treachery of D. Alphonso King of Castille against eishbloud. wherevnto D. Iohn yeelded, and beeing inuited to dine
with the King vpon All Saints day, thinking to make good cheere, he was by the Kings
commandement murthered, with two Knights his vassalls, called Garci Fernandes Sarmiento,
and Lopes Aluares of Hermosilla. After this fact (to vnseemely for a King
who is the mirror of Iustice) they made his processe; who beeing layed vpon a Beere
couered with a blacke cloath, the King condemned him as a traitor and did confiscate
all his goods, and vnited them to the crowne, hauing aboue fourescore townes and
castles. The deceased left one only daughter his heire, the which was conueied into
France by her Gouernesse, and came to Bayone, which at that time was held by the English,
and was afterwards wife to D. Iohns Nugnes de Lara. D. Maria Diaz de Haro, d. Iohns
mother, who was then in the Monastery of Peralez, hearing of his death, and wanting
good councel,Biscay sold to King D. Alphonso. by the perswasion of D. Garcilaco de la Vega should the Siegneury of Biscay
to the King, the which was not confiscable, for it was her patrimony: yet the King did
not enioy it very soone, neither is the sale very certaine. the murther of D. Iohn the
Blinde, comming to the knowledge of D. Iohn Manuel, made him to stand vpon his
gard: wherefore leauing the fronter, and the Kings forces, hee retired to a castle of his
called Chincilla, where he fortefied himselfe, from whence the King could not of a long
time draw him, notwithstanding all promises and assurances: wherefore hee himselfe
came to Seuille, where hee made a stately entry, and beganne to make warre against
the Moores, with great perparation both by land and sea. Thether came a sonne of
Ozmines, called Abraham the drinker for that hee drinke wine, who offered for to doe
him seruice, and hee was entertained. On the othe side D. Iohn Manuell gaue the
King of Granado to vnderstand, that he was at his commaundement, and that hee would
giue him great meanes to anoy the King of Castile.
In the yeere of our Lord 1328. King Don Alphonso did beseege Oluera, and tooke
it by composition, to haue their liues and goods saued: in the meane time beeing aduertised
that the Moores of Ayamont, fearing a seege, sent their wiues, and vnnecessary
people towards Ronde, hee sent the troupes of Seuile to spoile them, and to take
this multitude prisoners. Ruy Goncales of Mancanedo, who led this companie, did
effect what hee had in charge, but seeking to attempt Ayamont, the Moores
within it made a verie furious sallie vpon him and his troupes, and put them all to
rout, tooke away their Standard, and slue him that carried it: and but for the Archbishop
of Seuile, who made it good, and withstood the force of the Barbarians with
some knights and souldiars which hee had rallied together, they had beene all cut in
peeces. The King after the taking of Oluera came to Pruna, a strong towne, which
had a castle impregnable: yet there were two Christians, which did assure the King
that they had a meanes to take it. The King hauing giuen them a good troupe, and
set them to worke, he gaue a generall assault to the towne with his whole army, so as
the beseeged holding themselues assured of the castle, left onely two or three Moores
to gard it,Pruna taken by the Christians. and went all to defend the towne: whereby the two Christians, with them
that followed them had meanes to seize vpon the castle, the vnexpected taking whereof
made the towne to be presently yeelded.
From thence the Christian armie went to Ayamont, and to the tower of Alfaquin,
the which yeelded without any resistance. Alphonso Geoffrey Tenorio, Admirall
at Sea, gaue battaile to two and twentie gallies, some belonging to the King of
Granado, and some to him of Maroc, the which he vanquished, and tooke twelue hundred
Moores. hee sunke foure gallies, and carried away three: And for this yeere beeing
1328. there was no other exploite of warre done,An. 1328. by reason of the rayne, and winter
approching, which made the King returne to Seuile.

Don Iohn Manuel reuolted against his King and country, by reason of disloyalty
vsed to D. Iohn the blinde, and allied himselfe with the Kings of Arragon and Granado,
being the more incensed with the newes hee had, that the King treated a marriage with
the Infanta of Portugal, leauing his daughter D. Constance Manuel, to whom hee was
made sure, we haue sayd. The Infanta was called Mary, and was daughter to King D.
Alphonso, who had in the yeere of our Lord 1325. succeeded King Denis his father in the
realme of Portugal, and of D. Beatrix of Castille, sister to the King D. Fernand the
fourth, so as she was cousin Germaine to his future Spouse.


D. Alphonso the fourth of that name, the seuenth
King of Portugal.
8 THis D. Alphonso of Portugall was surnamed the braue,Portugal. for that he was valiant and
generous. He was about fiue and thirty yeeres old, when hee beganne to raigne,
and had beene made sure to D. Beatrix, beeing but eight yeeres old, and was married at
the age of sixteene.Genealogy of Portugal. They had many children, whereof Alphonso, Dems and Iohn died
young: then they had D. Pedro, who was King after his father, Donna Maria, of whose
marriage with King D. Alphonso of Castille, we haue begunne to speake, and D. Leonora
or Eluira, who was wife to D. Pedro the Ceremonious, King of Arragon. This King
D. Alphonso had beene very turbulent in his fathers life time, maintayning certaine rebels
against him: yet beeing come vnto the crowne, hee became vertuous, and a great
fauorer of Iustice, making many good lawes, and gouerning his realme wisely: yet
hee had great quarrels with D. Alphonso Sanches his bastard brother, to the great oppression
of his subiects: for Don Alphonso Sanches was a braue knight, and could well
defend himselfe, hauing the fauour of the Castillians, and of the King of Arragon,
who sought many meanes to reconcile them, but in vaine. The subiect of their quarrels
was onely iealousie, conceiued in the heart of King D. Alphonso, for that King Denis
their father had loued this bastard exceedingly. But in the end the King was Maister,
neuer ceasing vntill he had chased him into Castile, after which he confiscated his goods,
and proceeded against him by course of Iustice.
9 During the treaty of marriage betwixt D. Maria of Portugal and D. Alphonso
King of Castille,Castille. D. Iohn Manuel, with the helpe of the Arragonois and Granadins, beganne
to ouerrunne the territories of Castille, from Almanca vnto Pegnafiel, running,
burning and spoyling all they incountred: Then did the King make his well beloued
fauorite and councellor, D. Aluar Nugnes Osorio, Earle of Transtamara, Lemos and
Sarria,Dukes, Marquises and Earles and hereditary in Spaine. and Lord of Riuiere and Cabrera, for in those daies there was no Earledome
hereditary in Castille nor Leon, and hereof Spaine doth yet retaine those markes of
antiquity, that the children of Noblemen carrying the titles of Dukes, Marquises or
Earles (which were all personall and temporall dignities) dare not take them after
the decease of their fathers, without a new permission from the King, except some which
haue that right by preuiledge.
Hee did this to oppose him to D. Iohn Manuel, against whom hee sent D. Garcilaco
de la Vega, whilest that hee remained at Cordoua, and prepared for his future marriage
with the Infanta of Portugall: Don Garcilaco comming to Soria, was ill receiued,
for the Nobility hauing had a false aduertisment that hee was come thether to
carrie many Knights prisoners,Murther of Garcila^o de la Vega. they murthered him in Saint Francis Church, beeing
at Masse with his people. These were the fruites of the Infidelity which the
King had vsed against Don Iohn the Blinde, a Prince of his owne bloud, by reason
whereof euerie one grewe very iealous both of him, and of his priuate seruants. This
murther did much displease the King, and incensed him against Don Iohn Manuel more
then before.

Hee came to Toledo, where hauing assembled great forces, hee went and beseeged
Escalona. D. Iohn Manuel on the other side laied siege to Huete, but neither of them
preuailed. The marriage with the Infanta of Portugall was in the end concluded,
and moreouer D. Blanche, daughter to the deceased D. Pedro of Castile, the Kings vncle,
was accorded to the Infant D. Pedro of Portugal. Pope Iohn beeing aduertised
of the reuolt of Castile, gaue charge to Don Pedro of Toledo, Bishop of Carthagena,
newly made Cardinal, to mediate a peace in the realme, interposing his Apostolike
authority: but hee labored in va^ne, for hee found the King so incensed, as hee would
not heare of any composition with his subiects, giuing the Cardinal probable reasons:
wherefore hee made his report vnto the Pope, and discharge himselfe of his
commission.
During these troubles, D. Fernand Rodrigues of Bilbao, Prior of Saint Iohn,Reuolts in Castille, a great
friend to Don Iohn Manuel, caused the cities of Toro and Zamora to rebell against the
King, saying that it was by reason hee had aduanced D. Aluaro Nugnes Osorio to the
dignity of an Earle: the towne of Vailledolit did the like, whereas Ioseph of Eccia^
Iew, Intendant generall of the imposts, had like to haue beene slaine. Herevpon the King
left the seege of Escalona; and came to Vailledolit: where the inhabitants, beeing
animated by the Prior of Saint Iohn, shut the gates against him: yet beeing come to
a parle with Don Iohn Martines de Leyua, Iohn Veles of Gueuara, Fernand Ladron of
Rioja, and Ruis Diaz his brother,The King is forced to dismisse D. Aluaro his Mignon. Pero Rodrigues of Villega, and Garcilaco de la Vega,
sonne to him that had beene slaine at Soria: these knights and others wrought so, as
the King dismist the Earle Don Aluar Nugnes, and so was receiued into the towne,
and by the same meanes hee made a composition with Toro and Zamora; from
thence hee went to Ciudad Roderigo, to celebrate his marriage.
Seeking for to retire out of Don Aluaro's hands, the fortes which hee had giuen vnto
him in charge, hee could not recouer them all, and moreouer Don Aluar, beeing
discontented with this disgrace, hee presently went and ioyned with Don Iohn Manuell:
wherevpon the King was aduised to kill him: And seeking a murtherer, and
a fit occasion, hee found a man furnished with the quallities of a disloyall Courtiar:
this was Raymyr Flores de Guzman, who notwithstanding that hee had beene a verie
great friend to the Earle, offered to dispatch him, vpon the great promises which the
King made him: wherefore fayning to bee in disgrace with him hee went vnto the
Earle, by whom beeing well entertained, lyuing and lying together, hee had meanes
and oportunity to kill him whilest that the King did celebrate his marriage in Alfayates,
and did capitulate with D. Alphonso King of Portugal, who came in person to
Font Grimald.
The Court beeing come neere to Medina del Campo, the King was aduertised of
the death of Count Aluar, to iustifie the which hee caused his processe to bee made, and
condemned him himselfe sitting in the seat of Iustice at Tordehumos: hee caused his
body to be burned, and his goods to bee confiscated as a traitor, whereof Ramir Flores
de Guzman, had for his reward, and the price of his friends bloud, which he had shed, the
castle of Beluer, and the towne of Cabreros. These are commonly the fauours of the
best beloued Courtiers, which abuse the familiarity of their Kings, or relie to much
thereon. King Don Alphonso perceiuing the misery whereinto hee did runne, desired
to make a peace with Don Iohn Manuel, but hee laboured in vaine, for the Prior of Saint
Iohn vndid all that hee could doe.
The same yeere, beeing the yeere of our Lord 1329. the marriage which had beene
treated some monthes before,Arragon. betwixt Don Alphonso King of Arragon and D. Leonora
of Castile, sister to his King Don Alphonso of Castile,An. 1329. was celebrated at Tarassone,
whereas both Kings met, beeing accompanied by many Princes, Princesses, Prelates
and Knights, and the Ambassadors of Don Alphonso King of Portugal. There
was the league renued betwixt the three Estates of Castille, Arragon and Portugal, and
decreed to receiue one an others Rebels, promising withall to assist the King of
Castille in his warres against the Moores, with the forces of Arragon and Portugall:

what issue came of this marriage wee haue before related, when as D. Leonora saw her
selfe mother to Don Fernand her first sonne, which was at the end of the yeere, beeing
desirous hee should succeed the King his father, shee sought by all meanes to
shewe her selfe a stepmother to Don Pedro, her husbands sonne by his first wife, but
hee finding it, hee kept himselfe farre off during his fathers life. Don Pedro for his part
was of a rough and sower disposition.
As soone as the Infant D. Fernand was borne, the King his father gaue him the
Marquisate of Tortose and Albarrazin, contrary to the Edict and law of Daroca, whereof
wee haue made mention, whereat the Estates were much discontented, and with
them the Infant D. Pedro, Don Pedro de Luna, Archbishop of Saragossa, Don Michel
Gurrea, who was at it were Gouernor of the Realme, a dignity which they were wont
to giue to the eldest Princes of Arragon, Don Pedro and Syraon Gurrea brethren:
this last was Abbot of Montatragon, Vidal of Villanoua, Garcia de L^ris, Michel Zapate,
and other Noblemen: yet they were forced to haue patience, for D. Alphonso King of
Arragon suffered himselfe to bee wholy gouerned by D. Leonora: this was the first subiect
of hatred betwixt D. Pedro and her.
The King of Castille beeing much discontended for the death of D. Garcilaco de
la Vega,Castile. came presently after his marriage to his aunt being at Soria, where causing
informations to bee made against the murtherers hee condemned the guiltie to death,
and did confiscate their goods. Hee assembled the Estates of all his realmes at Madrid,
of whom hee obtained of guift of great summes of Marauidis of gold, to make
warre against the Moores, who that yeere had sodainely taken the towne of Priego.
D. Iohn Manuel, as well for the marriage betwixt the King of Arragon, and the Infanta
of Castille, as for that his wife, sister to the King of Arragon, was newly dead, lost
his support on that side: yet hee married againe with D. Blanche, daughter to the Infant
D. Fernand de la Cerde, younger brother to D. Alphonso de la Cerde, cousin to D. Iohn
Nugnes de Lara, which de Lara married at the same time the daughter of D. Iohn the
blinde, the heire of Biscay, who was yet at Bayone, whether shee had beene conuaied,
when her father was slaine, her name was Mary.
The King beeing prest to resist the Inuasions of the Moores, hee found meanes to
make a peace with Don Iohn Manuell, to whom he restored Donna Constance his daughter,
whom hee had kept in the castle of Toro, and graunted vnto him certaine other
conditions, whereby hee pacefied the intestin troubles of the realme. Beeing at Vailledolit,
hee caused Ioseph of Eccia, the Iew, to yeeld an account of the reuenues of his
customes, and for that there had beene great complaints made of him, hee tooke that
charge from him, ordayning that from thenceforth it should bee discharged by Christians,
with the title of Treasorers, and not of Customers.
In the yeere of our Lord 1330. the Kings of Castille and Portugal, meeting at Font
Grimald,An. 1330. renued their alliances and leagues, and did capitulate a new, that the King
of Portugal should assist him of Castille, with fiue hundred horse for the Moores
warre: and then was a marriage celebrated betwixt Don Pedro the Infant of Portugal,
and Donna Blanche daughter to Don Pedro of Castille. The Rendezuous for the
Christians army was appointed at Cordoua, whether the King came with his fiue hundred
horse Portugois: led by the maister of the troupes of the Order of Christus; so as all
things being ready they laied siege to Thiebe Hardales.
Mahumet King of Granado, who kept himselfe in a manner alwaies in the castle
of Alhambra,Moores. gaue the whole conduct of the warre to Ozmin, who hauing taken Pruna
by treason came and lodged with six thousand horse, and good troupes of foote at Turon,
three leagues from Thiebe, seeking by his continuall alarmes to diuert the Christians
seege, making daylie skirmishes about the riuer of Guadathiebe, which was the
common watering of both armies: notwithstanding all this, the Christians continued
their battery, and the towne was valiantly defended by the Inhabitants, who burned
the Engins of battery with wilde fire, and did frustrate many of the assaylants attempts.
In the end Ozmin desirous to raise the seege,Str^^^gem of (...). he resolued to charge the campe with this
pollicie. He diuided his army into two, and sent three thousand horses farre about, and

by couered places, to charge the Christian army behind, or in flanke, vpon signe giuen,
whilst that he with the other three thousand, and his footmen did set vpon them in front,
thinking that the whole armie would make head against him, and that whilest they were
in fight, the rest falling vpon them with great cryes, should amaze them, and easily
disorder them: but he fayled in this disseigne: for the king of Castile beeing aduertised by
his spies, that part of the Mores army was disbanded, and that the rest came against him,
hee appointed a good squadron of horse to defend the rere, and he with the rest went to
incounter Ozmin, whom he fought withall and repulsed, and had defeated him, if the
three thousand horse, which he had sent to charge the armie behind, had not turned head,
(finding all things in good order) and come in time to succour Ozmin, which was the
cause he was not wholy defeated. Whilest they were in fight, the king sent two thousand
horse to assayle the Mores campe, and to spoyle their baggage, the which they effected,
bringing away many prisoners.
This ill-succeeding enterprise was poorely repayred the next day by the Moores, who
slue about fifty souldiers whom they found disbanded about the riuer, and this was all:
wherefore they retired, and the seege was continued: and then the Moores beeing out
of hope of succors, yeelded to haue their liues saued. Afterwards Priego and Lagnetta
were yeelded, and the forts of Cuenas and Ortexica recouered, which had beene abandoned
by the Moores.
With these victories king D. Alphonso returned to Seuile, being much incensed against
Don Iohn Manuel, who had still secret intelligence with the king of Granado, and beeing
ill affected to D. Alphonso, had not stirred during the seege, notwithstanding that hee had
promised to assayle the Moores towards Murcia, neither was hee much contented with
the Portugois, who left him almost at the beginning of the seege of Thiebe, and returned
to their houses. By reason of these infidelities, he resolued to haue peace with the king of
Granado, who sought it and accepted what he offeeed to his Ambassadors at Seuile, that
he should pay him twelue thousand doublons of yearely tribute, and do him homage for
his Realme of Granado, so as he might be allowed to draw victuals out of the Christians
country, paying the twentith penny.
10 The king D. Alphonso beeing at Seuile without any cares of warre,Castile. he gaue himselfe
to the long-sought loue of Donna Leonora of Guzman, daughter to Don Pero Nugnes
de Guzman, who had beene wife to Don Iohn de Velasco, whom he enioyed. This Lady
(who had not her like for beautie in all Spaine) did so gouerne him, as hee did not any
thing but by her will, excusing himselfe that the Queene Donna Maria, whome hee had
married but two yeares before, had no children. Being come from Seuile to Xeres of Badajos,
to visit Queene Elizabeth his Grand-mother, Dowager of Portugall, beeing yet aliue,
he found there by chance the Infant D. Alphonso de la Cerde, that came out of France,
who kist his hand and yeelded vnto him the right which he pretended to the Realmes of
Castile and Leon,D. Alphonso de la Cerde qui^s^is interest to Cast^l. the which he had long disputed but in vaine. He had the same yeare (as
some hold) yeelded to Philip king of Nauarre, the interest which he had or might pretend
as king of Castile, to Alaua, Rioja, Guipuscoa, and other lands adjacent, of the auncient
patrimony of Nauarre. The king of Nauarre in recompence gaue him certaine places and
pensions, to entertayne his estate, and so they continued good friends. This D. Alphonso
de la Cerde had married a Lady in France of the bloud Royall, named Malfade, by whom
he had two sonnes, Don Lewis and Don Iohn: this last was Earle of Angoulesme, and
Constable of France, during the raigne of King Iohn, whom the Histories of France, cal
Don Iohn of Spaine. Thus Don Alphonso was prouided for, beeing issued from the eldest
sonne of D. Alphonso the Learned. Don Iohn Manuel the king, seeing that it was now
time to liue in peace, employed Donna Leonora of Guzman, to bring him into fauour,
the which she obtayned, yet was it not wholy to his content.An. 1331. This Lady was deliuered in
the yeare 1331. of a sonne by the king, who was named Don Pedro, and to whome the
king assigned for a perpetuall inheritance, Aguilar del campo, and many other reuenues.
11 In those times they of the Prouince of Alaua, had a custome to choose a Lord,Custome of Alaua*
vnder the soueraignty of Castille, who did gouerne, and enioyed the reuenues which

were appointed for the Lords of the Countrie: sometimes they were Princes of the
house of Castile, the kings children, and sometimes the Lords of Biscay, or of the house
of Lara, or others, as they thought good: for the doing whereof, they were accustomed
to assemble in the field of Arriaga, neere to Victoria, and there made their election: and
those of this election were called brethren, and the assemblie a Brotherhood. Thither
came the chiefe families of Alaua, with the Bishop of Calaorra, and the deputies for the
Labourers: the towne of Victoria, and that of Treuigno were not of this assembly, but
had bin alwaies vnited to the Crowne. This yeare the Brotherhood sent deputies vnto
the king, beeing at Burgos, desiring him to incorporate them vnto the crowne, and that
they might no more choose any Lord, or subalternall gouernour; for that in the factions
and seditions past, they had beene distracted from the kings obedience, by the Gouernors,
whereby the countrey had suffered much. The King desirous to giue them contentment,
assuring his estate the more thereby, and increasing his demeynes, came to
Victoria, and from thence to the assembly of the Brotherhood, beeing in the field of Arriaga;
whereas publikely, and in all their names, there was a petition presented vnto him
by these Knights hereafter named: D. Lopes of Mendoca, D. Bertrand Iuanes of Gueuara,
Lord of Ogna, and Ladron of Gueuara his son, Iuan Hurtado of Mendoca, Fernand Ruis
of Mendoca, Arch-deacon of Calaorra, Ruis Lopes of Mendoca, sons to D. Lopes Diego
Hurtado of Mendoca, Fernand Peres of Ayala, Fernand Sanches of Velaico, Goncalo Iuanez
of Mendoca, and Hurtado Diaz his brother, Lopes Garcia of Salazar, and Ruis Diaz
of Torres. These beeing followed by many other gentlemen, and the deputies of the
Clergie, and third Estate, presented many Articles vnto the King, beseeching him to
grant them,Alaua vnited to the Crowne of Castile. promising for their part, that this should bee their last assembly, and that the
name and effect of their Brotherhood should remaine for euer extinct. The King hauing
heard them, and giuen the Articles to his Councell to peruse, receiued them, and vnited
the Prouince of Alaua for euer vnto the crowne of Castile; whereof letters were afterward
dispatcht at Victoria, in the yeare 1332. And these were the Articles.
1 That the King nor his successors should not alienate any place of his demeines.
2 That the gentlemen and their goods should bee free and exempt from all subsidies,
as they had bin heretofore.
3 That the Monasteriall Churches and Collations which belonged to Noblemen,
should be preserued for them as before, and whereas the Incumbents were not resident,
the gentlemen should receiue the reuenues.
4 That all Labourers dwelling vpon gentlemens land, should be subiect vnto them,
the Seigneurie, and Iustice soueraigne reserued to the King, and the Oxe of March, but
all amercements should be the Lords.
5 That the Gentlemen and others of the countrie should gouerne themselues according
to the customes and rights of Soportilla, and in all offences their causes should bee
iudged according to the lawes of the Siete partidas.
6 That the Iudges royall, and Captaines of castels should be borne and resident in
the country, who could not proceed against any one but vpon complaint, vnlesse they
were condemned or banished, and that all prisoners should be deliuered vpon caution,
vnlesse they were subiect to a corporall punishment.
7 That all Labourers dwelling vnder Monasteriall Churches, and Collations of
Gentlemen, should bee free and exempted from all tribute and subiection, except the
Oxe of March.
8 That Labourers dwelling in Pallaces and Castels of Gentlemen, should haue the
same exemptions, so as there were but one at once, and those which nurse Gentlemens
lawfull children, should enioy the like priuiledges, during the time of their nourishment.
9 The Gentlemen which dwell in villages vnder the Iurisdiction of Victoria, should
enioy the same rights with them of the Prouince of Alaua: wherein should bee obserued
the sentence giuen betwixt the towne of Victoria, and the villages thereunto belonging.
10 Whosoeuer should kill a Gentleman, should pay 500. solz for a fyne, and whosoeuer
should hurt or dishonor a gentleman, should pay the like summe vnto the party.

11 That there should be no forges of Iron set vp in the territorie of Alaua, to the
end the mountaines should not be consumed.
12 That no man might build a house without the barre.
13 That all sales, donations, answers, assignations and pleas, shold be iudged where
they had beene begun.
14 That a Subsidie being demanded of him, who should tearme himselfe a Gentleman,
enioying the rights of Castile, he should be exempt.
15 That the king should make no new building, or towne in Alaua.
16 That the villages of Mendoca and Mendeuil should be free from all tributes and
Impositions, and enioy the ancient rights, yet their Seigneurie should belong vnto the
Crowne.
17 That the Bourg of Gue^ara should be free from all tribute, as it had bene before
ordayned by the assembly of Alaua, and likewise of the Oxe of March, the Soueraigntie
notwithstanding belonging to the king.
These were the exemptions and chiefe priuiledges granted to the Gentlemen of Alaua,
in the yeare 1331.An. 1331. In former times all sutes were decided and iudged without any
Lawes or Statutes, but onely by naturall reason, and by Arbitrators, but then they were
reduced into a frame according vnto certaine Lawes, and they had a certaine seate of Iustice
appointed. During the kings aboad at Victoria, he did institute (as some affirme) the
Order of the Knights of the Band,Order of the Knights of the band. to maintaine souldiers in Spaine, the which went to
decay: yet some hold it was some yeares before. But this yeare returning to Burgos, hee
set downe the Orders, whereof the chiefe Articles are these:
They carried a red band foure fingers broade, in manner of a scarfe, which came from
the left shoulder vnder the right arme, the which the king gaue onely to Gentlemen
which had followed the Court tenne yeares, or beene in the warre against the Mores and
by their Orders it was not to be giuen but to younger brothers, who had no great shares
in their fathers inheritances. These Knights beeing receiued, tooke an oath to obserue
the rules of the Order which follow:
1 That the knight of the band should be bound to speake vnto the king for the common
good and defence of them of his countrie,Articles of the Order. beeing required by them.
2 That he should speake the truth vnto the King, and should be bound to reueale vnto
the King what he should knowe or heare spoken against him.
3 The Knight conuicted of a lie, should not carrie a sword for one whole
moneth.
4 He should conuerse with souldiers and other men of qualitie, and not with men of
base conditions.
5 They should keepe their promise to all men, of what estate and condition soeuer.
6 They should be prouided of armes and horses, vppon paine to loose the title of
Knight-hood.
7 The Knight should not be seene mounted vpon a Moile, nor without band, nor
sword.
8 He should be no Iester, but his discourse should be graue the honest.
9 He should not complaine of his wounds, nor vaunt of his valour.
10 He should not play at cardes nor dice, nor ingage his armes, nor apparell.
11 He should honour and serue Ladies and Gentlewomen.
12 If two Knights of the band had a quarrell, the rest should bee bound to seeke all
meanes to reconcile them.
13 The Knight which did vsurpe the band, and had not receiued it from the kings
hands, should be bound to defend it against two knights of the Order of the band, and if
he did vanquish them, he might then carry it without contradiction, but if he were vanquished,
he should be banished from the Court.
14 Any knight winning the prize at the Iusts of armes of the knights of the band,
should be receiued into their Order.
15 That the knight of the band which should draw his sword against another knight
of the same Order, should forbeare the Court for two moneths: and for two moneths

after should weare but halfe a band, and if he should wound his companion, hee should
be sixe moneths in prison, and banished the Court for sixe moneths more.
16 The king should bee sole Iudge of all matters concerning the knights of the
Band.
17 All the knights of the Band should bee bound to accompany the king vnto the
warre.
18 They might not go to the war with the Band, but against Infidels, and in all other
they should lay aside the Band.
19 The knights of the Band should assemble thrice a yeare, to treate of the affaires
of their Order, where the king should appoint it, beeing mounted and armed, and the
sayd assemblies should be in April, September, and at Christmas.
20 They should exercise themselues in Iousts, Ioco de-canna, tossing the pike, and
managing of horses, at a certaine time appointed.
21 No knight should liue in Court, without seruing a Ladie or Gentlewoman to
haue her in marriage, or otherwise with honour.
22 The knights of the Band should be bound to be at all tourneys within ten leagues
of the Court.
23 If any of them did marrie within twenty leagues of the Court, the other knights
should be bound to beare him companie, and to honour him and his spouse, making some
exercises of armes, and giuing him presents.
24 The first Sunday of euery moneth they should come into the great hall of the
Pallace, and there exercise all sorts of armes before the king, without offending one another
either maliciously, or in choller.
25 A knight beeing ready to dye, he should be visited, comforted, and exhorted by
his companions, and after his death they should be bound to assist at his funerals, and
should mourne a moneth, all Iousts and exercises of armes ceasing.
26 His Band that was dead should be restored to the king by the other knights, who
should be sutors to haue some one of his children receiued into the Order, or to obtaine
some present for the widow to honour her, and entertaine her estate of Nobility, or to
marry some of her daughters.
The first knights of this Order, yet not all at once were chosen, without respect to the
elder, to honour him, and not to draw it into consequence.

The king Alphonso.
The Infant D. Pedro.
D. Henry.
D. Fernand.
D. Tello.
D. Iohn Nugnes.
D. Henriques.
D. Alphonso Fernand Cornel.
D. Lope Diaz d' Almacan.
D. Fernand Perez Portocarrero.
D. Charles of Gueuara.
D. Fernand Henriques.
D. Aluar Garcia of Albornez.
D. Pero Fernandes.
D. Garcy leoffrey Tenorio.
D. Iuan Esteuanes.
D. Diego Garcia of Toledo.
D. Martin Alphonso of Cardona.
D. Goncal Ruis de la Vega.
D. Iohn Alphonso of Benauides.
D. Garcilaco de la Vega.
D. Fernand Garcia Duque.
D. Garcia Fernandes Tello.
D. Pero Goncal of Aguero.
D. Iohn Alphonso Cariello.
D. Inigo Lopes Horozco.
D. Garcia Guttiere of Caruajal.
D. Guttiere Fernandes of Toledo.
D. Diego Fernandes of Castiello.
D. Pero Ruiz of Villegas.
D. Alphonso Fernandes Iuge.
D. Ruy Goncales of Castagneda.
D. Ruy Ramires de Guzman.
D. Sancho Martines de Ley^a.
D. Iohn Goncales of Bacan.
D. Pero Trillo.
D. Suero Perez of Quinones.
D. Goncal Mexia.
D. Fernand Cariello.
D. Iohn de Rojas.
D. Pero Aluarez Ozorio.
D. Pero Perez of Padilla.
D. Gil Quintagna.
D. Iohn Rodrigues of Villegas.
D. Diego Perez Sarmiento.
D. Mendo Rodrigues of Viezma.
D. Iohn Fernandes Cornel.
D. Iohn of Ceruejule.
D. Iohn Rodrigues of Cizueros.
D. Orion of Liebana.
D. Iohn Fernandes Delgadillo.
D. Gomes Capiello.
D. Bertrand of Gueuara.
D. Iohn Tenorio.
D. Obietto of Tordesillas.
D. Iohn Fernandes of Bahamon.
D. Alphonso Tenorio.
Some put. D. Iohn the Blind in the number
of these Knights, which shewes that the
Order was long before instituted.

These were at this time the most renowned families of Spaine, wherof some are wholy
extinct. Other houses are since growne great, as the Velasques, Manriques, Pimentel,
Mendoca, Cordoua, Pacheco, Estunica, Fajardos, Arellanos, Tendillas, Cueuas, Andradas,
Foncecas, Luna, Villandrado, Sotomaiores.
This Order of Knight-hood did flourish for a time, but for that it was not religious as
the rest, it was neglected and came to nothing.
At the same time Henry of Solibert Gouernor of Nauarre,Nauarr^ by the perswasion, as it is
likely, of D. Iohn Manuel, and of Don Iohn Nugnes de Lara, entred into quarrell with the
king of Castile: and for that he knew the forces of Nauarre were not sufficient to annoy
the King of Castile, and that those of France, were both farre off, and in warre with the
English, he insinuated himselfe with the king of Arragon, vnder hope of a marriage betwixt.
D. Ieanne eldest daughter to Philip king of Nauarre, and Don Pedro Infant of Arragon,
and heire to the Crowne: for this effect D. Pero Goncales of Morentin, was sent to
Tortosa in Cattelogne, where he was well receiued by the king, who hauing appointed
D. Pedro de Luna, Arch-bishop of Saragossa, to treate with him of this marriage, they
concluded it, as we shall shew, and agreed, that it should be accomplished within a certaine
time, and that in the meane time D. Pedro should ayde the Gouernors of Nauarre,
both present and to come,League and mariage betwixt Nauarre and Arragon. in all the wars they should haue for the realme of Nauarre. The
chiefe motiue of this marriage, was D. Iohn Alonzo de Haro, Seigneur de los Cameros, who
was very inward with D. Iohn Manuel, and sought al occasions to annoy king D. Alphonso.
D. Ieanne Queene of Nauarre being in France, was that yeare deliuered of the Infant D.
Charles, heire of the Realme of Nauarre, and the County of Eureux.
Another marriage was treated of in Portugal,Castille. to the preiudice of king D. Alphonso of
Castile: For D. Fernand Rodrigues of Bilbao, Prior of S. Iohn, Chancelor to Queene Mary,
wife to king D. Alphonso, a great friend to D. Iohn Manuel, and to whome the reuenges
which the king did vsually take of his Nobility were not pleasing: beeing also incensed at
the familiarity which the king had with D. Leonora of Guzman, and at the authority shee
had within the Realme, being also much deuoted to the king of Portugall, he preuailed so
with him by his practises, as he caused a diuorce betwixt the Infant D. Pedro of Portugall,
and his wife D. Blanche of Castile, who was very sickly, and made him to marrie D. Constance
daughter to D. Iohn Manuel, who thought to haue bin Queene of Castile. The king
of Castile, who dreamed not of these things, thought himselfe assured of the Christians,
and was wholy attentiue to the actions of the Moores of Granado, with whom he sought
meanes to breake the truce, by stopping of their victuals: but beeing better aduised, hee
sent to demand the tribute for that yere of king Mahumet, the which was paid, so as he suffered
the Mores to haue passage for their victuals out of Andalusia, and other places therabouts:
yet king Mahumet vnderstanding what small assurance there was in this truce,
and watching all occasions, either how to free himselfe from the subiection of the Christians,
or to annoy them: he past soone after into Affricke, to sollicite king Albohacen Miralmumin
of Maroc, to make some great enterprise with him in Spaine.
13 And for that the Moores of Spaine haue alwaies had great affinity and intelligence
with these Miralmumins of Affricke,Moores. it shall be fit to relate the continuance, since Ioseph
Aben Iacob, the second king of the race of Merins, whom we left vpon the banks of Affrick
trying to passe into Spaine in the yeare 1291. when as the king of Castile tooke Tariffe
from him: but being stopt by Benedict Zachary Admirall of Castile, he conuerted his desseigns
against Alboacid king of Tremessen, and his successor Boham.
This Miralmumin beeing at the seege of Tremessen, a familiar friend of his called

Alfetrian,Bucale 3. king of the race of the Merins in Affricke. slue him in his bed: whereupon his son Bucale tooke vppon him the scepter of
the Arabian Mores, and was the 3. king of the race of Merins. Being yet in the campe before
Tremessen, Albohaya his vncle being inuested by the Maroquins to take the Realme
from Bucale, he refused it for himselfe, but he aduanced another King of the same family
of Merins,Bot^bid 4. king of ^aroc. called Botebid, son to a brother of this Bucale, who forced him to fly, finding
himselfe too weake to make head against him. Bucale thinking to saue himselfe in Africke
was slaine by them that pursued him, neere vnto Mont Atlas. Thus Bot^bid raigned the 4.
of the familie of Merins, who at the end of the yeare, ended both raigne and life in whose
place Abortabe his Brother was the fift king of Maroc, by the helpe of certaine Christian
souldiers,Abortabe 5. king. who were then in Affricke, led by a knight called Goncalo Sanches of Troncones,
who notwithstanding had like to haue beene slaine by this ingratefull barbarian, beeing
forced to saue his life by flight, and so retired into Spaine. Abortabe raigned onely 2.
yeares, and died in the citty of Ribate, leauing the Realme of Maroc to his great Vncle
Aben Ioseph, sonne to king Iacob Aben Ioseph, the first of the family of the Merins which
had raigned in Maroc, and brother to Aben Iacob. This Aben Ioseph had one son called
Alboali,Aben Ioseph 6 King of Maroc whome he sought to make king of Fez in his life time, but as he had indiscreetly,
and too ambitiously cherished this son, he was forced to repent him, for such was the sons
hatred, as he depriued his father of the Realme of Maroc, and appointed him (by the intercession
of the Almodes then raigning at Tunis, who had there erected a kingdome of the
reliques of their families and forces chased from Maroc) Bolahu for his aboade and entertainment:
and Alboali raigned in the 7.Alboali 7. king of the race of Merins. place: but he enioyed it not long: for it was the wil
of God, that this wicked sonne fell grieuously sicke in the towne of Fez, neere vnto Tremessen
(not that Fez which is the chiefe of a kingdome) his father Aben Ioseph came thither
to beseege him, and prest him in such sort, as he was forced to leaue the realm of Maroc
and Fez, and to content himselfe with that of Sojumenca. By this meanes Aben Ioseph
recouered his Crowne and royall authority in Maroc, who holding Alboali vnworthy
to succeed him: he appointed Alboacen his younger sonne to be heire of the Crowne.
Alboali the elder aduertised of this institution, watched a time when both the father and
the sonne were absent out of Maroc, and comming thither on the sudden well accompanied,
he seazed thereon, thinking by that meanes to haue recouered his realme: but hee
was beseeged by king Aben Ioseph and Albohacen, vpon whom making a sally, he was defeated,
and sore wounded, so as he was forced to yeeld to his fathers will, and to retire
himselfe to Sojumenca, the which was granted him againe for his portion: after which
Aben Ioseph liued 18. yeares quietly king of Maroc, by whose decease succeeded his son
Alboacen,Alboacen 8. King of the Merins. the eighth king of the family of Merins, yet with great contention against his
elder brother Alboali, who sought by all practises to cast him from his throne, and beeing
not of strength sufficient himselfe, he begged ayde of other Barbarian Kings, so as
with the forces he obtained from king Botexefin sonne to Boham then raigning at Tremessen,
he came againe to beseege the capital town of Maroc, where Abderrahamen a braue
knight commanded, who defended it so valiantly, as he forced Alboali to retire with
shame, who in his retreat was incountred and defeated by the kings army, and sonne after
beseeged in his towne of Sojumenca, who seeing himselfe reduced to extremitie, hee
took a new composition, promising neuer to pretend any interest to the realm of Maroc,
but to content himselfe with that of Sojumenca: for assurance whereof he gaue his sonne
called Bozien for hostage. Wee must needes confesse that the humanity both of the father
and the sonne to Alboali was exceeding great, hauing so often rebelled, and aspired
to the crowne, a crime which doth often cause all respect of bloud and allyance to bee
forgotten, euen in Christian Princes. Alboacen rising from Sojumenca, ouer-runne Pilla,
and burnt all the countrie of Tremessen, in reuenge that King Botexefin had giuen ayde to
his brother at the seege of Maroc: It is this Alboacen which had beene sollicited by Mahumet
king of Granado, to passe into Spaine against Don Alphonso the eleuenth king of
Castile: and who afterwards hauing subdued the Realmes of Sojumenca and Tremissen,
was the greatest Prince in all Affricke.
Returning then into Spaine, wee say, that Ozmin Generall of the forces of Granado,
dyed about the yeare 1332.1332. soone after the truce made betwixt Castile and Granado:

leauing two sonnes Abraham and Abucebet, after whose death King Mahumet put himselfe
into fauour with King Alboacen, (for Ozmin notwithstanding that he was of the
same family of Merins, had alwaies beene an enemy vnto him) wherefore Mahumet going
to Fez, he was courteously entertayned by the Miralmumin, to whome hauing made
his complaints of the King of Castile, who did alwaies trecherously breake the truce: he
perswaded and intreated him, to ioyne with him against Spaine.King Mahumets words to Alboacen. For (sayd hee) God hauing
made you the mightiest Prince of the Religion, published by the Prophet Mahumet,
and whome so many Kings and Princes of Affricke obey, thou canst not more religiously,
and with greater honour employ thy forces, then against the Christians of Spaine,
our persecutors, and the implacable enemies of our law, nor more profitably addresse thy
noble enterprises, nor with hope of better successe, then against them, hauing the ports
and townes of Spayne at thy command, from the Streight along the coast of the Mediterranean
sea* whereunto the troubled Estate of Castile both alwaies inuite thee, wheras
Don Alphonso, who tearmes, himselfe King, through an insatiable desire of rule, hauing
spoyled him subiects of their lawfull inheritances, and pursued them in their honours
and liues by tyrannous cruelty, extending his outragious disdaine euen to women of
his owne bloud, and others of noble Families, hee hath so estranged most of the Princes
and Noblemen of Spaine, as they now seeke our friendship, and offer to ioyne with vs,
to make warre against him. It will be therefore an act worthy of thy wisedome, not to
let slippe so great occasions, and befitting the generositie of thy Noble and renowned
Family, by this oportunitie to repayre the ruined honour of the Arabians, troden vnder
foote in Spayne, for the sinnes of our Nation, by the will and pleasure of the great God,
who shewes plainely, that hee hath now turned his wrath against the Spaniards, both
Princes and people beeing plunged in all impietie, disloyalty, dissimulation, and couetousnesse.
To this effect spake Mahumet to the King of Maroc, who heard him with great attention,
and answered by the aduice of his Councell: that hee desired nothing more, then to
do what he had propounded, but at that time hee could not wholy attend it as it was fit,
beeing let by the warre which he had against the king of Tremessen, the which being ended,
hee would employ himselfe in person with all his forces. In the mean time he offered
him good troupes of horse, and gaue him great summes of mony. Thus the king of Granado
returned well satisfied into his country, where beeing arriued, hee sent presently to
Don Iohn Manuel, to conclude a firme League with him, and the other Noblemen his
Confederates, and to resolue of the meanes how to beginne the warre against the King
of Castile.
In this league ioyned Don Iohn Nugnes de Lara, Don Iohn Martines de Leyua, and
many others: and there was sent from them vnto Granado with the messengers Moores,
Don Pero Martines Clauijo, to haue the king confirme their accord. Wherefore the same
yeare 1332. Rodeuan Captaine of the Lymits of Granado towards Murcia, Abuceber
sonne to Ozmin deceased, and Machilif Gouernour of Antequera; entred the Realme of
Murcia in armes, vnto the territorie of Valencia, spoyling, killing, and burning all about
Orihuela and Guardamer: from whence they returned laden with spoyles to Granado,
whereby king Don Alphonso knew that hee must of force go to armes: for before hee
had a conceit that Mahumets practises would prooue vaine, and hoped to reclaime his
Rebels, by promises and other practises, but he was deceiued. Wherefore to beginne a
warre of so great waight and difficultie, hee went in pilgrimage to Saint Iames, and there
was made Knight, beeing in compleat armour, ordayning that from thence-foorth whosoeuer
should desire to be made a knight, should present himselfe armed at all peeces.
Returning to Burgos, he caused himselfe to be crowned king, to giue more authoritie to
his royall Maiestie: he also caused Queene Mary his wife to be crowned with great pompe
and charge to the Inhabitants. The next day the king did arme and make aboue an hundred
Noblemen and Gentlemen Knights, in he Monasterie of Huelgas, being al couered
with white. The ceremonie being ended, he gaue to the Citie of Burgos, the place of
Nugno, with the iurisdiction for euer, to recompence the expences they had beene at in
his Coronation.

During these Ceremonies the king of Maroc sent his sonne Abomelic, called the Infant
Picao, into Granado, with seuen thousand horse: armed a la Genette, who landed at Algezire,
whereof the Gouernors of Tariffe and Gibraltar, did presently aduertise the king of
Castile, which newes he receiued, to checke his ioy for the birth of two children, the one
by the Queene his wife in Vailledolit, whose name was Don Fernand, the other by Donna
Leonora of Guzman, called Don Sancho, to whom the king assigned Ledesma, and other
places. Assoone as the Moore Abomelte had landed, he tooke vppon him the title of
King of Algezire and Ronde, and came and beseeged the towne of Gibraltar, in the beginning
of the yeare 1333.An. 1333. for the releefe whereof the king D. Alphonso sent the masters
of the militarie Orders of S. Iames, Calatraua, Alcantare, and the Knights of the band:
seeking by all meanes possible to giue contentment to Don Iohn Manuel and other Noblemen
which had rebelled against him, but it was labour lost: wherefore hearing that the
king of Granado had on the other side beseeged castell del Rio, in the territorie of Cordoua,
he marched to the fronter in person. Those which defended castel del Rio, beeing
commanded by Martin Alphonso, behaued themselues so valiantly, with some small succours
which came vnto them from Cordoua, as the king of Granado raysed the seege and
went to Cabra, a towne belonging to the knights of Calatraua, the which hee tooke by
the treason of the Gouernour Pero Diaz of Agrayo, and hauing sent the prisoners hee
found in it to Granado, he razed the place. The towne of Gibaltar beeing battered and
furiously assaulted by the Affricane Moores, for the space of fiue moneths, hauing receiued
no succours from the King of Castile, was yeelded vp by Vasco Perez de de Meyra, who
in stead of imploying the kings mony ahout the fortification of the place, and to furnish
it with victuals and other necessaries, had made goodly purchases for his owne particular,
about Xeres.
After the taking of Cabra, D. Iohn Nugnes de Prado, master of Calatraua, presented
himselfe in view of the Moores army, with the troupes of Cordoua, Eccia, Carmona,
Marchena, and other places, meaning to giue them battell, but king Mahumet retired
himselfe. King Don Alphonso finding all things in disorder at his comming to Seuile, hee
presently led his army before Gibraltar, to recouer it from the enemy, before they should
haue leysure to fortifie it, but it was manned with a great garrison, which made many sallies,
the which was losse of many good men of either part: in the end the Christian army
beeing greatly opprest with hunger, the gallies beeing not able to furnish the campe with
victuals, they were forced to rayse the seege, to returne another time, as they did. At the
retreat of Abomelic, King of Algezire, they surprized in the passage so greata number of
Christians of all sorts, as beeing led to Algezire, the best of these poore slaues was sold
for a doublon. Some months after, the King of Granado tooke the castell of Benamexir,
a place belonging to the knights of S. Iames, the which was defended by Gomes Arias, and
afterwards spoyled the territorie of Cordoua, euen to the citty gates, finding not any resistance
for the army returned to the seege of Gibraltar, the which they found more difficult
then before, yet the Christians vsed all diligence to batter, mayne, sappe, and assault it
continually: king Abomelic sent to haue the king of Granado to approch with his forces,
beeing resolued to giue battel, and to rayse the seege from Gibraltar. King Mahumet was
readie, and came and camped neere vnto the riuer of Guadiara, aduertising Abomelic of
his beeing there, who came to field, whereas the two Morish armyes ioyned, within a
league of the king of Castiles campe, to whom they presented themselues in battel three
dayes together: but D. Alphonso was abuised to forbeare, and wisely. For the hazard of a
battell, drawes after it either the happines, or the ruine of an estate, and should neuer be
put in question by any wise captaine within his owne countrie, but vpon very great aduantage,
wherefore he fortified his campe with a trench, which reached to either shoore.
The armies hauing continued thus neere together some dayes without fighting, there
was a truce propounded, whereunto king D. Alphonso was the more willing to yeeld hauing
newes of many insolencies which the rebels of Castile had committed.Townes taken by the Moores. Wherefore
it was concluded of either side for foure yeares, the king of Granado remaining vassall to
him of Castile, paying a tribute of 12000. doublons, and Gibraltar should remaine in the
possession of Abomelic, who ioyned to his titles.

During this warre D. Iohn Manuel, and Don Iohn Nugnes de Lara, had conference with
Don Alphonso of Arragon, at the castell of Habib, seeking to draw him to their league,
against D. Alphonso king of Castile his brother-in-law, but they could not preuaile. These,
with other of their faction,Death of D. Fernand heire of Castile. began to ouer-runne the countrie, to take townes and prisoners,
and to do all acts of hostility, in the Realme of Castile. The king hearing of this
spoyle, at the very instant when as he was aduertised of the death of his onely sonne and
heire Don Fernand, in the citty of Toro, was wonderfully afflicted, and therefore inclined
to a truce, as we haue sayd: after which he was visited by king Mahumet in his campe,
whome he receiued kindly, giuing great presents one vnto another. King Mahumet returning
to his army, many that were desirous of innouation, murmured at this interview,
and reproched vnto the king, that he had eaten with a Christian king. Among others Abraham
and Abuceber, sons to Ozmin, (smothering in their brests an hereditarie hatred against
this king, and all his house) made a conspiracie, with such as they knew to be ill affected,
hauing intelligence with Mahomad Alhamar, already mentioned in the conspiracie
against his father: and watching an oportunity to put their wicked desseigne in execution,
seeing him one day attired in a rich roabe which king D. Alphonso had giuen him
they began to detest him, and to rayle of him to all men, saying, that he shewed himselfe
to be base and a coward, and that as he did outwardly carry the badge of a Christian, so
there was no doubt but he was insected within:Mahumet king of Granado murthered by his subiects. with such and the like reasons he incensed
the Moores in generall, so as they slue the king inhumanely with their swords at the entry
of his tent, as he was talking with his Alguazil in the 23. yeare of his age, and of the Arabians
716. hauing raigned in Granado eleuen yeares.


Ioseph the seuenth King of
Granado.
AT the time of this murther committed on the person of a king by his execrable
subiects, from whom they had receiued all good honour; Rodoan, a captaine of
great authoritie, and much fauoured by the deceased king, whose Alguazil he had beene,
was then absent from the armie, but he was soone aduertised of this disaster, wherefore
he went with all the speed he could, not vnto the campe, to pacifie the mutinies which
might rise by reason of this accident, but to the cittie of Granado, wheras king Mahumets
breethren were bred vp, which were two, Farrachen the elder, and Ioseph the yonger, into
whose hands (beeing most affected to him) he would put the scepter of the Granadins, as
he did to the preiudice of the elder, and hauing great authority in the cittie of Granado,
he caused the people to choose Ioseph. The example of which citty was followed by all the
rest of the kingdome, and soone after allowed by Abomelic, King of Algezire, and by Abraham
and Abucebet, the murtherers of king Mahumet, who contemning the truce made
some few daies before with the king of Castile, and wheron they had taken occasion to
murther their Prince, thought to breake it instantly, presuming that the tumult of armes,
and the necessitie of warre would passe ouer their treason with silence, the which in a time
of peace might be punished. Abomelic beeing as desirous of warre, sent Ambassadors to
Granado to this effect: to congratulate the Kings elections, and to perswade him to take
armes, and to go to field. The new king thinking it not conuenient to oppose himselfe to
the desire of the men of warre, for that they were yet mutined with the murther of the
King his brother, committed in the middest of their campe, in hatred of the truce, and
fearing that Ferrachen his elder brother, would easily winne them, if they were discontented,
he suffered himselfe to be perswaded: whereupon he sent his Ambassadors to the
Miralmumin of Maroc, that he might be receiued vnder his protection, the which hee
obtayned.
The King of Castile beeing aduertised of these practises, as hee was readie to dislodge
from Seuile,Castile. to go and suppresse the Rebels, hee was forced to stay there. And

at the same time hauing discouered, that certaine Knights had had a secret Conspiracy
with king Mahumet deceased, to the preiudice of his Crown, he caused one of them called
Diego Sanches de Iaen to be executed at Cordoua, the rest fled into the Moores countrie,Seuerity of the king of Castile, makes many christian Knights fly to the Moores.
of which number were Don Goncalo Lord of Aguilar and Montilla, and his brother
Don Fernand Goncales of Aguilar, who made themselues vassals to the king of Granado,
and by them and others of the same sort, (who were well entertayned by king Ioseph) the
warre was begun; making roades from their Castels of Aguilar, Montilla, Monturgue,
and other forts which were in their hands, agreeing with D. Iohn Manuel, D. Nugno de Lara,
and other rebels, who for their parts committed no lesse excesse in Castile, the which
did much trouble the king Don. Alphonso, fearing aboue all, that the brethren of Aguilar
would deliuer the places which they held, vnto the Moores.
Alboacen king of Maroc was glad of these troubles,Moores. and desired to entertain the reuolts
of Castile, for that he had an intent to go in person into Spaine, with a great power, as
soone as the warre of Tremessen should giue him any leysure, the which notwithstanding
did so trouble him, as he changed his resolution for a time, and was so prest, as hee called
home some of his troupes, which he had sent into Spaine with his son Abomelic: whereupon
he sent him word, that he should seeke by all secret practises to make a truce for himselfe
alone, aduertising him, that if the king of Castiles ambassadors should demand, if he
meant to comprehend King Alboacen his father, hee should answer, that it might bee hee
would accept thereof, if any messengers were sent vnto him. According to these instructions
Abomelic sent Ambassadors to king D. Alphonso being at Seuile, to treat of a truce,
to whom the question was made according to king Alboacens desire,Truce very beneficial for the Moores. and vpon their answer
D. Goncalo Garcia of Gallegos, Alcaide maior of Seuile, was sent to Maroc to vnderstand
king Alboacens will concerning this truce, who answered, that hee would willingly
enter, so as Ioseph the new king of Granado were comprehended: for being vnder his protection,
he could not abandon him, desiring that he might be assured from all troubles,
and moreouer fred from the tribute which hee payed to the king of Castile during this
truce. The Alcaide who had no such commission, aduertised the king his master, who seeing
himselfe annoyed by his owne subiects, was content the king of Granado should bee
comprehended, and that he should not pay any tribute during the truce, the which was
concluded in the beginning of the yeare 1334.1334. to continue foure yeares, causing king Alhoacen
to make his Letters pattents sealed with a seale of gold, and so in like manner did
D. Alphonso king of Castile, Abomelic of Algezire and Ioseph of Granado. This Ioseph called
Aben Amet was the first King of the Moores of Granado, that was exempt from paying
tribute to the kings of Castile in time of peace, through the fauour of the king of Maroc,
and the factions and seditions of Castile.
14 King Don Alphonso beeing thus afflicted betwixt warre and truce,Castile. in the Cittie
of Seuile Donna Loonora of Guzman brought him two sonnes at one birth. Don Henry,
who obtayned the Realme of Castile, as you shall heare, and Don Fredericke who was
Master of the Order of Saint Iames.
About March this yeare 1334. the king went from Seuile, hauing prouided for the
places on the fronters, as it was necessarie, and came to Vailledolit where hauing suddenly
raised an armie, he marched against the Rebels, and hauing taken some places from
them, he came to Lerma, whereas Don Iohn Nugnes de Lara was, for whom he layed many
ambushes, but without effect: wherefore he entred into Biscay, and beeing at Guernica,
a place deputed for the assembly of the Estates of the countrie, vnder a tree, after the
manner of their ancestors, he receiued from them the oath of fealty, and they yeelded
vnto him most of the townes and places of the country: for some held yet for Donna Maria
of Haro their Lady. This beeing done, hee came to Bermeo, and assayled a castell vppon
the sea, called Saint Iohn de la Pegna, two small Leagues from Bermeo: the Garrison
was obstinat in the defence thereof, and would not yeeld: wherefore the king beeing
called away for matters of greater consequence, built certaine small forts about it, and
manned them with souldiers to hinder their going in the comming out, and came
to Logrogno, and from thence to Algoncillo, where hee surprized Don Iohn Alphonso
de Haro, Lord of that place, one of the rebels, whome he caused presently to be slayne,

and did confiscate his goods, except los Cameros, which he gaue vnto his brother: then
returning to Burgos, he beseeged Herrera, a place belonging to Don Iohn Nugnes, who
either wearie of the warre, or distrusting the euent thereof, hee made his peace with the
king, and returned to his seruice.
During this seege Queene Mary was brought in bed of a sonne at Burgos, who was named
Don Pedro heire of the kingdome. The Writers of Arragon say, that this Infant was
supposed by Queene Mary, being iealous that the king her husband did so loue D. Leonora
of Guzman, and that she brought him so many children. The king hauing pacified the
troubles towards Biscay, he marched with his army towards D. Iohn Manuels country, and
beseeged Rojas,Disloyalty of King D. Alphonso. the which was defended by a Gentleman called Diego Gil, in the name of
D. Lope Diaz de Rojas, vassall to Don Iohn Manuel. This Diego Gil, hauing made some resistance,
in the end yeelded, vppon condition to haue their liues saued: notwithstanding
the king condemned him to death, with some others, for that he had resisted against the
Standard royall. And then there was an Edict made: That all Gentlemen holding towns,
castels,Edict against Captaines of places, that did resist the king. or houses of strength, belonging to any Nobleman, knight, or other of the kings
vassals, the king comming thither in person, they should be bound to receiue him, without
any imputation: if not, they should loose their liues: which Decree was afterwards
put in practise vppon the Gouernour of Iscar, who lost his head, for that hee had presumed
to resist the king.
About the end of the yeare, king Don Alphonso came to Atera, a place neere to Calatajub,
where he found Donna Leonora his sister, Queene of Arragon, with whome hauing
treated of certaine affaires, he returned to Vailledolit, where by the negotiation of
certaine Mediators,Accord betwixt the king of Castile and Don Iohn Manuel. an accord was made betwixt him and Don Iohn Manuel, and a peace
throughout all the Realme, which the Spanish Authors attribute to his seueritie against
the Rebels, when hee tooke them, condemning most of them after their deaths: about
the same time Donna Leonora of Guzman was deliuered of a Sonne, whome the
King named Don Fernand: for which cause there were generally great feasts and Ioy, and
at Court there was a stately tourney: where on the one side the knights of the Band did
runne, among the which was the king in a disguised habit.
15 The yeare following 1335.Nauarre there were some alterations towards Nauarre,
which Realme was gouerned by Henry of Solibert, aboue-named, beeing resident in the
Castell of Olite, with three thousand Livres of entertaynment, the places of strength
beeing put by the Estates into the hands of faithfull Knights. The Castels of the riuer,
whereof Arnaud of Leet was Merin or Gouernour, were held by these Captaines following:
At the castell of Cortes, commanded Iohn de Soici.At Herrera, Pero Sanches of Varelo.At Penna Ronde, Pero Ximenes of Funez.At Corell, Pero Sanches of Montagu, sonne to Fortun.At Araciel, Inigo Aznar of Corello.At Sancho Abarca, Mathew Saillant.At Estaca, Garci Perez of Dax.At Valtierra, Geoffrey of Villaribo.At Cadrieta, Goncalo Perez of Gorrocian.At Coparrosso, D. Alphonso of Spaine.At Ablitas, Iohn Martines of Necuessa.At Arguedas, Pero Sanches of Montagu, sonne to Pero.Artaxone was held by the Inhabitants.The Castell of Rade, by Symon Martines of Barasoayn, for
the Heires of Oger of Mauleon, for want of homage.In the Merindad or Iurisdiction of Sanguessa, whereas
Oger of Gramont was Merin, there commanded.
At Saint Care, Iohn Renaut le Chat.At the castell of Murillo, Diego Peres of Esperun.At S. Martin of Vnx, Garci Ximenes of S. Martin.At Vxue, D. Alphonso of Spaine.At Gallipienco, Pedro Arnaud of Vrtuuia.At Casseda, Stephen of Cormelles.At Pegna, Peter of Cuyuero.At the old castell of Sanguessa, Garcy Arnaldes of Espleta.At Petiella in Arragon, D. Martin Fernandes de Saraca.At Pintano, D. Simon de Sotes.At Ongacaria, Helias Martines of Irurozgui.At Leguin, Iohn Martines of Eusa.At Yrurtegui, Martin Garcia of Ollaogui.At Valcarlos, Martin Ynigues of Vrca.At Rochfort, Lobet of Narbays.At Monteyran, Pedro Sanches of Olicaratea.At Rochbrun, Willyam Arnand Durdes.At Guerga, Iohn de Sauain.At Thiebes, Garci Michel of Escayren.At Castell-nouo, Roderigo of Ayuar.At Burgui, Pedro Azuar of Ezcura.At Ysaba, Martin Garcia of Leyun.In the Merindad of Iurisdiction of Pampelone, Fernand
Diaz de villa alta, held the castell of Toloyna.Iohn of Rouceray, that of Aza.Iohn of Bulli, Labraca.Iohn Fernandes of Baguedan, the castell of Oro.Bernard of S. Pelage, that of Falces.Pedro Garcia of Ciraguegui, Carcar.Iohn Botayroa, and Martin Sanches of Villamera, the castle
of Lana.Roger of Alamaina, Andofilla.Corbaran of Leet, Reca.Romieu Martines of Arrornis, Acagra.Alphonso Diaz of Morentiu, Peralta.Diego Sanches of Eulate, Artacona.Iohn Velez of Medrano, the tower of Viana.Diego Lopes of Alsasua, the castell of Toro.Martin Sanches of Azedo, Maragnon.Iohn Moreuant, the castell of la Garde.Renauld of Bourray, the castell of Milagro.Alphonso Perez of Morantiu, the castell of Montjordan*Garci Sanches of Espeleta, Lerin.Ordoniz of Blandiaco, Funes.D. Pedro Ximenes of Mirafuentes, Arcos.Lope Perez of Agnoa, the castell of Miranda.Philip of Coynon, the castell of Belmarques.Sancho Perez of Ladoca, the tower of Mendauia.Michel Remires of Cufia, the castell of Celatambor.Sancho of Licaracu, the castell of Larraga.
Which Captaines of Forts were all entertayned by the King, and enioyed many priuiledges,
according to the lawes and customes of Nauarre. The treatie of marriage continued
still, betwixt the Infant of Nauarre, and D. Pedro heire of Arragon, by D. Pedro de
Luna, Arch-bishop of Sarragossa, D. Pedro Goncales of Morentiu, and other Deputies,
who hauing beene long together in the towne of Cortez, concluded it in the yeare 1334.

The conditions were, that King Philip of Nauarre, should giue in dowry with his
daughter D. Ieanne,Ten thousand pound. a 100000. Sanchots, which were worth so many Liuers turnois,
and for assurance of a future marriage, there were giuen in pawne for Nauarre, Lescar,
Arguedas, Saint Care, Murillo, Gallipenco and Murgui; and for the King of Arragon,
Fayos, Boria, Malona, Campdalijub, Sos and Sauveterre, and the Articles were signed by
the parties with many knights at Daroca. The King of Castille hearing of this alliance,
being iealous and foreseeing that they sought but an occasition of warre, he wrote
vnto the Gouernor, that hee could neuer vnderstand that his subiects had wronged the
Nauarrois, and that if any thing had beene committed which required reparation, hee
was readie to see it done: but the Gouernor giuing a deafe eare to that which hee had
written,VVarre betwixt Nauar and Castille. persisted in his resolution and seized vpon the Monastery of Hitero by force,
being then in the possession of Castille, and had before beene of Nauarre. The King
of Castille seeing the warre to be ineuitable, sent to the King of Arragon, to intreat him
to be a meanes, that his sonne D. Pedro, might not ioyne with the Nauarrois, nor aide
them to annoy Castille. The King of Arragon, beeing verie sicke answered that his
indisposition would not suffer him to thinke of such affaires, and that if his sonne had a
will to fauor the Nauarrois, he could not hinder him, being in that Estate. This answere
beeing made knowne to the Arragonois, they grewe more desirous to ioyne with the
Nauarrois, wherevpon D. Lope de Luna, one of the greatest Noblemen of the Realme,
D. Michel Perez Zapata and Lopes Garcia, accompanied with many other knights, whom
the Infant D. Pedro gaue them, to the number of fiue hundred horse, came to the Gouernor
to Tudele, from whence enting into Castille with the forces of Nauarre, they
made a great spoile, and brought away a great booty, finding not any one to make
head against them: whereof the King of Castille beeing aduertised, hee was much greeued,
giuing the speediest order hee could to man the frontiers: hee sent D. Alphonso Ortiz
Prior of Saint Iohn, to D. Iohn Nugnes de Lara, to the end hee should take vpon him
the charge to defend the country, with such troupes as hee should giue him: but D. Iohn
notwithstanding his reconciliation with the King, would not trust him, keeping himselfe
still in Biscay, and yet the King promised to giue him Maralles and Villalon, with many
other things: wherefore King D. Alphonso made Martin Fernandes Puerto Carrero General
of this warre, and sent with him vnto the frontier D. Diego Lopes de Haro, sonne to
D. Lopes the little, D. Fernand Rodrigues of Villalobos, D. Iohn Garcia Manriques, D. Rodrigo
of Cisneros, D. Pero Nugnes de Guzman, and his brother, Ramir Flores, D. Lopes
Diaz of Almasan, D. Goncalo Ruis Giron, D. Goncalo Ruis Diaca, D. Aluar Rodrigues Daca,
Alphonso Fernandes Cornel, Garsilaso de la Vega, and his brother Goncalo Ruis de la Vega,
Pero Ruis Carilli, Iohn Alphonso of Benauides, D. Rodrigues of Sandoual, Sancho Sanches
de Roias, and many other knights of marke, which did not refuse to march vnder Martin
Fernandes, although there were many amongst them of greater houses, in regard that
hee did represent the person of the Infant D. Pedro of Castille, and had displayed the
standard royall, and was appointed by the King to be his Lieutenant generall; and as the
King sought to make his excuse,Obedience of the Noblemen of Castille to their King and Lord. saying, that hee would gladly his sonne had beene of
age to goe to horse, and that hee would willingly haue made him their leader and general,
they answered, that they would not onely obey Martin Fernandes Puerto Carrero,
whom they knew to bee a worthy knight, seeing hee gaue him them for their Leader,
but any one of lesse qualitie, yea a groome of his stable, if he commaunded it.
The Gouernor of Nauarre beeing aduertised of this army of Castillans, fortefied the
Monastery of Hitero, and sent thether D. Michel Perez Zapata, thinking they would
come and assaile it. The Castillans being all assembled at Alfaro, leauing the Monastery,
marched directly towards Tudele; being discouered, the Arragonois and Nauarrois
sallied forth to incounter them, not caring to attend the returne of Michel Perez, who
had led part of their forces to Hitero.
The Castillans were stronger in horse,Defeat of the Arragonois and Nauarrois by the Castillars. and the place fit to vse them: wherefore beeing
ioyned, although the Nauarrois made great resistance, yet they were put to rout,
and repulst towards the towne, with great slaughter, and the losse of many that were
taken prisoners. And you must vnderstand that neither the Gouernor, not D. Lope

de Luna, were at this charge, but kept themselues in Tudela, so as the army of Arragonois
and Nauarrois were without a head, and were chased euen to the towne gates. The
victorious Castillans returning towards Alfaro, incountred Michel Perez Zapata, with
his troupes, comming from Hitero, who put his men in battaile, by the fauor of a Dich,
the which he defended against his enemies, who were full of fury, after their late victory,
and sought to force it, but many miscarried: yet the multitude of the Castillans preuailed,
and Michel Perez was ouerthrowne, and taken prisoner with many others: if night
had not approcht without doubt (as the Histories say) the Nauarrois and Arragonois,
in this last incounter, had beene all put to the sword.
Thus the Castillans after two victories, returned with many prisoners, and great
spoiles to Alfaro, forbearing for a time to returne into Nauarre, hauing not gotten
these victories without losse. Those that were in the Monastery of Saint Mary of
Hitero, notwithstanding that they were well fortefied, and furnished with victuals, durst
not abide there, so as the Castillans seized thereon, from whence they went to beseege
the Castille of Tudeguen, in the which there was a garrison of Gascons and Nauarrois,
who yeelded the place; beeing perswaded by the faire speeches of a Castillan monke,
who was in the castle with them. The Castillans taking heart by this happy successe
returned afterwards thrice into Nauarre, and spoiled the country, carrying away many
prisoners, and great store of cattaile.
On the other side the people of Guipuscoa,Guipuscoans enemies to the Nauarrois. hearing of the warre, vpon the frontiers
of Castille, Nauarre and Arragon, hauing no commaundement, entred in armes into
Nauarre, vnder the conduct of Lopes Garcia of Lazcano, whom they made their captaine,
spoyling a great part of the country of the iurisdiction of Pampelone; and in the end they
laied seege to the castle of Vnca, which they tooke. The King of Castille aduertised of
these happy exploits, was desirous to stay the course of their victories, fearing least hee
should kindle a warre betwixt France and Spaine, which should not bee easily quencht:
wherefore he commaunded them to containe themselues, and onely to defend the frontiers
of his Kingdome, yea hee ^^lled home most of the captaines and knights, which
were vnder the Infant D. Pedro's Banner, being led by Martin Fernandes Puerto Carrero.
Hee and some others did instantly obey, but Garcilaso de la Vega, and Goncalo Ruis his
brother, made an other roade, with certaine troupes, into Nauarre, about Sosiere, where
they left lamentable markes, burning and spoyling all they found. The newes of these
outrages came into France, which did mooue many kinsmen, friends and subiects of
King Philip to apprehend the spoiles which the Castillans had made in Nauarre,Gaston Earle of Foix the first of that name. among
the which Gaston Lord of Bearne, and Earle of Foix made hast to passe the mountaines,
with many souldiers, Bearnois and Gascons, and hauing taken view of his troupes at Viane,
which is a league from Logrogno, he entred into Castille, where hee made the like
spoile as the Castillans had done in Nauarre, and then came and camped before Logrogno,
the Inhabitants whereof sallied forth vpon them, beeing led by a gentleman of
the country called Ruis Diaz of Gaona, but they were repulst into the towne, and pursued
so neere,Defeate of the garrison of Logrogno by the Earle of Foix. as without the valour of Ruis Diaz of Gaona (who with three companions
made head against the enemies, at the entry of the bridge, whilst the rest had recouered
the towne, and assured the Ports) they had entred Pel-mel with them, and taken Logrogno.
This Esquier imploied his life for the preseruation of his country, imitating (but
with lesse happinesse) the example of the Romaine Horatius Cocles, for hee was slaine vpon
the bridge. The Earle of Foix fayling of his hope to take Logrogno by this meanes,
retruned with his men to Viana.
The King of Castille beeing in the meane time aduertised of his comming, had commanded
many companies of foote and horse to march towards the frontiers, meaning
that when they had raised a great army, they should enter into Nauarre, if it were conuenient,
so as it was likely there would bee a dangerous warre betwixt these two mighty
Kingdomes: for it is to bee presumed the French King would haue beene engaged, in
fauour of his cousin Philip King of Nauarre, and not to giue occasion to the Spaniards
to presume to passe so easily ouer the limits wherewith nature had diuided those two nations.
But it was the will of God, that in this heat of their courrages of either side, Iohn

Archbishop of Rheims came into Nauar, going in pilgrimage to Saint Iames of Gallicia,
who seeing this warre begunne betwixt the Nauarrois and the Castillans, for light occasions;
wrote a letter to the King of Castile, admonishing him to harken vnto a peace.
The King who was no lesse desirous then the Archbishop, imbraced this occasion; and
shewing that the reuerence of so great a prelat, made him willing to obey his holy aduertisments,
he sent vnto him Martin Fernandes Puerto Carrero, D. Gil Carillo of Albornoz,
Archdeacon of Calatraua in the church of Toledo, who was afterwards Cardinall.
By the aduice and resolution of which three, with whom was ioyned Fernand Sanches of
Vailledolit, notarie Maior, or Secretary of Castille, who concluded a peace vpon these
conditions.
That there should be peace betwixt Philip King of Nauarre and D. Alphonso King of
Castile,Peace betwixt Nauarre and Castile. their vassals and subiects, and a cessation of armes for a certaine time. That
foure commissioners should bee named, two for Nauarre, and two for Castile, for the restablishment
and restitution of what had beene taken of either part, and for the reparation
of any thing that should bee committed to the preiudice of this accord. That the
Monastery of Santa Maria of Hitero, should be restored to the Monkes, who should remaine
Neuters, vntill it were decided to what iurisdiction it did belong: to the end the
diuine seruice should not be interrupted, nor they any waies molested by the Nauarrois
or Castillans. That the castles of Tudeguen and Vrsa should remaine in the possession
of the King of Castile, vntil their differences were decided, and a definitiue sentence giuen.
That in regard of the propriety of the Monastery of Hitero, there should bee arbitrators
chosen, a Nauarrois, a Castillan and a Cardinal of Rome, who should bee agreeable
to both parties, to iudge thereof, and in the meane time all quarrels should
cease betwixt the two realmes, Kings and subiects. These Articles beeing concluded,
they were afterwards confirmed by the two Kings.
16 During these warres of the King of Castille against the Moores and his Rebels,Arragon.
and against Nauarre, the realme of Arragon was troubled with the quarrels and hatred
of the Queene D. Leonor against the Infant D. Pedro her sonne in law, shewing herselfe
in all shee could, a right mother in law. Wherein shee was the more to bee feared, for
that she did gouerne the King D. Alphonso her husband at her pleasure, and did worke in
him what impressions she would, so as many times the Infant was in great danger, which
he did afterwards reuenge. Besides these intestine iarres, the King of Arragon was much
troubled which the continual rebellions of the Sardiniens,Sardinien turbulent. and their Lords, who were
for the most part Geneuois, but hee wrought so by his wisdome, and dilligence, as without
sing any force, but in extremity, he reduced most of them to his deuotion. Francis d'
Orta sonne to Leonard, as well in his owne name, as of Alion, Marian Fabian Dignamin,
and Nicholas of Oria, came and did homage to the King, and obtained pardon, and
confirmation of all the Lands which they did hold in Sardinia; vpon condition that
they should not giue any aide nor fauour to the rebels and banished men of the towne
of Sassari, where notwithstanding the King granted a repeale for such as had beene condemned
of light crimes, but those of the families of the Cathons, Pali and d' Oria, who
had beene condemned of high treason, by D. Berenger of Carosso, were banished the
Island for euer. This nation of the Sardes was so prompt to reuolt, as notwithstanding
any prouision the King of Arragon could make, and all accords and treaties, hee was
constrained to be watchful,Geneuois of the Ghibeline faction against the Arragonois in Sardinia. with care, and exeeding great charge. Ayton of Oria hauing
rigged out nine gallies, and some other Genouay ships of the Ghibeline faction, remayning
at Sauonne, houering about the Island of Sardinia, surprized neere vnto Cap de
Terre, nine ships of Cattelogna, and sunke them, and so passing on he terrified all the Arragonois
in the Island, and held the fort of Cailleri as it were beseeged for a time, which
made all the Sardiniens in a manner to rebel: wherevpon D. Alphonso King of Arragon
sent D. Raymond of Cardona thether, a captaine of great experience, and made him Lieutenant
general of that Island.
These things past in the yeere of our Lord 1330. about the time that the Moores did
inuade the realme of Murcia, of the which wee haue treated, at which time the Infant D.
Pedro Earl of Ribagorca and Ampurias, the Kings brother married Ieanne sister to Gaston

Earle of Foix, the first of that name, and daughter to Roger Bernard.
The Cattelans enemies irreconciliable to the Geneuois, and newly incensed by the
losses which they had receiued by the army of Ayton d' Oria, who after that he had spoiled
all that he found of the Arragonois faction vpon the bankes of Sardinia, retired into
Corsica, to the Port of Boniface; they drew out of their Ports and Hauens of Cattelogne
about forty Gallies,Cattelans burne and spoile the riuer of Genoa. and thirty Foists and Brigantins, and directing their course towards
the riuer of Genoa, they burnt al the Geneuois houses of pleasure, without respect of
friend or foe: for the common weale of Genoa being then diuided, by reason of the
faction of Guelphes and Ghibelins; the Ghibilins open enemies to the King of Arragon
did for the most reside at Sauonne, and from thence made their sallies and enterprises;
sometimes drawing some priuate men of the Guelphes faction, to runne vpon
the Cattelans, by reason whereof this Cattelan army intreated them all after one
manner.
During these wrackes, Luke of Fiesco one of the chiefe of the Guelphes faction, had
begunne to treat with King D. Alphonso, by the meanes of Francis of Saint Eulalia, that
if he would harken to a good accord with the Geneuois, holding the city of Genoa for
friend, and forget al wrongs done, they would furnish him with fifteene gallies, and follow
his standard against the Geneuois Ghibelins remayning at Sauonne, who had caused
all the reuolts and troubles in Sardinia, wherewith the King was very well pleased: but
the spoiles which the Cattelan army had made during the treaty in the riuer of Genoa
intercepted all; so as these two factions of Genoa, being equally afflicted by a forraine
enemy, were the more willing to giue credit to the perswasions of Robert King of Naples,
who reconciled them, and then they ioyned against the King of Arragon, to dispossesse
him of the Island of Sardinia. The heads of the two factions, were the families of Oria
for the Guelphes,Genouois spoile the coast of Cattelogne. and Spinola for the Ghibelins. Beeing thus incensed they runne
along the coast of Cattelogne, with three score saile, where they tooke many ships and
other spoiles, leauing lamentable spectacles in all places where they had landed. Thirteene
of their gallies passing from thence into Sardinia, attempted the fort and Port of
Caillerij in vaine, from whence they were repulst with losse. These warres at sea,
betwixt the Cattelans and Geneuois might bee held equall, for they were the mightiest
nations at sea in that age. All was full of difficultie, and iealousie in the Island,
notwithstanding that King Don Alphonso, by his bountie, aduancements, alliances
and marriages contracted in his fauour, and at his instance betwixt the Noblemen
Cattelans, and Sardiniens, or Geneuois (hauing charges or lands in the Island) had
sought to draw them vnto him, and to make them friends, and affected to his party: yet
he was in continuall warre, and was forced to keepe great garrisons in the Island, and
many gallies at sea with so great charge, as all the reuenues of the Island of Sardinia
did auaile him little: beeing often constayned to importune the Pope, to discharge
him of the tribute, which hee ought vnto the church of Rome, by reason of this chargeable
conquest.
Thus King Don Alphonso past his raigne in these home-bred and forraine troubles,Mary of Naples Queene of Maiorca vnchast.
beeing but short. A little before hee died Don Iames of Arragon, Lord of Xerica, who
had married Queene Marie, which had beene left by D. Sancho King of Majorca, who liuing
dissolutly and vnchastly, was by this king sent home to the king of Naples her father.
The peace betwixt Arragon and Granado was sworne by him and confirmed at the
castle of Valence, with Albuhacen, Abencomixe and Pascal Circra, Ambassadors for King
Ioseph Abenamet, vpon the like conditions, as with Castille. A little before his death, D.
Leonor seeing herselfe mother of two sonnes, D. Fernand and D. Iohn, who was yet in his
swatheling cloathes, to be much hated (and not without cause) of the Infant D. Pedro,
who should succeed to the crowne, shee sought to put into the hands of the King of
Castille, her brother (whose fauour shee affected) the castels of Verdegio and Sometio
frontier places; but Don Pedro hauing alwaies an eye to his mother in lawes actions,
especially at that time, the King beeing very ill disposed, preuented her, and put
garrisons therein. The Queene without attending the King her husbands death, dislodged
from Barcelona, and seized vpon Fraga, from whence shee sent garrisons

to places belonging to her children.Death of D. Alphonso the fourth King of Arragon. In the meane time the King died in the city of Barcelona
in the yeere of our Lord 1336. hauing raigned eight yeeres, and about three
monthes. Being ready to die, he made the marriage of D. Iames his second sonne with
Cicile daughter to the Earle of Comminges: his body lies in the town of Lerida.


D. Pedro the fourth of that name, and the
thirteenth of Arragon.
17 DOn Pedro his sonne, whom he had by D. Theresa of Entenza Countesse of Vrgel,
before that he assembled the Estates, or performed any ceremony, tooke vpon
him the royal title, against all custome, affecting nothing more then to bee first reuenged
of the Queene Donna Leonor his mother in law, whose places he seized on, and sent Ferry
of Apilla, Gouernor to the Infant D. Iames after her, to bring her to Sarragossa: but
hearing of the Kings death, she tooke the way to Castile, by great iournies, and past Ebro
at Tortose, then going by Turol and Albarrasin, she came into her brothers country,
being accompanied by the Bishop of Burgos, and D. Pedro of Xerica, carrying great store
of treasure and iewels with her, which bread a warre betwixt these two Realmes of Castille
and Arragon. D. Alphonso King of Castille, in fauour of his sister, deliuered Michel
Perex Zapate, and other Arragonois out of prison, whom she imployed against the King
D. Pedro, with other noblemen, whom she had wonne.
D. Pedro the fourth of that name, was surnamed the ceremonious, for that in all his
actions he was very slow, and spent the time in superfluous ceremonies. He was crowned
at Sarragossa, not without emulation of the Cattelans; but custome hath giuen
this right to the city of Sarragossa, that the Kings are crowned there, and no where else.
Th^ther came not any Noblemen of Cattelogne, except D. Othon of Moncade, and D.
Raymond of Peralte. The King hauing taken and receiued the oth after the accustomed
manner, retired to Lerida, to the Estates of Cattelogne: where hee disanulled all the donations
made by the King his father, and the alienation of the reuenues, and despoiled D.
Pedro of Xerica (who had accompanied the Queene Donna Leonor into Castille) of all
his goods.
In the beginning of his raigne,Disp^sition of the King D. Frederics wil. died D. Frederic King of Sicile, beeing very old and
consumed with the goute, who had held the realme with great troubles and warre the
space of one and forty yeers, and six monthes, leauing his sonne D. Pedro to succeed him,
who was the fourth King of the race of Arragon, which held Sicile. The King his father
leauing many children, sonnes and daughters, by Queene Leonor his wife, by his will excluded
the daughters from the succession of Sicile, ordayning that if in his posterity the
males should faile, the Realme should bee vnited to that of Arragon. Wee haue sayd
before that D. Pedro King of Arragon, had promised to marry D. Ieanne the eldest daughter
of Nauarre,Treaty of marriage betwixt D. Pedro King of Arragon, and D. Maria of Nauarre. but this marriage tooke no effect: for hee did more affect Mary the second
daughter of King Philip, procuring him and Queene Ieanne to yeeld therevnto:
wherefore he sent for his Ambassadors into France, Iohn Sanches of Marojal, Chamberlaine
of the great church of Sarragossa, and Garcia Loris, a knight, who in his name concluded
a marriage at Anet, with the Infant Mary, who was not yet twelue yeeres old:
and it was accorded by the matrimonial contract, that for want of heires male of King
Philip, and Queene Ieanne his wife, Mary the second daughter should inherit the realme
of Nauarre, and not the elder. The King and Queene of Nauarre, did binde themselues
to giue her in dowry three score thousand Sanchots; and for assurance of this marriage,
there were giuen in deposito by King Philip the castles of Arguedas, Saint
Cara, Estacha, Murillo, Gallipenco, and Burgui; and for the King of Arragon, Sos, los
Fayos, Borja, Saluatierra, Malon and Campdalijub, which places were put into the
hands of certaine gentlemen, to be deliuered to any of these Princes, to whose preiudice
the accord had beene broken. The King of Arragon assigned Tarracone, Iacca and
Teruel, for his wiues ioynter: and it was agreed that the Princesse should bee deliuered



vnto the Inhabitants of Tudele, within a certaine time, and there kept by them; to bee
deliuered vnto her spouse, being full twelue yeeres old: and moreouer, as at the reception
of King Philip, it had beene capitulated that the first sonne borne of Queene Ieane
his wife, beeing come to the age of twenty yeeres, they should deliuer him the realme
to gouerne, and that the Estates should bee bound to pay him a hundred thousand Sanchots;
in like manner, if Donna Maria, the future Queene of Arragon, should come to
the succession of the Realme of Nauarre, the Estates should bee bound to pay him the
like sum of money: These were the principal Articles of this marriage, which was soone
after accomplished.
In the yeere of our Lord 1337,An. 1337. the King D. Pedro being come to Valence, he sent Bernard
of Villaragut, Arnaud Morera, and Azbert Caliaza Ambassadors to the Pope, to
doe him homage for the Islands of Corsica, and Sardinia: In this last the Estate was
then somewhat quiet: for Azon and Iohn, Marquisses of Malespine, sonnes to Opicin,
Damian Bernabas, and Brancaleon d' Oria, Earles of Donoratico, the townes left vnto the
Pisans, demanteled, and without any munition, Peter Iuge of Arborea, with Murian and
Iohn his brethren, all holding lands, and beeing subiects in the Island, conteined themselues
in the friendship of the new King of Arragon, and did willingly acknowledge him
for their superior. The rest of the family of Oria, for a wrong newly receiued from Raymond
of Cardona, had beene forcebly drawne vnto it: who notwithstanding by the intercession
of the Pope, and the Kings of France, and Sicile, had beene receiued into sauour,
and restored to their goods. Such was the Estate of Arragon, at D. Pedro comming
to the crowne.
18 D. Alphonso King of Castille hauing made a peace with the Nauarrois,Castille. found
himselfe freed of a great care, beeing ready to fall into new broiles by the practises of his
owne subiects. This Prince thinking to raigne more securely, had taken a course of extreame
seuerity, shewing himselfe cruel and treacherous to his Nobility, whereby hee
was feared,Cruelty makes Kings to bee feared, but withal they loose the loue of their subiects. but withall he lost the loue and respect of his subiects: so as he was no sooner
freed from one daunger, but hee fell into an other, worse then the first: wherefore this
distrust lying smothered in the heart of D. Iohn Manuel, D. Iohn Nugnes de Lara, D. Pero
Fernandes de Castro, D. Iohn Alphonso of Albuquerque, and others, reconciled heretofore
vnto the King by necessity, rather then of their owne free will, they held a Maxime,
That a tyrant being offended, will at some time reuenge himselfe; and therefore they
must not trust him,A Tyrant offended is neuer truly reconciled. vpon any reconciliation, who to pacefie the troubles which had
growne by his owne error, had made no difficulty to sacrifize (vpon the peoples spleene)
his owne Mignons: degrading, and in the end murthering, and condemning them as
traitors, after their death, yea the Princes of his owne bloud, rapting their goods and
Estates, and depriuing the lawfull heires: seeking to raigne ouer free men, and of generous
spirits, as ouer beasts, intreating them as base and effeminate slaues, who might
not speake their opinions freely, in matters of state and gouernment; of the which they
were held dead members, and without feeling: wherefore if they were men, hauing vnderstanding
and reason, they should neuer forget the nature of D. Alphonso, who was
proud, a contemner of all law, and treacherous: yea they proceeded so farre, as Don
Iohn Manuel withdrew himselfe from the subiection of King D. Alphonso, by protestation
and publike act.
The Noblemen beeing thus ill affected to their King,VVarre in Castille made by the rebels. they made a league (during the
warre of Nauarre) with D. Alphonso King of Portugall, and did incense him to take
armes for their defence, but their attempts had no better successe then the precedent,
for D. Alphonso King of Castille, meaning to preuent these disorders, gaue commendement
throughout all the Prouinces of his Realme, to suppresse all those that should
take armes without his priuity and warrant, seeking by all meanes to keepe the
Rebelles diuided one from an other. Moreouer hauing some fealing, that cruelty
was to violent a remedie for men that were nobly borne, hee sought by all milde and
courteous meanes to diuide them, and to draw some of them vnto his seruice; the
which he effected with D. Pero Fernandes de Castro, and D. Iohn Alphonso of Alburquerque,
who abandoned their companions.

And not able to doe the like with the rest, he went in person to beseege D. Iohn Nugnes
Lara,
being in Lerma, and gaue order that in other parts of the Realme they should
seize vpon the houses and persons of other rebels, beseeging and forcing them if they
made resistance:VVarre made by Portugal against Castile. and aboue al he sent against D. Iohn Manuel, the orders of holy knights.
The seege being before Lerma, there were many skirmishes and furious incounters:
wherevpon the King of Portugall tooke occasion to declare himselfe, sending word
vnto the King of Castile, that he should leaue D. Iohn Nugnes de Lara in peace, who
(he sayd) was his vassal, where of the King of Castile made no great esteeme, but continued
his seege more violent then before: some authors say that the King of Castile, had
a desire to repudiat his lawful wife Donna Maria, who was daughter to D. Alphonso King
of Portugal, and to marry D. Leonara de Guzman, his concubine, and that it was the true
cause of their hatred. D. Iohn Manuel going secretly out of the castle of Garci Nugnes,
he came to Pegnafiel to fauor them that were beseeged within Lerma. In the meane
time the tower of Lobaton and Soto were taken by the Kings men, where some Knights
being taken, they were condemned and put to death.
The King of Portugall thinking hee had iust cause to enter in hostil manner into
Castile, hee beseeged Badajos: which seege continued, vntill that D. Pero Alphonso de
Sosa a Portugall, was defeated, with his troupes, by the garrisons and people of Andalusie
and Extremadura, neere vnto Villanoua of Barca Rotta, where many Portugals of
account beeing slaine, the King was forced to raise his seege. They of Lerma seeing
themselues battred with great obstinacy, beganne to distrust their owne strength,
and were out of hope of any succours, wherefore they sought meanes how to let D.
Iohn Nugnes de Lara escape by night; least hee should fall into the King of Castiles
hands, who was much incensed, but all passage were so stopt as hee could not possibly
get out, so as in the end hee was forced to compound, yeelding himselfe, with
the forts of Biscay, vpon condition that hee should haue his life saued, the which was
promised him and kept. The townes of Lerma, Busto and Villafranca in the mountaines
of Oca, were demanteled, and the forts of Biscay deliuered into the Kings hands,
for an assurance of Don Iohn Nugnes faith, hauing promised and sworne neuer to leaue
his seruice, who followed the court at Vailledolit, and was afterwards much honored by
the King, who besides other dignities made him chiefe standard-bearer of the Realme,
and in the end he recouered al that had beene taken from him.
D. Iohn Manuel seeing this,Arragon. retired himselfe into Arragon, where there were great
broiles betwixt the King D. Pedro, and D. Leonora his mother in law, and her partisans:
for D. Pedro of Xerica, whose lands the King had taken away, was in armes, with Diego
Lopes of Haro, Iohn Martin of Leua, Lope Diaz Rogio and other Commanders, beeing
sent by the King of Castile, who assisted them with men, money and councell: and to
conferre of these quarrels, hee and his sister Donna Leonora met at Ayllon, whereas shee
made great complaints of the King D. Pedro, who had chased her out of Arragon, and
spoiled both her and her children.
The King of Castile desyring to bee reuenged of the King of Portugall,Castile and Portugal. hee marched
towardes Badajos, where vpon the way hee was aduertised that Donna Leonora de
Guzman was deliuered of a sonne, the which hee caused to bee named Don Tello,An. 1337.
this was in the yeere of our Lord 1337. Donna Beatrix his aunte, Queene of Portugall,
came vnto him at Badajos, intreating him for to pardon the Portugalles, and
not to enter in hostile manner into the countrie, promising to finde meanes to reconcile
all quarrels betwixt her sonne and him, and that all reasonable satisfaction
should bee made.
Her praiers were reiected, and hee marched with his army towards the towne of Yelbes,
where hee cut vp the Vignes and Oliue trees, and spoiled all there abouts, then hee
past by Ronches and Beros,King of Castile inuades Portugal with an army. and returned to Chelles and Oliuencia, desyring much to
incounter the Portugal army, the which hee knew to bee in field, but it marched an other
way. Don Alphonso Ieoffres Tenorio, Admirall of Castille, defeated the Portugal
army at sea, beeing commanded by Manuel Pecagno a Geneuois, and carried away the
Admirall prisoner, yet not without losse of some of his ships and men.

This was the first attempt of Castile against Portugal, the which was staied by the
Kings sicknesse, wherevpon he caused himself to be carried to Seuile, and put his army into
garrisons: but being soone recouered, he gathered his forces againe togither, and entred
into the country of Algarbe (notwithstanding that the great master of Rhodes, by
commission from Pope Benedict the eleuenth, had exhorted him to desist from this war:
and in like manner the Archbishop of Rheims, who was then Ambassador in Castile for
the French King) he past the riuer of Guadiana, and came to Ayamont, which finding abandoned,
he repast at Castromarin, the which was wel fortefied, so as he would not stay,
but marcht towards Tabira, where he burnt the trees, and razed the farme houses there
abouts, and then he returned into Castile by Alcautin. Whilest he wasted the country of
Algarbe in Porgutal, the King of Portugal did the like in Gallica, and beseeged Saluatierra,
who although he tooke it not, yet hee spoiled a great country, and left it desoalte, by
reason of the couardize of Don Pero Fernandes, who was Gouernor in these parts,
who would neuer shew himselfe to make head against the King of Portugall, for
that hee had beene bread vp a Page in his court: wherefore the Portugall army hauing
spoiled the countrie of Galicia at their pleasures, they returned without any incounter.
The Moores were ioyfull spectators of these warres betwixt the father in law and son,
so as they did strictly entertaine the truce which they had made with the King of Castile:
and for the better confirmation thereof, there came a great Ambassage into Castile,
from Albohacen the Miralmumin of Maroc, the chiefe whereof were two Alfaquins
or Doctors of Mahumets sect, of great reputatoin, who presented vnto King D. Alphonso
Barbary horses, rich swords, cloath of gold and of precious silke, Ostriges, Falcons
and other beasts, who hauing receiued an honourable reward, and obtained confirmation
of the truce, with reparation of some excesse which had beene committed amongst
the garrisons of the frontiers, they rturned well satisfied, but soone after the Moore
changed aduice and councell, hearing (to their great griefe) that there had beene a truce
concluded betwixt the two Kings of Castile and Porgual. This truce was treated and
made by the diligence of the great Maister of Rhodes, and the Archbishop of Rheims
Ambassador for France, it was concluded with the King of Castile in the towne of Merida,
about the end of the yeere 1337. or in the beginning of the next.
During this was betwixt Castile and Portugal, D. Ximenes de Luna Archbishop of
Toledo died,Death of Ximene de Luna Archbishop of Toledo. in whose place the Chapter did choose (but through the Kings fauour, who
had written) D. Gil Aluares of Cuenca, otherwise called D. Gil Carrillo of Alboronza
councellor of Estate to King D. Alphonso, and Archdeacon of Calatraua, in the same
church, a man of great vertue amongst the Spaniards, who for his wisdome and iudgement,
did in time merit to be a Cardinal of Rome, with the title of Saint Clement, Bishop
of Sabina, and Apostolike Legat in Italy, the Romaine Sea beeing then resident in Auignon.
During which dignity he did many things for the good of the church: and amongst
other monuments and testimonies which remaine of him at this day, there is the
Colledge of Saint Clement in the city of Bolonia, the which they commonly call the
Colledge of Spaine, the which was built by the executors of this Prelat, who did so appoint
it.Colledge of Clement at Bolonia. It hath aboue three thousand ducats of rent, with the which there are thirty
students entertained, whereof twenty be Lawiers, six Diuins and foure Phisitions, besides
foure Chaplains, al Spaniards, except one who may be a Portugal. The Rector of this
Colledge hath ciuil and criminal iurisdiction, and is not subiect to the Legat, nor to any
other Magistrat of the city, the Colledge enioying as ample preuiledges as any knights
or gentlemen there. About the end of the yeere 1337. was founded the towne of Algria
of Dulanci, two Leagues from Victoria, in the Prouince of Alaua, of many villages
there about, the which obtained from the King the preuiledges, and lawes of the Realme,
whereby the Inhabitants should gouerne themselues, and market euery Monday, with
liberty to choose their owne Iudges.
In the yeere of our Lord 1338. D. Pedro King of Arragon, married D. Maria, second
daughter to King Philip,Arragon. and to Queene Iean of Nauar, in the towne of Alagon, the Bishop
of Chaalons doing the ceremony,An. 1338. hauing accompanied the Queen-mother to the

Bride, who came alone to this marriage, without her husband Philip, being ingaged in
those cruel and bloudy warres betwixt the French and English; contending for the
crowne of France. Pope Benedict the eleuenth,Marriage betwixt D. Pedro King of Arragon and D. Mary the yonger of Nauar. then raigning, dispensed with the married
couple for the bond of consanguinity, which was betwixt them, at the request of
Philip of Valois, the French King: from Alagon the new Quene was conducted to
Sarragossa, whereas the feast and pompe was ended, for the which they had prepared
long before in that cittie, beeing chosen for the celebration of this marriage: but
the indisposition of D. Ieane Queene of Nauarre, was the cause that they were married
at Alagon,
19 The newes of a truce betwixt the Kings of Castille and Portugal,Moores, beeing vnderstood
at Granado, and from thence sent to Maroc; at such time as King Albohacen had
surmounted all warres and difficulties in Affrike, these Moorish Kings had a desire to
fill Spaine with fire and murther, beeing thrust on by two contrary passions, the one of
feare, to be first set vpon by the King of Castille, who was now freed from his intestine
wars: the other of hope, that their armes should be as successful against the Christians of
Europe, as they had beene against the babarous Affricans: for King Albohacen hauing
not long before called troupes out of Spaine, which had followed Abomelic his soone,
lying then idle on this side the seas, whereas al was quiet: and beeing assisted by the
forces of Granado, sent into Affrike by King Ioseph, hee had lately depriued Botexesin,
who raigned in Tremessen, both of Kingdome and life, and had vnited vnto his crowne
the Realme of Sojumenca: so as beeing growne as haughty in courage, as powerful in
Siegneuries and subiects, he had no lesse conceptions, then to restore the ancient glorie
of the Miralmumins his Predecessors in Spaine, and wholy to expell the Christians.
Besides the respect of religion did much incourage him, holding it not onely honourable,Expedition of Moores into Spaine.
but also conscientious, to aduance Mahumets sect by armes, according to his Doctrine:
wherefore hauing by the aduice of his Alfaquins and Alcaides concluded this
warre, hee beganne to giue order that his troupes should march towards the Straight,
and passe by little and little to Algezire, and other places of Granado, making a Magazin
for victuals, armes, engins and other munition for the warre, at Tanger; where of the
Christian Princes were presently aduertised by their Gouernors of sorts vpon that frontier,
and of King Abomelics passage and returne into Spaine, and of the preparations
which both he and Ioseph King of Grando made: infallible arguments that they would
soone make open warres, as it happened in the beginning of the yeere 1338. D. Alphonso
King of Castile seeing this burthen ready to fall vpon him, fore cast all meanes how
to beare it: hee made Orders and taxes vpon victuals, and cut off the Spaniards superfluities
in apparels and other pompes: hee sent his sea-army into the Straights, to stop
the Moores passage: hee obtained from Pope Benedict pardons and Indulgences for
all those that should contribute to this warre: hee assigned places for the souldiers Rendezvous:
hee leauied footmen, artisans and pioners: and in generall hee prouided for
all things which hee thought necessarie for the warres: but aboue all hee pacefied the
troubles growne betwixt D. Pedro King of Arragon, and Donna Leonora his Mother in
law. In all which businesses, the Archbishop of Rheims, Ambassador for France in Castile,
laboured with great affection, and to the end there should bee nothing defectiue
for the wel gouerning of the common weale, the Prelats and Masters of the Orders made
diligent search among them that were their suffragans and dependants: so as D. Ruis Peres
Maister of the Order of Alcantara was deposed by D. Iohn Nugnes master of Calatraua,
who had iurisdiction ouer him, and power to doe it. Yet amidest al these Cares,
the King did not forget the loue of D. Leonora of Guzman, whose brother called Don
Alphonso Melendez of Guzman, was by him made maister of the Order of the holy
knights of Saints Iames.An. 1339. The yeere 1339. beeing come, hee went towards Seuile, where
was the Rendezvous, for all his troupes, both horse and foote, so as hauing in few daies
gathered together a great and well ordred army, hee entred the territories of Antequera
and Archidona, the which he spoiled running vp to Ronda, fro^ whence he was forced to
retire to Seuile for want of victuals, where he spent the rest of the spring to distribute the
forts and places vpon the frontiers vnto captaines, making D. Gonzales Nugno, or as others

say, Martinez Miaster of Alcantara (newely elect) Gouernor and his Lieutenant generall
there, and hee himselfe came to Madrid. The Moores incensed at this entry which
the Christian army had made into their country, went to field by two seueral waies, the
Infant Abomelic (who had great numbers of light horse) by Medina Sidonia, whose teritory
he spoiled, and Ioseph King of Granado entred by Silos, which place belnging vnto
the knights of Saints Iames and well manned, hee beseeged, and battred furiously, but
it was not onely brauely defended by the garrison but their campe was assaulted by the
Castillan army,Moores raised from the siege of Silos. and they forced to dislodge by D. Alphonso Melendez de Guzman who
was the Leader, not without great dishonor and losse to the King of the Moores: who at
the same time was stript fo the victuals ofhis army, which he caused to bee conducted to
Priegos, by the Gouernor D. Gonzale Martines, who carried the prey to Alcaudette.
The gallies of Castille being ioyned to them of Arragon, held King Abomelic as it were
beseeged in Algezire, lying in the straight; taking from him all hope of succours, either
of men or victuals from Affrike: wherevpon the Moores beeing aduertised that in Lebrixa
was one of the store-houses for he Christian army, thought they might well surprise
it: wherevpon they sent about one thousand fiue hundred horse among the Oliue
trees of Xeres (where they tooke a great booty) but they fou^d that D. Fernand Puerto Carrero,
gouernor of Tariffe, was entred a little before with a good number of souldiars;
wherefore their defeigne beeing disapointed, they turned towards Arcos, where they
spoiled, and carried away great store of cattaile, whereof the Inhabitants within Seuile
being aduertised, they went with their city standard to field, and beeing ioyned to the
Maister of Alcantara, to D. Aluar Perez of Guzman, to D. Pero Ponce of Leon (who
went out of Arcos) and others, they came and incountred these forragers vnlooked for,
whom they charged so furiously, as they put them to rout, and recouered all the prey.
King Abomelic continuing the spoile about Xeres, marcht with three thousand and fiue
hundred horse which he had reserued, and a great number of foot towards Alcala de los
Ganzules, and beseeged it, beeing ignorant of the defeat of his men. The victorious
Christians, hauing ioyned with Fernand Goncales d' Aguilar, who had some horse, and
being also fortefied by them of Eccia, marcht that way, and charged this army of Moores
with such fury,Moores defeated. as they put them to flight, and chasing and killing them they pursued
them far, his campe remayning in great confusion and disorder. King Abomelic being
hastely pursued, had no meanes to get to horse, but fell amongst the footmen, who fled
and were hardly followed: so as in the end, not to be knowne, hee cast himselfe amongst
those which lay vpon the ground slaine or wounded, where a Christian souldiar passing
by and not knowing him thrust him through with his sword,Abomelic a Moorish King slaine. whereof hee died soone after.
The Christians (as some write were not aboue 2000. horse, and two thousand fiue
hundred foote; who without any great losse, slue ten thousand Moores in this surprize
and pursute: they spoiled theri campe, and tooke their baggage which was great, and so
returned ioyfully to Xeres. The Kings body was afterwards found, neere vnto a brooke
whether he had crept (as it was likely) to quench the burning thirst, which doth commonly
afflict such as are wounded, hauing lost much bloud. King Albohacen his father being
aduertised of this pittifull accident, was inflamed with wrath, and desire of reueng, makeing
al possible speed to passe into Spaine.
Whilest that hee prepares himselfe,Castile. there fell out a great disorder in Andalusia, by
the meanes of D. Leonora of Guzman. This woman who gouerned the King, made reports
and accused D. Gonzal Nugnes Maister of Alcantara, of certaine matters, the which
did much incense the King;Troubles by the report of a woman. wherefore being come to Madrid, hee sent to the Maister to
come presently vnto him. D. Gonzal who was fully aduertised why hee was sent for, and
knowing how dangerous the King was to them hee did not like, obeyed not: but thrust
on by distrust, hee left his seruice, and debauching many of his knights, hee acquainted
himselfe with the Moores, and beganne to make practises in Granado. The King beeing
aduertised of his reuolt, returned sodainely and had meanes (before hee could dislodge)
to beseege him in a towne called Valence, belonging to the Order of Alcantara,
whereas D. Goncale defended himselfe vnto the end, and would neuer harken to any
words or promises whatsoeuer.

In the end, not able to hold it any longer, hee offred to yeeld vnto the Kings mercy,
but it was too late: for the place was forced, and he taken and put to death and his body
condemned and burnt as a Traitor by the Kings sentence. Such as had followed his
party, and held other places yeelded. A man in truth worthy of a more honorable
death, who besides many generous acts, and worthy seruices done vnto the crowne of
Castille, had beene in the two aboue mentioned victories and adorned the Temples of
the towne where he was forced, with the standards and ensignes hee had taken from the
Moores. D. Nugno Chamico was chosen in his place.
Ieoffery Giralbert Admiral of Arragon,Moores. who kept the Sraight with the gallies of Arragon,
being landed vpon the shoare nere to Algezire, had an incounter with the Moores,
by whom he was vanquished, and slaine with an arrow, wherevpon the army returned
into Arragon, that of Castile remayning at the passage, the which consisted onely of
three and thirtie gallies, and some few ships, to weake a force to stoppe the Moores passage
out of Affrike: so as about three thousand Genets past presently into Algezire,
without any let, and beganne to ouerrunne the country about Arcos, Xeres and Medina
Sidonia, gathering together a gret prey: but thinking to put it into Algenire,
they were forced to leaue it by the way, being charged by the horsemen which went out
of Xeres, who slue many vpon the place, amongst which was Boutui, a famous captaine
of the Moores.
King Alhohacen had caused a great number of vessels of al sorts to be made ready, both
in the ports of Spaine and Affrike, meaning to carry into Spaine one of the greatest armies
that euer went out of Affrike, to stop whose passage, King Alphonso was il prouided:
and as he was distrustfull, and of a strange humour, and many times vniust vnto his best
seruants, hee compaline of Don Alphonso Ieoffrey Tenorio his Admiral, saying that
hee slept, and suffred the Moores to passe and repasse at their pleasure,Loyalty ill rewarded makes a good seruant despaire. the which
was not true: for the Admirall did his duety with those few Gallies hee had, and did
often take foists and other vessels which did houer about those coastes, and ships laden
with victuals which came out of Affrike into Spaine: namely from Centa to Algezire;
the which notwithstanding did not satisfie the King, who would exact some great
effect of necessity: wherefore hee thrust the Admirall unto despaire, the which was
verie preiudiciall to that warre.
King Albohacen beeing come to Ceuta in the beginning of the yeere of our Lord
1340.An. 1340. and hauing there gathered together to the number of three score and ten Gallies,
and other vessels to passe his horsemen, victuals, armes, engines and other equipage of
warre, neere to a hundred and foure score sailes, as wel of his owne, as of the Kings of
Granado, hee went with this mighty army towards Spaine, where it was easie to land,
finding no resistance, whereat King D. Alphonso, who was at Seuile was much incensed,
blaming his Admiral incessantly of cowardise and treachery, the which hee took so
greeously, as he resolued rashly to goe and charge the Moores at what price soeuer*
and hauing drawne those few Gallies and Ships he had out of Saint Lucar, into the open
sea, he presented himselfe before Algezire, prouoking the enemie to battaile, who
going out of Algezire and Gibraltar, farre more in number then the Christian Gallies,
there was a fierce and cruel battaile,Defeat of the Castillan army and death of the Admiral. the end whereof was the whole losse of the Castillan
army, whereof there were but fiue gallies saued, the which recouered the neere
port of Tariffe, and some few ships, which escaped by fauour of the winde and current,
sayling, towards Carthagena. The Admirall was slaine in this conflict, saying, that the
King should know he was neither Coward nor Traitor: but it was a rash attempt in him,
to hazard so small a fleete against so great an armie, who should haue considred, that
by the losse of a battaile hee gaue the whole commande of the sea vnto the enemy.
Thus this Admirall thinking to preserue his honor, which hee might well haue warranted
by the reasons of warre, which disallow all great hazards, but in extremity, hee did more
blemish it. This losse which happened to Don Alphonso King of Castille, partly by
his owne bitternesse, and vniust rigour to his faithfull seruant, did much afflict him, so
as hee was forced to seeke speedie meanes to repaire so great a ruine: for the Moores
army insolent of this victory, and knowing that there were no forces at sea able to

make head against them, vaunted that they would beseege Seuile: wherefore the King
of Castille was forced to conuert the true which hee had made with the King of Portugall
to a peace, and to consent that D. Constance Manuel should marry with Don
Pedro Infant of Portugall, whose wife D. Blanche beeing fallne into a Palsey, was put
away by him. By meanes of this peace, and at the instance of the Queene Donna
Maria, daughter to the King of Portugal, hee promised to lend all his shippes of warre
to the King of Castille, the which stayied not long before they arriued at Seuile, when
as the King gaue order to rigge out fifteene gallies of his owne, and twelue ships, of
the which hee gaue the charge vnto Don Alphonso Ortiz Calderon, Prior of Saint Iohn.
In the meane time King Albohacens army past, the Moores Gallies and Ships neuer
ceasing for a long time, to transport horse and foote, victualles and munition for
the warre, which they had prepared, the which was as great and fearefull as any
had beene seene, for hey write in their Histories that this Arabian King had gathered
together all the forces hee could from the shoare of the Westerne Atlantike
sea,Great preparation of war made by King Alboacen against Spaine. vnto Egipt, hauing by the conquest of the Realmes of Tremessen and Sojumenca,
so extended the bounds of his Empire as there was not any King or Potentat in all
the length of Affrike, which was not his subiect, or strictly allied vnto him: so as the
Spanish authors say, that hee brought into Spaine aboue seuenty thousand horse; and
foure hundred thousand foote, the Arabians and Affricans comming from all part vpon
the newes of this great expedition, by the preachings and perswasions of the Alfaquins,
Doctors and Priests of their law, who were sent through out all the regions of
Affrike, by King Alboacen, to the end that such, as spoile and gaine (the common end
of warre) could not mooue, might bee perswaded to take armes for religions cause.
This great multitude of Infidels, were neere fiue monthes in passing, hauing at this
passage, besides the Gallies of Maroc and Granado, those of the Kings of Tunes and
Bugie, whereof hee of Tunes was father in law to Alboacen, and their common landings
were Algezire and Gibraltar.
It behooued King D. Alphonso studie how hee should resist so great a power, the
whihc did wonderfully trouble him: yet beeing a Prince of a great courage, hee prouided
for many things speedely, which were of great importance for the warre. And
doubting that the Moores first attempt would bee against Tariffe, hee manned it with
a good garrison of old souldiars, and gaue the charge thereof to Iohn Alphonso of Benauides,
furnishing the place with all things necessarie to maintaine a seege: wherein
hee was not deceiued, for it was presently inuested by the enemie, King Albacen
beeing in person in the armie. Experience hath often taught, that multitudes giue
no victory; for besides that God will therein shew a testimony, that it is hee alone, without
the force of mans arme, which rayseth and pulles downe Kingdomes and states;
there are so many naturall and humaine reasons, which doe concurre with this point of
religion, as thee is no cause to call it in question. The confusion, disorder, disobedience,
mutinies, hunger, diseases, the infinit carriages and lets of baggage, iealousies betwixt
commanders, and diuersity of nations, the negligence and rash confidence which Kings
ground vpon their great numbers of men,Armies vnprofitable by their too great multitudes. are inseparable mischeefes to great armies, the
which haue most commonly ruined them, but haue alwaies made them vnprofitable and
a burthen, to them that haue lead them. So it happened to King Alboacen in this voiage:
for as soone as hee had landed this infinite multitude of Arabians and other Nations,
presuming that there was not any Christian is Spaine, that would dare to present
himselfe before so great a power, and that hee should presently see himselfe Maister
of all the townes of Andalusia: besides hee thought hee had no cause to feare any impeachment
at sea, the two armies of Castille and Arragon hauing beene defeated:
so as all small vessels of burthen might passe safely from Spaine to Affrike, and furnish
his campe with victualls, if hee should haue any neede, wherevpon hee presently
disarmed all his Gallies and drew them into the Ports, hauing no other
thought but to make warre by land, but it fell out otherwise: for there was not any
pettie place vpon the frontiers of Andalusia but held good: so as being forced to attend
his prouisions for so great an army from Affrike, for that the countrie of Granado

could not supply it, he found himselfe (being at the seege of Tariffe) in great want of victuals,
being easie for the gallies of Castile and Portugal, to spoile all passengers which
brought munition from the ports of Africke into Spaine: wherefore he repented himself
much of this enterprise, and would gladly haue found some meanes to haue retired honorably.
At that time Don Iohn Martines de Leyua arriued at Seuile, returning from Pope Benedict
who kept at Auignon: from whom he brought pardons and full indulgences, to such
as should crosse themselues for this warre against the Infidels, or otherwise employ them
selues or their goods for the aduancement thereof, with an especiall charge and commission
to Don Gil Carillo of Albornoz, Arch-bishop of Toledo, to publish this Croisado,
making him to that end Legate of the Apostolike sea. The army before Tariffe being opprest
with famine, King Alboacen gaue Don Iohn Alphonso of Benauides, the Gouernor, to
vnderstand, that he had some matters to treat of with him for the good of the king his master,
and therefore he should send some vnto him, to conferre with him. The Gouernour
hauing receiued hostages, sent two Gentlemen vnto him: but beeing aduertised at the
same instant that the gallies of Castile and Portugall had beene all cast away by tempest
vppon the coast, so as the sea beeing free, victuals began to come aboundantly from Affrike
vnto the campe: when as these Knights came vnto king Alboacen, hee sayd nothing
of consequence vnto them, but was desirous agiane to continue the warre, sending backe
these messengers, and retiring his hostages. Then did they make a furious batteire, with
all kinds of engines vsuall in those times, against the which the beseeged rampared themselues,
and made a gallant defence. King D. Alphonso hauing called to seuile, the Noblemen
of his Councell, and the chiefe men among his subiects, sitting in his royall throne
with great maiestie, holding in his right hand the sword, wherewith hee had beene girt
in Saint Iames Chruch of Gallicia, when he was made Knight, and in his left hand the
Crowne, wherewith he had beene crowned in the cittie of Bourgos: he spake grauely vnto
them of the present estate of his affaires,D. Alphonsos speech to his Councell. and the danger wherein the Christian realms
of Spaine then were, by the importune malice, and impiety of the Arabians, their ancient
enemies, coniured together at that time from the East vnto the West, to glut their
implacable thirst with the bloud of Spaniards: against whose forces, without all doubt, in
time, Spaine should not be able to resist, many of their best men hauing beene consumed
by the factions and diuisions which had raigned among them, whereby Spaine had wasted
her selfe by her owne armes, and withall the ill successe of his armies at sea, brought
twise to nothing: so as for so dangerous a mischiefe, there was need of an extraordinarie
remedie, the honour of the name of Christians, the Crowne of Castile, and their liberties,
liues, and goods, beeing then in question: wherein he had need of good and faithfull
Councell, and for that cause had called them together, praying God to put into their
harts and vnderstandings, what was fit for the honor and increase of his Crowne, and the
Common-weale. Whereupon many different opinions hauing beene propounded, all in
the end concluded, that they must rayse the seege from before Tariffe: for the effecting
whereof they must find meanes to ioyne the forces of Portugall, Arragon and Castile together
for the which they began presently to giue order. The Queene of Castile got a
promise from Don Alphonso King of Portugall her father, to ayde the king her husband
with all his forces, whereupon there was an enterview of the two kings, at Irumegna, a
towne in Portugall.
The king of Castile sent to encourage them of Tariffe, giuing them hope of speedie
succours: forbidding them expresly not to sally foorth vpon the enemy, for that the losse
of one man did more import them, then an hundred to King Alboacen: he obtained a new
army at sea from the king of Arragon, (the which was commanded by the Prior of Saint
Iohn, who had escaped in the tempest) to ioyne with those few gallies which he had yet
left: and presently after the king of Portugall came in person to Seuile, beeing accompanied
with all the flower of his Nobility, and the best souldiers of his country. The leauied
men in all parts of Spaine both foot and horse, which enrolled themselues for this religious
warre, but especially out of Biscay, Alaua, and Guipuscoa, which bee the best footmen
of Spaine, the which were commanded by Don Pero Nugnes de Gazman, their Lord

Don Iohn Nugnes de Lara, beeing employed in the conduct of the horse. To conclude,
their indeauors were such, as within few dayes there were mustred about Seuile 25000.
foote, and 14000. horse, with which forces the two kings of Castile and Portugal, resolued
to offer battell vnto the enemy which was before Tariffe, beeing farre more mighty
then they, hauing besides the great number of horse and foote which he brought out of
Affricke, ioyned vnto him the forces of Granado, the which consisted of 7000. horse, and
a great multitude of foot. Assoone as the Christian army began to march, Alboacen king
of Maroc, and Ioseph king of Granado, sent Albohamar Infant of Maroc with 2000. horse
to keepe the passage of the riuer of Salado,Skrim^sh at the passage of the riuer Salado which runnes betwixt Pegna du Cerf, and Tariffe,
the which were defeated by a thousand horse and 4000. foot, which the King of Castile
had sent to put themselues into Tariffe, the which they effected happily, after this exploit,
through fauour of the night, the Moorish kings hauing already raised their seege,
burnt thier engines of batterie, and retired their army into a place of aduantage, called Alfaneque.
These troups were the bands of D. Henry and D. Tello, children aduowed of Castile,
the which were led by wise and expert Captaines.
The day after this defeat the two armies presented themselues vppon the bankes of the
riuer of Salado, which the Christian meant to passe, and so they did, but with great resistance
and difficultie: yet Goncalo Ruis de la Vega, and his brother Garciaco, who marched
in the head of the army, assured the passage for the rest, repulsing the Mores, who defended
it valiantly, when as the Christians were all past without breaking, they found the
great squadrons of the Moores in Order, ready to fight, so as in an instant they ioyned,
and were so mingled, as the kings themselues on either side, sparing not their owne persons,
and performing the duties as well of souldiers, as of Generals of armies, were many
times found in danger: and their obstinacie was so great in the fight, as the Arch-bishop
of Toledo was faine (partly by intreaties, and partly by force) to draw the king of Castile
out of the presse, where he had the fore-part of his saddle shot through with an arrow: a
dangerous blow, if it had lighted a little higher, the which might haue made the kingdomes
of Spaine a prey vnto the Mores by the losse of a battell, which doth commonly
follow the death of the Generall. But God disposed otherwise, according to his mercy to
the Christians: for the Moores beeing rather hindred then helped by their multitudes,
gaue way and fled, where as the slaughter was so great, as the number of the dead (as Authors
write) is not credible, but howsoeuer,Defeats memorable of the Moores at Salado. the Christians had an absolute victorie, who
might haue slaine more, and it may be haue extinguished the name of Moores in Spaine,
if they had poursued the disordered enemies, who fled one ouer another, and not busied
themselues at the spoyle, especially the footmen. The camp remayning free to the Christians,
as they gathered the spoyles together, there were found among the dead, one of
the king of Marocs wiues, called Fatima, daughter to the king of Tunes, of the race of
the Almohades, and three other Ladies. Among the prisoners Abohamar sonne to king
Alboacen, and his nephewes Aboham and Alboali, it may be children to Alboali, who had
beene king of Sojumenca, two of the kings daughters, and other Moores of noate. The
Kings of Maroc and Granado escaped by flight, and retired to diuers places. Alboacen apprehending,
that by this defeate his reputation and honour would bee much blemished,
and thereby the fidelitie of his subiects shaken, fearing least a sonne of his called Abderramen,
whom he had left at Maroc, should seaze vppon the kingdome, he past the same
night to Ceuta.
This battell wonne by the Christians the eight and twentith of October, in the yeare
1340. is rightly paralelled to that of Muradal or Tholousa, by the which the Moores lost
the command of Spaine, some 128. yeares before; for thereby the great desseins
of the King of Maroc were disappointed, hauing promised vnto himselfe the conquest
of all Spaine, so as after that time the warre grew more easie and light. This victorie
was honoured and renowned by many religious and ciuill acts among the Spaniards
for besides that during the conflict,Superstitious acknowledgements of so great a victory the name of Saint Iames, (who was held Patron and
Protector of Spaine) did sownd (as they say) in the ayre, and that Don Alphonso Goncales
Pereyra, Prior of S. Iohn, or of Crato in Portugal, had carried with him a peece
or fragment of the true Crosse, and many other such perswasions and inducements

put in practise (according to the doctrine of those times) in the campe, and in all other
places whether that newes came, thankes were giuen vnto God for so great a grace, and
great demonstrations of ioy made throughout all the townes. D. Alphonso King of Castile,
the day after the battell entred into Tariffe, and caused the breaches to bee repayred,
commending and rewarding the Captaines and souldiers which had carried themselues
valiantly in the seege. Hauing afterwards viewed the enemies spoiles, the king of Castile
did distribute it, according to euery mans merits.
The king of Portugall would not haue any thing, but certaine furnitures and caparasons
for horses, and swords richly wrought after the Moresco fashion: but the King of
Castile his sonne-in-law gaue him a prisoner, a Moore of the bloud royall, one of the
sonnes of Alboali, who had beene king of Sojumenca. Thus the two kings, father-in-law,
and sonne-in-law, parted, very well satisfied one of another. To acknowledge the grace
which God had done vnto the Christians, by so great a victorie, the king of Castile took
this course, he sent Iohn Martines de Layua, to Pope Benedict, then residing at Auignon,
with his royall Standard, which had beene carried in the battell, accompanied with foure
and twenty of the chiefe Ensignes which he had taken from the Moores, the which were
borne by so many Moores. Moreouer, he sent him an hundred horse richly appointed,
euery one hauing a sword and a target hanging at his saddle pommell, and were led by so
many Moores. With these horses he sent his owne, on the which hee was mounted the
day of the battell, couered with the royall armes of Castile and Leon: and moreouer, many
rich Iewels, and other singularities, which things were presented vnto the Pope with
great ceremony and pompe, and receiued with no lesse honour and solemnity by the
Pope and Cardinals. And the more to honour this act, the Pope the same day did sing a
pontificall Masse, and did preach, much commending the king of Castile, and to reward
him, he powred foorth his spirituall treasures, granting him store of Indulgences, with
the which Iohn Martines de Leyua returned, beeing well recompenced.
Some Authors write, that the victuallers, carters, pioners, merchants, Lackies, and others
of base quality in the Christians campe, falling vppon the baggage, whilest the souldiers
were in fight, had taken great spoiles of gold, siluer, and other riches, and that the
king being aduertised thereof, was perswaded not to suffer men, which had not beene in
the battell, nor aduentured their liues, to enioy the booties which were due vnto souldiers:
wherefore meaning to follow this aduice, he forced many to bring backe that which
they had taken: but the greater number escaped, who fearing to be dispossest of that which
they had gotten, beeing all their fortunes, left Castile, and went into Nauarre, Arragon,
France and other countries, with such store of doubl duckets, as the price of gold was
fallen a sixt part, and all merchandize much risen.
20 In this warre were furnished twenty gallies of Cattelogne,Arragon. by Don Pedro king of
Arragon, and eight by him of Majorca. The King Don Pedro was not there in person, neither
did he send any forces by land, by reason of his owne affaires and domesticke desseignes,
which he did plot to the prejudice of his subject. A violent Prince, proud, disdainfull,
and full of reuenge. Don Iames King of Majorca his cousin and brother-in-law,Qualities of the King D. Pedro. was
forced in the city of Barcelona, the yeare before the defeate of the Moores at Salado, to
do him homage for the Ilands and other Segneuries which he held vppon the Mayne, as
to his Soueraigne, causing him to kneele before him, whereuppon this Prince retired him
selfe in a great rage to Perpignan: from whence soone after he was forced to returne to
Court, and to accompany the king Don Pedro vnto Auignon, whither he went to visit
the Pope, where it happened that these Kings walking through the towne together, a seruant
of the King of Majorcas, doing some seruice vnto his master indiscreetly, hee did so
mooue the King Don Pedro, as he was ready to draw his sword, and to strike the king of
Majorca himselfe, which was the beginning of their quarrels, the which continued long
and violent.
The arriuall and entire of the king Don Pedro into Auignon, was vey honorable, for
at the passage of the riuer of Durance, he was met and receiued by two and twenty Cardinals,
and entred with the king of Majorca into the towne, betwixt Cardinall Neapoleon
of Vrsins, and he of Cominges: but the next day (after he had shewed his spleene against

his brother in law, it may be moued with some sower answer which the Pope had giuen
him) he retired to Villa-noua discoutented. The chiefe man which then serued him in his
most important affaires, was Nicholas of Ionuille, a French man, who was Earle of Terra-noua
in the Kingdome of Naples, and had maried Marguerite daughter to the Admirall
Roger of Loria. This man was aduanced in the place of D. Pedro Earle of Ribagorca,
the Kings vncle, who was giuen more to a contemplatiue life, then to worldly affaires:
for the which notwithstanding he had had long and bitter iarres with D. Pedro de Luna,
Archbishop of Sarragossa, who was desirous to gouerne, and to mannage the affaires of
the Realme: but their contention had beene ended by the aduancement of this third,
and they were reconciled at the marriage of D. Lope de Luna, the sonne of Artail, and nephew
to the Archbishop, and D. Violant the Kings aunt, and sister to the Earle of Ribagorca,
who was widow to Philip Despote of Romania, and sonne to Philip Prince of Tarentum,
the which were celebrated at Lerida, and from whence they went to Auignon.
The King D. Pedro beeing returned from this voyage, hee commenced a criminall Processe
against the King of Maiorca, for that he caused money to be coyned in the Towne
of Perpignan, and he caused him to bee cited to appeare before the Estates then assembled
at Barcelona, not much troubling himselfe that the French King (carrying himselfe
at Soueraigne of Montpellier, and other lands belonging to the King of Maiorca, on
this side the Pyrenees) had seized vpon the sorts and castles of all these places. The King
of Maiorca not appearing, his totall ruine was resolued by the King, the which followed
as we shall hereafter shew.
At that time such was the Estate of Sardinia:Estate of Sardinia. Caillery, Aquafredda, Iojosaguarda,
Quirro Castelorguilleux, Gallicelli, Castel Pedresio, Faba Osoli, Sasseri, and la Bastide
of Sorria, were held by Arragon garrisons: Marian Iudge of Arbore^, had beene newly
made Earle of Gothian by the king, Iohn Marquis of Malespine, and the Earles of Donoratico
were friends to the kings of Arragon: but in Italy the Pisans, the Genouois, and
with them Luquin Vicount, (who then ruled at Milan) had made a league, and conspired
to chase the Arragonois out of Sardinia, where they also had their partisans and intelligences:
for besides other factions, the family of Doria was then diuided into foure factions.
These things did trouble the king D. Pedro admist his enterprises, at such time as hee
sought the ruine of D. Iames King of Maiorca, and when hee was sollicited by Hugh Cortingo,
Petra Allerata, and Loupe Cinerca, chiefe men of the Iland of Corsica, to vndertake
the conquest thereof, whereof the Bishop of Aleria was the minister and ambassadour:
and euen then when it was most needful to haue sent his gallies to the Streight, in fauor of
the k. of Castille, and for the common interest of all the Christian Princes of Spaine.
Before the yeare 1340.Portugal. past, the Infant D. Pedro of Portugall had a sonne by his new
spouse D. Constance Manuel, whome he had marred at Ebora, with a dowrie of 300000.
doublons, and many rich iewels, and this Infant was named D. Fernand or Ferdinand, who
was king of Portugall after the Grandfather and father.
21 In the yeare 1341.Castile. D. Alphonso king of Castile hauing called a Parlament of all his
Realmes at Herrena in Extremadura, there were great summes of mony giuen him, his
subiects seeing that he employed it profitably, for the defence and increase of the crowne:
from thence he came to Madrid, where he gaue Order for all that was necessarie for the
warre, and appointed the Rendez-vous for his troupes at Cordoua, from whence he sent
them of Seuile and Cordoua to make incursions, attending the rest of his forces: he made
a shew to go to Malaga, the which put the Moores into great feare: but hee marched to
Alcala of Bencayde, vppon the arriuall of those troupes which he expected, the which he
found vnfurnished, for the king of Granado did confidently beleeue, that he would haue
led his armie to Malaga: This place after some weake resistance yeelded, vpon condition
that the Inhabititants should haue their liues saued: Moclin was taken by the diligence of
D. Alphonso Fernand^s Cornel. There was some ouerture of a truce made in the behalfe of
the king of Granado, but without any conclusion, for that the king of Castile would not
haue king Alboacen comprehended: Priegos was also taken by composition: the like hapned
to Sarrabuey, being prest by Martin Fernandes Puerto Carrero. D. Alphonso Melendez
de Guzman, master of S. Iames, did also win the castel of Benamexir: other places, as Rute,

and the tower of Matrera were also forced: then winter approching, the king left good
garrisons in his townes, and of the sea to Giles Bocanegora, a Geneuois with fortie
gallies, and other ships, and then he came to Vailledolit, where he assigned the Estates at
Burgos, at the which the seege of Algezire beeing propounded, there was granted vnto
him an Imposition, called Alcauala, which was the twentith part of all merchandize, that
should be sold within the Realme. Thus as the king desseigned the seege of Algezire, his
Admiral Giles Bocanegra hauing surprized twelue gallies of Granado in the port of Bullon,
he burnt foure, sunke two,Victories at sea of the Christians against the Moores. and carried away the other sixe. The king of Portugall
sent ten of his gallies to ioyne with them of Castile, which were in the port of Xatares, being
commanded by Charles Pecano or Pecagno. In the meane time many of the Moores
gallies assembled at Ceuta, the which they sayd, exceeded the number of 80. which threatened
to passe into Spaine with great forces to reuenge their former losses. The king of
Castile aduertised herof, came to Seuile, where by the way he vnderstood that the Mores
army was come out of Affricke into Spaine, and that they were entred into the mouth of
the riuer of Guadamecil with great numbers of souldiers, victuals, and other prouisions,
the which they had landed, but it was suddenly beseeged by the gallies of Castile and Portugal,
to whose succor came 13. gallies of Algezire, the which were fought with all by
part of the Christian army, who sunke foure of them, two were taken, and the rest ran on
ground. Being returned to their companions, who had shut vp the Moores army in the
mouth of the riuer, there was a furious battell giuen, where as the Christians had the better,
and the Moores lost 25. of their gallies. This done, the Portugl Admirall returned
being sent for by the king his master: he came to kisse the kinig of Castiles hands at Xeres,
who did him great honour, and gaue him letters in testimony of his vertue to the King of
Portugal his master, intreating him to send him backe againe with his gallies. But the army
at sea was nothing weakened hereby, for at the same time that the gallies of Portugal
departed there arriued 20. from Arragon, of the which D. Pearo of Moncada was Generall,
who in their way had incountred and vaniquished 13. gallies of the Moores, whereof
they carried away foure, two were borken against the shore, and the rest saued themselues
at Velez in Affricke. The king came to Xatares, and being himself desirous to discouer the
country of Algezire, and the situation of the towne, he went abord a gally, and houered
along the coast, and by the gulph, finding the country very pleasant: wherefore hee grew
more desirous to beseege that fort: and being returned to Seuile, and giuen order for all
things necessarie for such an enterprise, he came and inuested it both by sea and land, in
the month of August 1342. hauing not yet all his forces together,An. 1342. but onely 4000. foot:
and 2600. horse, with his sea army of Castile and Arragon. In Algezire they made accompt,
that there were at the least 800. horse, and 12000. foote Moores, all archers, and
Crosse-bow men, who did much annoy the Christians, by their continuall sallies and skirmishes,
but assoone as the king of Castile had taken a fort, called Carthagena, lying betwixt
Algezire and Gibraltar, they presented themselues more warily. A Moore taken in
this castell, beeing brought vnto the king to discouer the state of the towne, was so transported
with a desperate furie, as had not his Guard beene, and others that were neere vnto
the Kings person, he had slaine him. Matters standing on these tearmes, the king of Arragon
reuoked his army, for that he had need thereof against the king of Maiorca, the
which did somewhat incomodate the seege: and at the same time the king had another
cause of griefe, for the death of D. Alphonso Melendez de Guzman, master of S. Iames: in
whose place D. Frederic the kings base sonne was chosen in the campe. There arriued daily
at the campe great numbers of men from diuers forrain countries, to serue against the
Infidels: by reason whereof, and fore-seeing that this seege would bee difficult and long,
King D. Alphonso intreated the Christian Princes of France and Portugal, and the Pope
himselfe to lend him mony. The French king assisted him with 50000. Crownes, which
were made ouer to Genoa. Whilst they lye before Algezire, Ioseph King of Granado hauing
gathered together 6000. horse, which he had in his country, with 2000. Affricans, being
in garrison at Ronda, hee ouer-ran the country as far as Eccia, where hauing spoyled
all, he came to Palma, which he entred without any great difficulty, putting all the Christians
hee found in it to the sword, then packing vppe his baggage, hee returned with all

speed to Granado, fearing to be charged by the Garrisons and Commons there-abouts,
who began to make a head. There was a More with one eye taken in the camp, who came
from Castellar, and was sent to kill the King of Castile, as hee himselfe confessed, for the
which he was executed. This yeare about Nouember, there arriued ten gallies, sent by
the king of Arragon, and commanded by Mathew Mercier of Valence: the like number
came from Portugal, and ioyned with the army, but within three weekes they returned,
and to man knew the reason, yet the seege was not stayed, nor the batterie discontinued
before Algezire: Inigo Lopes of Ozorco, who had charge of the Engines, vsing great diligence.
This was one of the longest seeges we read of in Spaine,An. 1343. without any intermission of
Winter or other season. The yeare 1343. beeing come, the king of Granado entred againe
into Andalusia, hee recouered and razed the Catle of Benamexir, and spoyled the
Towne of Estepa, but hee could not stay there: for that the Castle held good, and yet during
all these incursions, this Moorish king did sollicite King Don Alphonso to come to
some truce, offering the like conditions, whereunto he and his Predecessors had beene
formerly bound, but for that he would not leaue the league and friendship of the King of
Maroc, the King of Castile would not hearken to any treatie: although hee vnderstood,
that king Alboacen was a Ceuta, and that he made great preparation to come and raise
the seege of Algezire, wherein he was stayed by the iealousie hee had of his sonne Alderramen,
least hee should make himselfe King of Maroc in his absence, whose head hee
was in the end forced to cut off, hauing to that end sent H^scar his Alguazil, or Prouost
to Maroc, who by promises and good words, lulled this sonne asleepe, being impatient
in his ambition, and so executed his charge. The Moores of Ronda and Malaga, beeing
two thousand horse, and as many foot, came running towards Eccia, not knowing that
the king had sent a great troupe of horse into those marches, to hinder their courses: yet
they forraged the countrie, and tooke their way home-wards, but Fernand Goncales of
Aguilar cut off their passage in the right, at a riuer called de las Yeguas, and charged
them so furiously at the breake of day, as notwithstanding any resistance, they abandoned
their prey, and were put to route, leauing aboue sixe hundred of their men slaine and taken,
and three hundred horse, which the Christians caried away. There were a good number
of horse past alreadie out of Affricke, so as the king of Granado ioyning them to the
forces of his countrie, hee might put an arny to field, able to present battell to them that
were at the seege before Algezire, their forces being then some-what diuided, for that
king Don Alphonso had (as we haue sayd) sent a good part of his horse-men towards Eccia,
Carmona, Marchena, Vtrera, Aguilar, and other places: but beeing either fearefull,
by reason of former losses, or he expected greater succours from Affricke, hee deferred
it very happily for the king of Castile, and beganne to practise a truce, whereunto
King Don Alphonso made shew to incline, protracting the time, vntill the comming of
his horse, whome hee had sent for with all speed vnto the campe, the which beeing come,
there were so many difficulties propounded by him, as nothing was concluded.
The King of Maroc being vpon the Affricke shoare with a great army, hee sollicited
him of Granado to giue battaile, offering to send him part of his troupes, if he were not
of sufficient strength. The King of Granado excused himselfe, for that both their forces
vnited together, were not able to resist the fury of the Christians before Tariffe wherfore
he aduised and intreated him to passe in person, and to bring with him all the forces he had,
but there was no meanes to perswade the king of Maroc to passe the streight: so as the
seege continued, where there daily arriued Princes and Knights from France, England and
other places: there is speciall mention made of a Duke of Lancaster, and an Earle of Salisbury
English men, of Gaston Earle of Foix, and his brother Roger Regnaud, whom some
call Bernard Vicount of Castelbon, and especially of Philip King of Nauarre, whose history
we haue need to returne vnto.
22 This Prince hauing his residence for the most part in France,Nauarre employing himself
vertuously for the defence of that realm against the English, who eontended for it against
Philip of Valois then raigning: his country of Nauar being gouerned in the meane time
by Lieutenants, or Viceroys French-men, whereof wee haue named some. And in these

times mention is made of one Regnaud Pons, and of one William Brake, Gouernors, in
whose times the lawes of Duel were much practised in Nauarre, a well among the Nobility,
as others, who decided their controuersies and quarrels by combat. The wars betwixt
the French and English beeing somewhat appeased about the yeare 1343, more for
want of meanes to make warre, and for need of rest then otherwise. Philip king of Nauarre
obtayned leaue to come and visit his countrie, and if it were conuenient to see the
seege of Algezire, whereof there was so great brute throughout all Christendome. this
desire increased in him, beeing in Nauarre, and the rather for that hee vnderstood there
should be a battaile, as it was likely, and that the king of Castile did resolutely attend it.
Wherefore king Philip inuited many of his friends, and leauied men as well in Nauarre,
as in France, giuing order for the shipping of munition and victuals in the ports of Guipuscoa,
and so marched on, hauing giuen aduice of all vnto king D. Alphonso, leading with
him only an hundred horse, and three hundred foot, which were ready about him, giuing
order for the rest to follow. There was great honor done him in all the townes of Castile,
where he past, the king hauing so commanded, and he arriued at Seuile about the Spring,
whither the king of Castile sent Ambassadours to welcome him, and conduct him to
Xeres vppon the frontier, whether many Noblemen, and souldiers should come to
accompanie him, as well to do him honour, as for the safetie of his person, for that
the Moores Armie lay incamped vpon the Riuer of Guadiana.
Thus the king of Nauarre was conducted vnto Xeres, and from thence to the campe,
with all the shewes of friendship and amity that could bee desired: The king went foorth
to meete him, beeing attended on by many great and worthie personages Castillans and
strangers, French, English, Germaines, and other Nations. The King of Castile did such
honour to the King of Nauarre, as hee would not determine of any matter of consequence,
without calling him to councell, neither heare nor answer any Ambassadors but
in his presence. The King of Nauarre likewise for his part shewed himselfe very desirous
to please him.
There were many skirmishes at that time, in the which the Nauarrois and Gascons
carried themselues very valiantly: notwithstanding mention is made by the Histories of
Spayne, of a great oportunitie lost of giuing the Moores a notable route, by the default
of Gaston Earle of Foix, who that day had the leading of the Nauarrols and Gascons, but
they speake of it doubtfully, as a thing vncertaine, and it may be without any iust ground,
adding withall, that the Earle for shame demanded his conge, pretending certaine reasons
that hee could not stay, as well for that his souldiers were vnpayed, as for the neede
they might haue of him in France, neither could the king of Nauarre, or hee of Castile
(who offered him all contentment) stay him by any intreaties or perswasions. Finally,
(according to the Spanish Authors) hee departed with a good troupe of Knights and
souldiers, leading his brother with him: but being at Seuile, hee died, which shewes that
sicknesse was the cause of his retreate, or rather the wounds which hee had receiued in a
furious skirmih, which he maintained against the Moores which sallied out of Algezire,
in the which our French-Histories affirme that he was slaine. He was father to Gaston Phebus,
of whom mention shall be made hereafter. Philip king of Nauarre fell also sicke, with
other Noblemen, which grew by the intemperature of the ayre of Andalusia, beeing too
violent for the French, who changed nothing of their accustomed manner of lyuing, being
in a different climate. The king of Nauarres sicknesse was such, as hee was aduised to
cause himselfe to be transported into France, so as he was forced to take leaue of the king
of Castile, who neglected no good office to comfort him but beeing come to Xeres,Death of Don Philip king of Nauarre. his
sicknesse so increased, as he was forced to stay, and dyed there in September 1343. He had
raigned about 15. yeares and fiue months in Nauarre. His body was carreid to Pampelona,
and there interred in the Cathedrall church: wheresoeuer his body past through the
Realme of Castile, there were great ceremonies done, and shewes of mourning, by commandement
from king D. Alphonso. The Spanish Authors (who slatter not the French)
write, that this infirmity increased by griefe, for some errors which the French (which followed
him) had committed in an ambush which had bin layd for the Moore, where by
their too great hast they lost a goodly oportunity to defeat a great number.

The English Noble-men beeing also called home by their king left the campe: and so
as Authors report, king D. Alphonso remained alone with his owne subiects, and such of
Portugal and Arragon, as hee had entertayned: the which may well seeme to bee written
by Spaniards, that they alone might haue the honour of the taking and winning of
Algezire.
23 After the retreat of these strangers,Castile. the king was much troubled for many respects:
for besides that he was left weake, his treasures were spent, by reason of his exceeding
charge, and the rewards hee was forced to giue to such as come to serue him from
forraine countries: for besides his land army which he must furnish with all things necessarie,
he was forced to entertaine the gallies of Genoa, Portugal and Arragon, that hee
might be master of the sea: the which they could hardly do, for that the enemy was strong
who soone aftter past out of Affricke, with sixty gallies Moores, and many other vessels,
landing many horse and foot, with great store of victuals at Estepona, whom they might
easily haue put into Algezire, where they began to want, if they had beene men of resolution:
for besides that the king of Castiles army was not equall in strength, it was then
dispersed in diuers parts. With this new supply the Moores might muster 12000. horse,
an infinit number of foote. King D. Alphonso got succours and money from the French
king, the Pope, and other Princes his friends, and from the Prelates, townes, and priuate
men of his realme, who lent him willingly what they could spare: so as hee stayed the Genouois,
who would haue beene gone, and contented both them and others, with great
wisedome and good husbandry.
The King of Castile,Portugal. notwithstanding his affaires of war, did not forget any thing that
might serue to better the Estate of his Prouinces, building and peopling new townes, as
Monreal vpon Deua a riuer in Guipuscoa, and Playsance, vpon the same riuer, the which
he peopled with men out of the valley of Marquina, granting them the rights and priuiledges
of Logrogno, and assigning their bounds and limits.
These things past in the yeare 1343. in the which there hapned at Lisbon, the chiefe city
of Portugall, great earth-quakes which ruined many goodly buildings, to the great terror
of the inhabitants: and in this accident dyed the Admirall of Portugall.
The aduerse armies in Andalusia, were continually in skirmish and light incounters,Castile. but
Ioseph King of Granado would by no meanes yeeld to a battel, notwithstanding the great
supplies he had from Ceuta, and that he had with him a son of king Alboacens, called Hali,
with many other great personages Moores, but desired rather to trie if he could get king
Alphonso to yeeld vnto a truce: wherefore he sent two Ambassadors vnto him, who had
beene formerly employed, to whom the king of Castile seemed to giue a willing eare: by
whome there was added vnto the conditions of the former accords, that king Alboacen
should pay him for the charge of this seege, 300000. doublons of gold. These conditions
being imparted vnto king Ioseph, with a suspension of armes, he presently past ouer to
Ceuta, to conferre with Alboacen. But in his return, he was set vpon (notwithstanding the
assurance giuen him by king Alphonso) by a gally of Genoa, thinking to take the 300000.
doublons with the king, but the kings gally being well armed, defended it selfe, and so escaped,
whereof king Ioseph made great complaints vnto the king of Castile, who without
doubt would haue sunke the Genouois gallie with the Captaine, if he could haue taken it,
but he had gotten to sea, fearing to be punished, and so retired to Genoa. The treaties of
truce being troubled by reason of this infidelity of the Genouois, the Mores army which
was at Gibraltar, aduanced vnto the riuer of Palmons, halfe a league from the Christians
campe: where their fore-runners incountring the two armies which followed, had like to
haue come to a generall battell, but the Moores retired first, hauing lost some men. Their
whole desire was to victuall Algezire, where they vnderstood, that all things wanted, and
that many small vessels, laden with victuals, had beene taken at sea, seeking by day or night
to enter into it, through fauour of the wind or current: for the christians gallies were exceeding
watchfull. But they presented themselues so often by land, making shew that
they would fight, and watched their oportunitie so by sea, as fiue Vessels of Ceuta had
meanes to enter, and to refresh the beseeged with some victuals, and other necessarie
prouisions, whereof the Captaine was a Moore, called Muca, who beeing discharged,

returned to Ceuta without losse, reporting vnto King Albeacen the great necessitie of the
beseeged. King Alphonso, was much troubled hereat, but the estate of the beseeged
beeing hereby a little eased, was not much bettered: for these victuals lasted not long,
considering their multitude of people, and their great extremitie, and the Princes of the
Moores seeing, that in the end they must either hazard a battaile, which they did much
feare, hauing so often (to their cost) tryed the Christians valour, or loose the place, which
had beene long and obstinately beseeged.
The king of Granado, with the aduice of Alboacen, did reuiue the treatie of truce, and
the conditions of former accords; which were, that he should be vassal to the king of
Castile, and should pay him tribute: and moreouer, that obtayning a truce for fifteene
yeares, (wherein king Alboacen should be comprehended) the towne of Algezire should
be yeelded vnto him, and that the Moores which were within it, should haue liberty to
depart with their goods whither they pleased the which after long deliberation, was concluded.
But they cut off fiue yeares of the time of the truce, the which was made but for
ten yeares. King Alphonso had a desire to see a young Price a Moore, that was within it,
he was sonne to Abomelic, but his Gouernour would not suffer him, saying, as hee caried
him away, that the King of Castile had no reason to see an Infant, whome he depriued of
his Inheritance.
This ended this seege, hauing continued nineteene moneths, during the which there
were many sharpe and furious incounters, whereof some might be accompted battailes:
they within the towne made fifteene great sallies the twelue first moneths, where as many
valiant men of either side were slaine. About the end of this seege, there had bene sent
out of Arragon Iames Escriuain, and Mathew Mercer Captaines, with twenty gallies, who
wonne great honour there. The king entred into Algezire in great pompe, where hauing
planted many of his Enslgnes vppon the towers, the great Mesgide was purified and hallowed
with great ceremonies, the which was named Saint Maries of the Palme. The wals
and rampiers beeing repayred, and the houses and land distributed to new dwellers, the
king came to Seuile, from whence hee sent two daughters of King Alboacens, which had
beene taken at the battaile of Tariffe, causing them to be honourably conducted into Affricke,
and richly attired: wherewith the Moorish king was so pleased, as he could not sufficiently
commend his bountie and courtesie; who hauing royally rewarded the Ambassadours,
which did accompany these Princesses, hee sent vnto the King of Castile a rich
present of pretious stones, silkes, armes, horses, lyons, and other beasts, infinite perfumes,
and whatsoeuer hee thought rare; the which did much confirme the league of
friendship betwixt them: but it happened that Alboacen within few dayes after, beeing
set vppon and incountred by one of his sonnes called Alboanen,Alboacen king of Maroc dispossest by his sonne. who had rebelled against
him, and abandoning the duty of a sonne, depriued him of the kingdome of Fez,
whereby the king of Castile entred into a new iealousie of warre, this vsurping sonne not
respecting the truce made with his father.
This Alboanen did not onely take from his father the Realme of Fez,Moores. but also all that
hee held in Spaine, as Ronde, Zachara, Gibraltar, Ximena, Marbella, Estepona, Castillar
and others. But whilest the Moores molested one another, the King of Castile and
his subiects had some rest, whereof they had great need, by reason of their continuall
toyle, and great expences at the seege of Algezire.
In the meane the king of Castile seeing that the quarrel^ betwixt Don Pedro king
of Arragon,Arragon. and his brethren D. Fernand and D. Iohn, borne of D. Leonora of Castile his
sister, continued still, he sought to reconcile them, sending Diego Garcia of Toledo to that
end, who laboured much, but in vaine. Beeing there, there was a marriage treated of, betwixt
D. Fernand Manuel, sonne to D. Iohn Manuel, and D. Ieanne of Arragon, daughter
to Don Raymond Berenger, Earle of Prages, Vncle to the King Don Pedro. The allyance
and amitie of Arragon had beene very auayleable to Don Iohn Manuel, the which
hee could not forget, although the King of Castile were not much pleased therewith.
24 During the seege of Algezire, the king Don Pedro sought to ruine D. Iames king
of Majorca, his cousin and brother-in-lawe, by force and all other vnworthie meanes,

seeking to make him odious by false accusations, where as force could not preuaile. Hauing
drawne him to Barcelona, vppon hope of a reconciliation, hee charged him in open
assembly, that he had fraudulently fought to carrie him, with his brother Don Iames
Earle of Vrgel, and their Vncle Don Pedro Earle of Ribagorca, into Majorca, and there
to detayne them prisoners, vntill that he were released from the oath of fidelitie, and
acknowledgement of Soueraigntie, which hee and his Predecessors had made vnto the
Kings of Arragon: and in this discontent and feare, he sent him away, retayning notwithstanding
his wife Donna Constance, who was his sister: and without any long delay,
the King Don Pedro sent Arnanld Erillo, and William Bellera to ouer-runne the County
of Rossillon, and other lands belonging to the King of Majorca, lying neere vnto Cattelogne,
and to seaze vppon the places of strength, the Princes and Princesses of his bloud
and his allyes employing themselues in vaine to pacifie them. But such was his hatred
and insatiable desire of greatnesse, as hee proclaimed open warre against this poore king
of Majorca, weake in meanes, and it may be, in courage, to make head against so mighty
a king, and so obstinate an enemie.
And at that time Don Pedro of Moncado was recalled with his Gallies from the
Streights, as wee haue sayd, who hauing increased his army with many other vessels
rigged out vppon the coasts of Cattelogne and Valence, hee came to Palomera, a hauen
in the Iland of Majorca, with an hundred and sixe sayles, where hee landed many
horse and foote, the king beeing there in person, who before his departure, had coloured
this enterprise with a pretext of Fellonie and Rebellion, pronouncing a sentence against
the King Don Iames,Maiorca conqac^ed by the king of Arragon. in an assembly of Noblemen and Princes at Barcelona, and confiscating
his goods. In this army was Don Pedro of Arragon, Earle of Ampurias and Ribagorca,
the kings Vncle, holding the place of Seneshall and chiefe of Armes: Don Pedro
of Arragon Lord of Xerica newly reconciled, Don Blasco of Alagon, who carried the
Standard royall: Don Iohn Ximenes of Vrree, Don Philip of Castro, D. Alphonso Roger
of Loria, brother to Don Pedro of Xerica, Galuan and Raymond Anglecole, Acart Murio,
Arnauld Erillo, Goncal Diaz of Arenos, Iohn Pernandes of Luna, Artal of Fosses, Michel
Perez Zapate, lourdain Vrries, Sancho Peres Pomar, with other Noblemen and Captaines.
Against these forces the king of Majorca had leauied three hundred horse and
fifteene thousand foote, but he was betrayed and abandoned, and forced to flie, and quit
the Iland: so as the king Don Pedro seazed thereon without fighting, and was receiued
into the city of Majorca, whereof Don Arnold Erillo was made Gouernour, and Gillebert
Centilla Captaine of the souldiers that were there left in garrison. The Iland of Minorca
made no greater resistance, and that of Yuica lesse. Minorca was giuen in gouernment
to Gillebert Ceruera, and Yuica to Martin Arbes. These Ilands subdued, the king returned
to Barcelona, from whence he presently marched in to the Countie of Rossillon,
with his whole army, whither the Cardinall of Rhodez, the Popes Legat, came vnto him,
to aduise him to desist from armes: who could get no other answer, but that the king of
Majorca should come and yeeld himselfe to his will. During this warre, there was borne
at Ceruera,Monster borne in Cattelogne staine by the parents, and they punished. in the territorie of Lerida in Cattelogne, a monstrous child, hauing two
heads and foure legges, whose father and mother seeking to conceale it, buried it aliue,
but beeing discouered in this attempt, they were punished, as murtherers of their child.
There were great tumults and seditions at that time in Arragon, betwixt many Noblemen,
contending by armes for their possessions, so as the king commanded that D. Athon
of Fosses should be apprehended and punished, to terrifie others, he also caused his
reuenues and lands to be seazed on, from the which he did appeale vnto the Magistrate of
the Iustice of Arragon, which was then in the hands of Garci Fernandes of Castro, wherupon
there grew great contention: for the kings learned Councel pretended that the authority
of the Iustice of Arragon did not extend out of the assembly of the Estates, and
that this Magistrate was there onely a Iudge of controuersies, which did rise against the
king, being not lawfull for him out of the Estates, to make himselfe Iudge of any controuersie
against his royall Maiesty, but in sutes of state, and condition of persons, or in causes
whereas the king is called for a warrant, or in complaints which the people may make
against the kings Officers.

The king therefore commanded, (for that Garti Fernandes of Castro, Iustice of Arragon,
was allyed to Athon of Fosses) that Michel Perez Zapate, Lieutenant generall of Arragon
in the kings absence, should put Athon in prison, but finding himselfe too weake,Submission of the king of Maiorca dispossest
for that Athon was supported by many seditious persons, and had the countenance of diuers
great men his kinsmen and friends, he had recourse vnto the Iurates of Sarragossa,
according to the custome of his ancestors, enioyning them to fore-see, that the Estate receiued
no preiudice, and that Iustice should not be forced.
The warre of Rossillon continued, neither would the king D. Pedro yeeld for any intercession
the Pope could make, persisting still, that the king Don Iames (who was dispossest
of Majorca) should come and submit himselfe vnto him, without any condition. The
towne of the yeelded vnto him. In the end Arnold Bishop of Aux, the Popes Nuncio,
did mediate, that the King of Majorca should come and yeeld himselfe into the hands of
the king D. Pedro, and deliuer him his forts, vpon assurance that they should not attempt
any thing against his person, nor put him in prison: the which beeing granted, D. Iames
king of Majorca, vpon the assurance of D. Pedro of Xerica, came to Elne, and casting
himselfe at the king of Arragons feet, he submitted himselfe to his clemencie, beseeching
him to haue regard vnto his ranke and dignity, to suffer him to iustifie himselfe, and that
he would be pleased to sue ciuilly against him and howsoeuer, at the least, preserue vnto
his Nephewes, children to his brother D. Fernand, their right vnto the realme of Majorca,
and other lands, and cause the towne of Perpignan to be deliuered vnto him. The king
D. Pedro blinded with hatred and choller, reiected all these requests after a strange and insolent
manner, and being entred into perpignan, he caused a Decree to be published, by
the which he did confiscate the Iland of Majorca, and all the lands of the king Don Iames,Decree against the king Don Iames.
vniting them inseparably to the Crowne of Arragon: which decree he caused to be set vp
at euery corner. This poore Prince being thus intreated, he left the county of Rossillon,
and retired himselfe to Berga, a place assigned him for his aboad, vntill that his aduersary
should giue order for his entertainment. The king D. Pedro (after these seuere and vniust
proceedings) returned to Barcelona, where he entred armed, as triumphing for a victory
gotten of some great enemy. Beeing there in counsell,A thousand pound starling. he assigned 10000. livers of
pension for the king D. Iames dispossest, vntil he had giuen him lands and reuenues out of
Spaine: remitting vnto him his rights of Montpellier, and other places on this side the
Pyrenees, alreadie in his possession.
These things beeing signified vnto him by Don Pedro of Moncado, Philip Boillo,
and Garcia of Loris, hee reiected them all, saying: That he had rather liue banished in a
strange Country, and suffer all the miseries in the world, then to yeeld to so great an iniustice,
or allow of so vnworthie conditions, imposed vppon him by a king which was his kinsman.
Whereuppon the King Don Pedro renewed the warre, that hee might either take
him, or chase him out of the Kingdome.
This miserable Prince destitute and quite stript of all meanes, and abandoned of his
friends, and the courage to defie Don Pedro of Xerica, accusing him of disloyaltie, for
that hee had promised him many things (perswading him to come to Elne) which had
not beene kept: but Don Pedro was absolued by the king, who declared that hee had not
fayled in any thing he had promised* so as Don Iames sometimes King of Majorca, frustrate
of all hope, was forced to retire into the Countie of Cerdagne, hoping to hold
those Lands by the fauour and support of Geoffrey Estandart a French-man, Gouernour
of Puicerdan, and other Segneuries on this side the mountaines: but beeing deceiued and
forsaken of all, hee was forced to flie, and to passe the mountaines in Nouember, the
Winter beeing exceeding sharpe: so as vppon mount Pimorent, which diuides the Contie
of Cerdagne from Gasconie, hee was like to haue dyed with the extremitie of cold,
where hee fell into such a passion of griefe, as he was readie to haue slaine himselfe. This
vsage did D. Iames the king of Majorca receiue of his brother-in-law, Don Pedro king of
Arragon, who was at that time againe sollicited to attempt the conquest of Corsica, wherunto
he yeelded, and set some gallies to the port of Boniface, this yeare 1344. hauing intelligence,
and a secret league with William Roncaual, Rowland Ornan, Henry Cortingo, and
others of the chiefe of the Iland.

In the yeare 1345.Castile. D. Alphonso King of Castile, gaue order for the building of the new
towne of S. Ander,1345. called Heybar, and a league from thence of the towne of Marquine,
called also Helgoybar, which he peopled with the inhabitants of the villages of that countrie,
giuing them lawes and priuiledges according to the iurisdiction of Logrogne.
25 The yeare following 1346.An. 1346. a donation was made by Pope Clement the 6. resident
in Auignon, to D. Lewis de la Cerde, sonne to the Infant D. Alphonso, of the fortunate Ilands
or Canaries, vpon condition that he should conquer them, and cause the Gospell
to be preached there: to this end he came into Arragon, and there began to prepare an
army at sea, wherein he was much assisted and fauoured by the king D. Pedro: but we find
not that he past into the Ilands, and to speake truly, it would haue beene distastfull vnto
the king of Castile, in whose Streight these Ilands are situated: yet this D. Lewis held the
title of Prince of the fortunate Ilands. D. Iohn Manuel (who had neuer loued the king of
Castile from his heart) was glad of these petty discontentments, by fauour whereof hee
spread abroad false reports and aduertisements, to draw the two kings of Castile and Arragon
into warre, but what he could not do by his practises, occasion wrought, at the
treaty of marriage which the king of Castile would make betwixt D. Fernand of Arragon
his nephew, sonne to his sister D. Leonora, and D. Eluira Infanta of Portugal, who is by
some called also Leonora, by reason whereof king D. Alphonso, and D. Leonora his sister
had an interview at Tordelaguna: which put the king D. Pedro into such iealousie, being
then a widower, (which was in the yeare 1347.) as hauing done what hee could to diuert
this marriage,1347. he resolued to demand the Infanta of Portugal for himselfe, for the which
he sent his ambassadors. The king of Castile beeing much mooued, that hee of Arragon
did thus seeke to crosse him, sent Don Iohn Alphonso of Albuquerque into Portugal, to
hinder the conclusion of this marriage, but hee arriued too late, for the ambassadour of
Arragon had so negotiated, as all was concluded: whereat the king Don Alphonso was
much offended.
26 This D. Pedro king of Arragon had in his time many wiues,Arragon. the first was D. Maria
Infanta of Nauarre, daughter to king Philip of Eureux, by whom he had D. Constance
Queene of Sicily, wife to D. Frederic the second. D. Ieanne married afterwards to D. Iohn
Earle of Ampurias, and one sonne, who died as soone as he was borne, and the mother
fiue dayes after, in the yeare 1347. To his 2. wife he had this Infant of Portugall: to his third
he tooke D. Leonora, some call her D. Constance, daughter to Frederick the 2. King of Sicily,
by whom he had D. Iohn his successor in the Realme: D. Martin Earle of Xerica and
Luna, and Duke of Momblanc, and first Constable of Arragon, (who by the death of his
elder brother, was also King of Arragon) and D. Leonora, which was wife to D. Iohn Infant
of Castile, afterwards king, the first of that name of Castile and Leon. Besides these
great Princesses, the King Don Pedro, being old and a widower, fell in loue with a subiect
of his owne of a meane family called Sibile, a widow, borne at Forcia in the territorie of
Ampurias, and married her, of whom he had D. Izabella, who was Countesse of Vrgel,
and wife to Don Iames. These were the marriages of the king Don Pedro, who raigning
cruelly and couetously, incensed the Estates and Nobilitie of his Realmes of Arragon
and Valence against him, whereas the subiects made Leagues against their Prince, which
did in a manner ruine and confound that Estate, King Don Alphonso not forgetting to
make vse of that occasion, to be reuenged of the wrong and iniurie which hee pretended
had beene done him, in disappointing the mariage of his Nephew Don Fernand with the
Infanta of Portugall.
The King Don Pedro hauing no sonnes at the consummation of this second marriage,
sought to haue an oath taken to D. Constance, his eldest daughter, heire to the Realme of
Arragon, and other lands depending and annexed after his decease, the which was cause
of great seditions: for Don Iohn, Earle of Vrgel, the kings brother, gouerning the
Realme then as Gouernour, or Lieutenant generall, opposed himselfe violently: by
reason whereof the King (who was violent and rough in all his actions) chased him away,
and tooke from him his publike charge: then hauing emancipated Donna Constance
his daughter, hee made and instituted her Gouernesse, or Regent of the Realme, to
make her way to the succession, there beeing present at this act, and his principall

councellors, D. Hunges Bishop of Vic, D. Pedro Thousio maister of Montesa, D. Pedro of Xerica
viceroy of Valence, Pedro Fenouilles, Audemar Mousses, Goncalu Diaz of Arenos, and
Ga^cerand Belpuccio. D. Pedro the King vncle, Earle of Ampurias, tooke that oth to his
Princeesse in the name of the Estates, vpon condition, that if it were found the hereditarie
right did belong vnto D. Iames, the oth should be voide. D. Iames seeing himselfe disapointed,
stirred up troubles in the country of Valence: hee had recourse to the vnion
of Arragon, to retaine his digmity of Gouernor of the Realme: hee made a league with
his brethren D. Fernand and D. Iohn sonnes to D. Leonora of Castile, and with the King
of Gastile himselfe, and disquieted al Arragon.
The dispossest King of Majorca hearing of these tumults, would bee an actor, and
came neere vnto Majorca, with certaine gallies of France and Genoa, whereof Charles
Grimaldi was General, but as misfortune did still accompany him hee effected nothing
of worth in those Islands nor vpon the coast of Cattelogne, whether hee afterwards
came, and was repulst by the King himselfe. By the aduice of Bernard of Cabrera, who
was then held a man of great wisdome and iudgement, he made his vncle D. Pedro, Earle
of Amputias, chiefe of his councel, and seeking by all meanes to catch his rebels, or to
diuide their league, hee wrought so as the Earle of Vrgel his brother came vnto him,
whom hee restored to his dignity of Gouernor of the realme, but it continued not many
daies, for he died presently, not without suspition to haue beene poysoned. Beeing
at an assemblie of the Estates at Saragossa, he granted them all they demaunded, and renued
the contract made by King Alphonso the third, with vnion of Arragon, by the
which sixteene castles were put into the power of the vnion, with liberty to deliuer them
to whom they would, if the King should infringe the accord.
This yeere of our Lord 1347.An. 1347. during these troubles the Kings marriage was consomated
with the Infanta of Portugal,Marriage of the King D. Pedro with the infaint of Portugal. the which were very mournful, for that in a short
space the Kings men receiued two notable routs by the rebels, the one neere vnto Xatiua,
where there died on the Kings part Andrew William the Secretarie, Lieutenant to
the Viceroy of Valence, and his sonne: the other neere vnto Valence,Defeat of the Kings men. in the which Goncal
Diaz of Arnos, and Pedro Mugnon captaines of the Kings men lost their liues. So as
the king, who in the meane time kept at Moruiedro, in a manner beseeged, was much
perplexed, and not knowing what to resolue, he suffred himselfe to bee perswaded to enter
into the city of Valence, where hee found himselfe entangled in the mutinies of the
citizens, who respected and honoured him so little,Valencians seditious. as notwithstanding his presence,
they spoiled and murthered one an other, after a pittiful manner. The Noble men and
captaines holding his party, were then fortefied in Daroca, whereof the chiefe were D.
Pedro of Xerica, D. Lope of Luna, D. Blasco of Alagon, D. Pedro Fernandes of Ixar, D.
Thomas Cornel, D. Iohn Ximenes of Vrrea, and D. Iohn Martines of Luna.
The Rebels were fauored and assisted vnder-hand,King of Castile fauors the rebels against the King of Arragon by D. Alphonso King of Castile, who
suffred them to make great leauies of souldiars in his countries, for the loue hee bare vnto
the sonnes of his sister D. Leonora, Douager of Arragon: and D. Fernand the eldest
had alreadie lead many bands of Castillans to Valence, and D. Iohn his brother prepared
to passe into Arragon with other troupes, to be the generall of that warre, the which the
Arragonois demaunded: yet by reason of the complaints made by the King D. Pedro,
who said that the league betwixt Castile and Arragon, was broken by King D. Alphonso,
sollyciting all his friends and priuat councellors, especially Queene Mary his wife, and
D. Leonora of Guzman, his best beloued, to disswade the King from this enterprise, laying
before him the consequence of this rebellion, there were sent by the King of Castille,
and by his sister the Queene D. Leonora, into Arragon D. Fernando Perez Puerto
Carrero, and to Valence Lope Perez of Fonseca, to treat of the meanes to pacefie these
troubles.
The King D. Pedro promised great matters to his brethren, and desired nothing
more then to haue the Castillan troupes called home by their King: but notwithstanding
any likelihood of an accord, they drew what succors they would from Castile: wherefore
King D. Alphonso beeing importuned by the King D. Pedro, and discontented with
these seditions, beeing also mooued with a desire he had to see the Queene D. Leonora

his sister and her children assured in their Estates, which had been left them by the deceased
King D. Iames, and by diuers other passions, he could take on better resolution, then
to shew himselfe a common friend: and for that hee could not well hinder the credit
which his Nephewes had in Castille for the leauying of men, hee also suffered the King
of Arragon to leauy horsemen for his money, entertayning Aluar Garcia of Albornoz,
who brought him aboue sixe hundred Castillan horsemen. With these forces and others
of his subiects, who fauoured his violences, hee came to battaile with the Rebels of
Valence and Saragossa,Rebels defeated by the king D. Pedro. beseeging Epila, being commanded by his brother D. Fernand,
whom he put to rout betwixt the riuer of Xalon and Epila, where the Infant D. Fernand
was taken prisoner: but his good fortune was, to fall into the hands of the Castillan
horsemen, who being loath hee should come into the power of the incensed King D.
Pedro, sent him speedily into Castille, to King D. Alphonso his vncle. In this battaile died
Iohn Ximenes of Vrrea, the chiefe fauourer of the vnion, Gombald Tramasset, Symon
Perez Pina, and Galuan Anglesole.
After this defeat there was a firme League made betwixt Castile and Arragon, by the
treaty of a marriage of one of the King D. Pedros daughters, with D. Henry, son aduowed
to the King of Castile: and there were conditions propounded for Queene Leonor
and her children; that the King of Arragon should suffer them to enioy their goods and
Estates freely, and that the Gouernment of Arragon should bee giuen to the Infants D.
Fernand and D. Iohn, and that the King should not proceed against the confederats of
Valence, against whom he was more incensed then against the rest. The King D. Pedro
would not grant the gouernment of Aragon to his brethren, nor pardon his rebels, but
desired the King of Castile to assist him with horse-men, that hee might punish them by
armes: and in regard of the marriage, he would haue D. Henry inuested in the country
of Murcia, with the title of a King: otherwise he should not marry his daughter. These
difficult and distastfull treaties to either partie, were spent in disputes, without any
conclusion.
The defeat of the confederats army at Epila, did so terrefie them of Saragossa, as many
men of marke went out of the Realme, others sent vnto the King of sue for their liues:
so as that great city whose forces had beene fearefull to the Kings of Arragon, was then
made subiect with the whole realme: for the King hauing calling there an assembly of
the Estates, such as he pleased, hee wrested away the popular lawes, and the preuiledges
of the vnion,Reformation of the Gournors iurisdiction. namely those of King D. Alphonso the third, and the confirmation which
he himselfe had made was disanulled, and new Articles made against the seditious: many
that were culpable, were condemned to die, and their goods confiscate. Thus the
rights and preuiledges gotten seditiously by armes, were lost againe by armes. There
the iurisdiction of the Gouernor of the realme was also reformed, a dignity neere vnto
that of the King, the which hauing to that time beene held by Princes, or great personages,
with great abuse, corruption and libertie, for that it had beene an ancient custome,
vsed in Arragon, not to call such men in question for their faults, but ciuily, beeing exempt
from condemnation of death, prison or banishment. It was then decreed, that
from thenceforth that dignity should not bee giuen to Princes, nor to any one that
were to powerful aboue the rest, but to simple knights: to the end that if they did commit
any fraude or abuse, or did violate the Lawes and publike liberty, they might make
their criminall processe,Lymitation of the iurisdiction of the iustice Maior of Arragon. and take away their liues, if the case so required. The iurisdiction
or the iustice Major of Arragon, was there also lymited: that is, he should haue
authority to suppresse the vniust decrees of the Kings officers, and the rash attempts, and
actions of mighty men, with all publike force, and maintaine iustice betwixt great and
smal: and it was decreed, that this Magistrat should not be giuen by the peoples suffrages,
nor at the appetite of the Plebeians, to men of base condition, but to knights, which
should be named by the King.
Saragossa being subdued, the King led his army against them of Valence, who persisted
in their rebellion.Valence subdued. The Valentians in the beginning thought to be able to resist and
there were some incounters betwixt them and the Kings men: but being often beaten,
and repulst with losse, they resolued in the end to yeeld the city, the which the king (being

sharpe and seuere by nature) would haue razed, plowed vp, and the place sowen with
fault, in hatred of the insolencies and contempt of which the Valentians had vsed against
him: yet he was diuerted from this cruell intent, by the Noblemen that were about
him, and his wrath was appeased, by the punishment of Iohn Ruis Corellia, Raymond
Scorne, Iames Romanin, and Ponce of Solier, men of noble families, who were put to
death, and others that were more lightly punished.
Such was the end of the reuolts and tumults of Arragon and Valence:Reuolts in Sardynia, During the
which the Island of Sardynia was likewise in a combustion, entertained by the Geneuois,
hauing lands there, namely by Mathew, Nicolosio, Iohn Anthony and Iulian Doria, by whose
support the Sardiniens did rise, and spoiled the countries which held the Arragon party.
D. William of Ceruillon was then Gouernor for the King D. Pedro in that Island, who
thinking to repaire the harme which the rebels had done, was defeated and slaine neere
to Bestide, which the enemies did beseege: wherefore D. Rambaud of Corbera was sent
in his place, and Ponce Santa paz for Generall of the Arragon gallies. These were
moire fortunate then Ceruillon had beene: for D. Rambaud raised the seege from before
Sasseri, and recouered many places: wherein he was faithfully assisted by Marian, Iudge
of Arborea, and by Iohn his brother, and so prest the faction of Doria, which was contrarie
to the Arragonois, as he freed the Island: the which ministred occasion vnto the
common weale of Genoa, to breake the peace which they had with the King of Arragon:
Iohn Murta was then Duke of Genoa, beeing in the yeere of our Lord An. 1348.1348.
wherefore they of the family of Doria, with the helpe and support they had from the
common weale of Genoa, beseeged Sasseri againe, and gaue a rout to Hugues Corbera,
brother to the Gouernor D. Rambaud, who was then absent, for he was come into Cattelogne
to makes new leauies of souldiars; so as the affaires of Sardinia were in greater
combustion then euer.
D. Rambaud returning to his Gouernment, with some gallies and good numbers of
souldiars of Cattelogne, he toucht at the Island of Majorca,Last attempt of D. Iames King of Maiorca. euen as there was a battaile
ready to be giuen betwixt the Arragonois and the dispossest King D. Iames, who hauing
armed many vessels vpon the coasts of Prouence and Languedoc, and giuen the leading
thereof to Charles of Grimaldi Lord of Monaco, had landed in the Island of Majorca,
being resolute either to recouer those Islands or to die: to make head, against him (besides
the care of D. Gilibert Ruillia, Gouernor for the King D. Pedro, in the Islands of
Majorca and Minorca) D. Ponce of Moncade Admiral of Arragon, laying a side his voyage
of Sicile, whether he was going, had also landed in Majorca, so as there were in
armes, for the King of Arragon, the day of this battaile, comprehending D. Rambuds
forces, eight hundred horse, and about twenty thousand foote: who ioyning with the
King D. Iames men,D* Iames King of Maiorca slaine. defeated them, after a long and cruel fight with great slaughter; whereas
the King Don Iames (a Prince alwaies vnfortunate in his enterprises) lost his life:
his sonne, called also D. Iames, being a prisoner, and sore wounded: wherefore the King
Don Pedro by this victory held the conquest of that Island from that time without
any contradiction, notwithstanding that hee had gotten it by tyranie and iniustice.
A little before the death of this last King of Majorca, he had sold to Philip of Valois the
French King, all the interest hee had to Montpellier and other lands on this side the
Pyrenee mountaines, wherevpon the King of Arragon sent D. Pedro Fenouillet Lord
of Lisle and Cagnette, in Ambassage into France, to transact with king Philip for these
rights, who agreed that the sale thereof, made by the deceased king of Majorca, should
bee good, vpon condition, that what the French king had not yet paied of the price,
should bee deliuered to the king of Arragon: and then did they treat of a marriage betwixt
D. Constance, daughter to the king D. Pedro, and Lewis Earle of Aniou, Grandchild
to king Philip, to ballance by this alliance the fauours which don Fernand and
Don Iohn, brethren to the king Don Pedro, might haue in France, who pretended (besides
their portions and rights which were kept from them in Arragon, by the king
their brother) that after him the succession of the crowne did belong to D. Fernand, and
not to D. Constance, to whom the king her father would haue it fall. But this marriage
tooke no effect.

27 Comming to the affaires which past at that time in Castille,Castile. after the pacification
of the troubles of Arragon, we finde that King D. Alphonso spent his time in peopling
of his townes and country: amongst others he peopled the towne of Sumaya in Guiposcoa
otherwise called Villa Grana of Sumaya, and gaue it the preuiledges of Saint
Sebastian, whether there appellations goe, and from thence to the court. And his realm
of Castile being in reasonable good quiet, seeing such as professed armes (whereof Castile
and his other countries did abound) seeke all occasions to imploy their armes, medling,
more then hee desired, with the factions and mutinies of his Neighbors: bieng also
duly aduertised of that which had past in Affrike, and of the little loue which the new
King of Fez bare him, who held many places of importance in Spaine, he held it nenessary
to make an expedition against the Infidels: for it is a difficult thing to keepe
great Kingdomes full of people in peace, especially after long pactise of warre, but they
will disquiet both spirituall and temporall at home, if they bee not imployed abroade:
so as armes hath this vnhappinesse, that after they are once taken, they cannot be laied
downe without great and difficult labour, and that many times succeeds ill.
About this time, which was in the yeere of our Lord 1348. Don Garcia Lope Maister
of the Calatraua, beeing accused of many disorders, retired into Arragon. Being
cited to appeere personally before the King of Castile, and absent, hee was condemned
and degraded for his co^tumacy, and so died; in whose place the Knights of Calatraua
in Arragon, proceeded in Arragon, contrary to the lawes and rules of their Order.
The Castillans of Calatraua,Schisme betwixt the Knights of Calatrans. did also choose one; so as this Schisme was like to haue
bread some great disorder, if by the mediation of the Pope, and the Kings of Castile
and Arragon, the parties had not referred it to Don Pedro King of Arragon who decreed;
That the Maister chosen at Calatraua should stand, and that any one which
held that dignity dying, the election of his successor should not bee made any where else,
but in the couent of Calatraua.
This Maister confirmed, was called Don Iohn Nugnes of Prado, who they sayd was
Bastard vnto D. Blanche, the King of Portugals aunte, and Abbesse of Huelgas neere
Burgos. To Don Iohn Fernandes his competitor, was left the Commanderie of
Alcaniz, with the title of great Commander, yet subiect to the Maister of Calatraua. The
approbation of these Maisters, beeing chosen, belongs to the Abbots of the Order of
Cisteaux. Amidest these tumults King Don Alphonso resolued for to raise an armie
to beseege Gibraltar, thinking that during the ^editions betwixt the Arabian Kings, father
and sonne in Affrike, it could not bee releeued: and therefore hauing so fit an occasion
offred him, hee made no difficulty to bee the first in armes, pretending that
hee did not breake the truce, seeing that this place and others in Spaine, were held by
Alboanen, with whom hee had not any treaty: For the mannaging and conduct of
this warre, which was of no small consequence, hee assembled the generall Estates of
all his realmes in the towne of Alcala of Henares, where (besides the Noblemen and
Deputies accustomed to come in former assemblies) many Townes and Commonalties
were newly called, and receiued to giue their voices, and to haue a place in such assemblies.
For vntil that time, the people and townes, which are called by the Toledans,
beiond the mountaines, as Castile the old, Gallicia, Asturia and the nighbour countries,
were those which did commonly assist, and did contribute and beare the charges, as beeing
most retired from the discomodities of the warre: but now at this time, they of Toledo,
Andalusia and such like, were also called by the King, for his intent was, to demaund
the subsidie called Alcauala throughout his whole Realme. This assembly and many
others which were made in after times, did for the most part consist of good townes,
who sent their Deputies: but since they found that multitude bred confusion, and therefore
there were eighteene principall places chosen, which should haue voices, and places
in assemblies,Places in the realme of Castile hauing vouces in the Estates. that is, sixteene cities and two townes. Spaine, as we haue said in the
discription thereof, is in a manner diuided in the midest by the mountaine called in old
time Idubeda the which at this present hath diuerse names. By reason whereof they distinguish
the people at this day to those of this side an the other side the mountaines.
On this side, wee will call the Toledans, and the nighbour Prouinces: on the

other side, shall bee those of Burgos. Therefore on this side the mountaines, they call at
this day, to the Estates of Spaine, for the Prouince of Toledo, the city of Toledo, Cuenca,
Guadalajara, and Madrid: and for the other Prouinces, Seuile, Granado, Murcia, Cordona
and Iaen. Beyond the mountaines for the Straight of Castile, Burgos, Soria, Segobia,
Auila and Vailledolit: and for that of Leon, the city of Leon, Salamanca, Zamora,
and Toro. These are the eighteene places which send their Deputies to the Estates,
among the which Burgos, Leon, Granado, Seuile,Debats betwixt Toledo and Burgos for precedence. Cordoua, Murcia, Iaen and Toledo
(townes which haue beene seates of Kingdomes) haue their places assigned, and hold
ranke: the rest take their places, as it happens, and their Deputies speake as they sit: as
for the citty of Toledo in this assembly at Alcala of Henares, it contended for precedence
with that of Burgos, alleadging many reasons, not altogether friuolous. First the
greatnesse of the city, and great numbers of people and Nobility inhabiting there, next
the seat of the Archbishop and Primat, the statelinesse of the Church, the Prelate whereof
was high Chancellor of all the Realmes subiect to Castille: and moreouer offring to
their consideration, the antiquity of the foundation of that city, which had beene the
head during the Gothes raigne, not onely of all that is contained within the two seas,
and the Pyrenees, but also of Gotike Gaule, which at this day wee call Languedoc, so
many councels celebrated there, and that sence the Arabians had become Maisters of
Spaine, it had beene a royal seat, hauing had many Kings, which did exceed all the Potentats
Moores of Spaine, in power and riches except him of Cordoua. God hauing
since of his grace suffred Christian Princes to conquer it, she alone amongst all the cities
of Spaine, had beene honoured with an Imperiall title, by reason whereof, and many
other preuileges there produced, they maintained the precedence to belong vnto her.
Burgos on the other side maintained that she was the capitall city, and the ancient seat of
the Princes of Castile, which was the title their Kings carried: that from Castile and Leon
did grow the conquests of the rest of the Realmes of Spaine, and that shee was called
the royal city; but their chiefe ground was, that time out of minde, shee had had the
first place and voice in such assemblies. Vpon these differences, the Noblemen fell into
factions, as their passions did transport them, or as they had their Siegneuries and houses
lying in the territory and iurisdiction of the one or the other citie. King. D. Alphonso
vsing therein wise aduise, hauing taken the knowledge of this cause vnto himselfe, he pronounced
thus: I speake (sayd he) for them of Toledo, and say, the city of Toledo will doe as it
shall please the King. Let Burgos speake now. This manner of decreeing contented
both parties, for it seemed to them of Toledo, that the King hauing made himselfe,
as it were, their Attorney, had spoken first in the behalfe of their city. And they of Burgos
holding that the Kings words did nothing preiudice their pretensions, seeing they
spake before the other Deputies, they surceased for the voice. Concerning their
ranke and precedence, the King desyring to preserue the seate to Burgos, and Toledo
refusing to sit vnder he, the King ordained, that from thenceforth the Deputie of Toledo
should not sit vpon the same banke with the other Deputies, but opposite vnto
them,Order betwixt Toledo and Burgos for predence. yet not in the same ranke: which order is obserued at this day in the generall assemblies
of the Estates of Castile. The first voice kept for the city of Burgos, was the
cause the King obtained the subsidie of Alcauala, which hee required of all his subiects:
for Burgos paied it already, and therefore did not contradict it: whereas if Toledo
(which had not borne this imposition) had spoken first,Alcauala an Imposition. shee had opposed herselfe, as
she did, and incourraged other townes to doe the like by her example. All in the end
yeelded vnto it, hauing heard the reasons which mooued the King to demaund it, and
the neede hee had for the good of the Realme, and the maintenance of the warre against
the Moores.
The assembly at Alcala of Henares beeing dissolued, and the King hauing gathered
together great store of treasor, by the speedie obedience of his subiects, hee beganne
to discharge some of his debts, and to retire many precious iewels which had beene
pawned, hee ordred iustice, and in the end applied his minde wholy to this seege, which
hee ment to lay to Gibraltar, and to prouide for al things necessary both by sea and land,
seeing that the time and the opportunity of the Moores seditions of Affrike, did inuite

him. The towne of Gibraltar had beene greatly fortefied by the Moores, since the time
they had taken it from the Christians: so as the enterprise was no lesse difficulte then
that of Algezire. But there was this aduantage, they did not so much feare any succors
from Affrike, as if the affaires of the Arabian Moories had beene quiet: notwithstanding
to prouide for all euents, he sent Velasco Martenez Alcaide or Prouost of the
court, to the King of Arragon in Ambassage, and with him Alphonso Goncales of Gallego:
to confirme the alliance and friendship betwixt them, and to reuine the treaty of
marriage betwixt his sonne D. Henry, and one of the Infants of Arragon: but his chiefe
deseigne was, to demaund ten gallies to keepe the straight. THe King D. Pedro answered
the Ambassadors, that he would send an Ambassador expresly vnto the King of Castile
their maister, the which he did.
King D. Alphonso was already before Gibralter,Arragon. when as the Ambassador came to
him from Arragon. There was an end made of the differences of the Queene D. Leonora,
and the Infants D. Fernand and D. Iohn whom the King Don Pedro should suffer
peaceably to enioy that which had beene assigned him by the deceased King, as well in
dowry, as in portion: and if it should happen that after that time they should mooue
any troubles in Arragon, that King D. Alphonso should not giue them, nor suffer to bee
giuen them any aide or succors. Nothing was concluded in regard of the marriage,
for that the King Don Pedro required, that Don Henry should bee inuested in many
Townes and Prouinces, which was not conuenient for the King of Castile to giue. For
succors, the King D. Pedro sent foure of his gallies, to ioyne with them that were in the
Straight, whereof Raymond of Villanoua was captaine, being manned with foure hundred
crosbow men.
The towne of Gibraltar was furiously batred, with all sorts of Engins, and defended
very valiantly,Castile. the garrison beeing very strong, and consisting of the best souldiars that
were amongst the Moores, who made many sailles vpon the Christians, in the which
were slaine their best men of either side; and moreouer King D. Alphonso's came was
much annoyed by the courses of the Neighbour garrisons, and by the King of Granados
horse men, who had the gard of those places which the Moores held in Spaine. This
seege hauing continued some monthes, the plague fell into the Christians campe, yet
the King beeing obstinate in his resolution, would not dislodge: for hee knew that the
Moores, being destitute of succors could not long resist, but must bee either forced, or
yeeld. Beeing in this resolution, it pleased God that hee himselfe was strooken with
the plague whereof hee died in the campe, in the yeere of our Lord 1350. the nine
and thirtith yeere of his age, and the eight and thirtith of his raigne. Some haue written
that hee died not of the plague,Death of king D. Alphonso. but of poyson, the which was giuen him by the
Moores practises. This accident was the cause of remoouing the seege of Gibraltar.
A little before D. Ieanne Queene of Nauarre, widow to King Philip of Eureux, died
at Conflans in France,Nauarre. who had gouerned her Realme, whereof shee was proprietary,
after the decease of her husband,Death of Iean Queene of Nauarre. with good discretion, and yet shee had some subiects
not very tractable, who sought nothing but quarrels. There were still riots committed
by them vpon the frontiers of Nauarre, namely by the Inhabitants of Sanguesse
and the Arragonois, notwithstanding all which, yet could shee wisely entertaine the
alliance and peace with D. Pedro King of Arragon her sonne in law, yea after the death
of Queene Donna Maria, her daughter: so as during her life, the King D. Pedro endured
all the Insolencies of the Nauarrois, who some times made roades farre into his countrie,
not seeming to take knowledge thereof, for the honour and respect hee bare vnto
his mother in law, neither did hee make any complaints, nor was mooued, as hee
ought to haue beene, for that the Estates of Arragon, and others beeing rebelled against
him for the causes aboue mentioned, many made their retreat into Nauarre,
from whence they drew assistance of armes, victuals and other things, to make warre against
him.
It is credible that the King of Arragon shewed himselfe patient in these things, that
he might not disapoint other desseignes of greater importance: for knowing that Ieanne
Queene of Nauarre was much honoured in France, hee entertained her friendship,

to the end that by her meanes he might haue King Philip of Valois more fauourable
vnto him, who was incensed against him for D. Iames of Majorca. This Lady laboured
so, as shee entertained peace betwixt them, and confirmed againe the alliances past,
by a treatie of marriage, which she propounded, betwixt Charles, Grand-child to King
Philip, and one of the daughters of the King don Pedro; and of her daughter
Donna Maria.
This Princesse being come into France with Charles and Philip her sonnes, to dispose
of her lands and estates which she had there, hauing left Iohn of Conflans, Lord of Dampierre,
Marshal of Champagne for Gouernor in Nauarre, she died at the end of the
yeere 1349. fiue yeeres after the decease of her husband, hauing held the Realme of Nauarre
about two and twenty yeeres, counting since the death of King Charles the Faire:
to whom succeeded her sonne Charles, who was surnamed the Bad.
The end of the foureteenth Booke.




SEMPER EADEMTHE FIFTEENTH BOOKE
of the Historie of Spaine.

The Contents.
1 DOn Pedro first of that name, the foureteenth King of Castile and fiue and thirty of Leon,
and his seuere beginning to raigne.
2 House of Lara Lords of Biscay, and the Siegneuries held by them.
3 Vnfortunate marriage of D. Pedro King of Castile, with Blanche of Bourbon. Vnlawfull
loue of this King with Donna Maria of Padilla, persecutions and murthers of the Noblemen
of Castile, his second vnlawfull marriage, and other excesse done by him.
4 Refuge into France of D. Henry Earle of Transtamare, bastard brother to the King of
Castile.
5 D. Charles called the bad, the thirtith King of Nauarre, and second of that name, his sower
disposition and rough proceedings, in the pursuite of his pretended right to Brie and Champagne.
6 Abolition of Caesars Aera in Arragon: Girone made a Principality for the elder of Arragon:
warre of Sardinia.
7 Cruel warre betwixt Castille and Arragon. Cruelties of D. Pedro King of Castile against
his subiects, and against his owne bloud.
8 D. Pedro the eight King of Portugal, sole of that name.
9 Vnfortunate loues of D. Pedro King of Portugal, with D. Agnes Castro.
10 Disposition of D. Pedro King of Portugal, his equity and dilligence.
11 Imprisonment of the King of Nauarre, his escape, and their proceeding against him in
France.
12 Proceedings of the warre of Castile and Arragon: cruelties, murthers and spoiles of D. Pedro
King of Castile.
13 Turbulent Estate of Granado: treacheries and cruelties of D. Pedro of Castile, against the
Princes Moores.
14 Practises betwixt the Kings of Castile and Nauarre, and continuation of the warre betwixt
Castile and Arragon.
15 Disloyaltie of D. Pedro King of Arragon, to D. Henry Earle of Transtamare.
16 New accords betwixt D. Pedro King of Arragon and D. Henry Earle of Transtamare:
continuation of the warre against Castile.
17 Accords betwixt Nauarre and Arragon, against Castile. Vnworthy death of D. Bernard
of Cabrera.
18 Returne of the Popes Sea, from Auignon to Rome.
19 Expedition made by D. Henry Earle of Transtamare into Castile against the King D. Pedro,
his brother, and the Earles victory.

20 Returne of the King D. Pedro: defeat of D. Henry: cruelties against the vanquished,
pollicies of the King of Nauarre during these quarrels.
21 Ingratitude of the King D. Pedro to the English, who had restored him; his impieties,
tyranies and cruelties.
22 Second expedition of Count Henry into Castile, conquest of that Realme with the helpe of
the French, death of the King D. Pedro the cruel.
23. D. Fernand sole of that name, and ninth King of Portugal.

Kings of Spaine mentioned in this fifteenth
Booke.

CASTILE and LEON.
14. D. Pedro. 1.--35.


NAVARRE
30. D. Charles. 2.


PORTVGAL.
8. D. Pedro. 1.
9. D. Fernand. 1.


D. Pedro the first and sole of that name, surnamed
the cruel, the foureteenth King of Castile,
and fiur and thirtith of Leon.
THe beginning of the raigne of D. Pedro, sonne to D. Alphonso of Castile,
was in the yeere 1350.An. 1350. in the which Pope Clement the sixth ordained
that the Iubile which they had beene accustomed to celebrate (yet
without any ground) euery hundred yeere amongst Christians, should
from that time be kept from fifty, to fifty yeeres, after the manner of
the Iewes. D. Pedro was at Seuile with the Queene his mother, when
the King his father died, where his obsequies being made, they consulted for the ordring
the Estate of the new Kings house, and the affaires of the Kingdome. D. Leonora of Guzman,
her children, kinsfolkes and friends being in great perplexity, at the death of King
D. Alphonso, retired themselues into diuerse parts of the realme.
This yong King being but fifteene yeeres old began his raigne with cruelty,D. Pedro King of Castile cruel. in which
vice he continued his whole life, but to his cost. D. Leonora being sollicited by some
Knights to come to Seuile, she came, vpon their faith, but she was presently apprehended
and put in prison, to satisfie the rage of iealousie of Queene Mary the Kings mother,Le^nor of Guzman the deceased kings m^stres (...) by the widow Queene.
wherevpon D. Henry Earle of Transtamare, and some of his brethren, children to this
Lady, thought to fortefie themselues in Algezire, but they were set vpon, and forced to
flie, some into Portugal, some else-where: against whom the King was more incensed
then before, for the marriage which followed betwixt D. Henry Earle of Transtamare,
and D. Ieanne Manuel, daughter to D. Iohn Manuel one of the mightiest Princes in
Spaine, next vnto the King, to which marriage the King D. Pedro himselfe aspired.

This being accomplished, the married couple were forced to flie into the Asturi^as, to
auoide the Kings fury,Quarrels touching the successor to the crowne of Castile. who the same first yeere, being fallne into a great sicknesse, and
almost abandoned by the Physitions hee descouered the hearts and disposition of the
Princes and Noblemen of his Realme, by the quarrels they entred into for the successor
to the crowne, thinking the King would die: Some being of opinion to call D. Fernand
or Arragon, Marquisse of Tortose, Nephew to the deceased King, sonne to D. Leonora
his sister: others giuing their voice to D. Iohn Nugnes of Lara, Lord of Biscay, issued by
the mothers line from the bloud royal Castile: of which party were D. Alphonso Fernand
Cornel, and Garsilaco de la Vega: the contrary party was held by D. Iohn Alphonso
of Albuquerque, a Knight of great credit with the Queene mother. The Kings recouery
ended this controuersie, touching him that should succeed to the crowne, but it
gaue beginning and force to the factions and insolencies which followed; for D. Iohn
Nugnes de Lara being gone from court,Hatred betwixt D. Iohn Nugnes de Lara and D. Iohn Alphonso of Albuquerque. in a great rage against the Lord of Albuquerque,
for some byting words cast forth in their controuersies during the Kings sicknesse, the
cares of this young and ill experienced King (cholerike by nature, and inclyned to reuenge)
were filled with the reports of such as gouerned him, wherevpon hee was so incensed
against this house of Lara, their friends and adherents, as it was euident that hee
sought but an opportunity to doe them some mischiefe.
The death of D. Iohn Nugnes, which followed soone after in the towne of Burgos,
made his aduersaries deseignes more easie: he left for successor to his Siegneuries (which
were great) one sonne, but two yeeres old, called D. Nugno de Lara. And at the same
time D. Fernand Manuel, Lord of Villena died also, leauing one onely daughter, named
D. Blanch, who died also soone after. These deathes did much content D. Iohn Alphonso
of Albuquerque, for that hee was freed from great emulators and aduersaries which
hated his authority, and the familiarity he had with the King, who preferred him before
all the Princes and Noblemen of Castile. The King was aduised by his councell,
to seize vpon these young pupils, and of their lands, according to which hee went towards
Burgos, causing D. Leonora of Guzman to be brought after him, whom hee sent
with a good gard to prison to Talauera. Being at Henera, the importunities of his mother
Donna Maria, were such, as he was forced to deliuer vnto her this poore imprisoned
Lady,D. Leonora of Guzman murthered by the commandement of the widow queen. who with a womanish and boundlesse rage, caused her to bee cruelly murthered,
in reuenge that she had many times defrauded her of the amorous imbracings of
the King her husband, and presently shee begged all her goods; an act which was nothing
royal, and which did redownd to the great contempt of the deceased King Don
Alphonso: Since which time, and by reason of this murther, the towne of Talauera was
and is called, de la Reyna, or of the Queene. The King D. Pedro did this being yong and ill
aduised. Being come to Burgos, at his first arriual, he caused Garsilaco de la Vega to be
slaine in his owne lodging: and afterwards there were also dispatcht Alphonso Garcia Camargo,
Fernandes of Medina, and Alphonso Fernandes,Noblemen murthered by the commandement of the King D. Pedro. Secretary or Notary, a Burgeois of
that city, al for the quarrels betwixt the Lord of Albuquerque and the house of Lara. A
lady of honor called D. Mencia, wife to Martin Ruis of Abendagno, Gouernesse to
the yong Infant Nugno de Lara, Lord of Biscay, hearing of these cruel executions of the
new King, transported the Infant from Paredes de Naua in Biscay, least the King should
do it some harme. The King hearing thereof, pursued them himselfe, vnto the bridge of
Larra, where vnderstanding that the Gouernesse and the Nurce had recouered the town
of Vermejo, he returned to Burgos, and resolued to make war against the Biscayns, so as
within few daies he sent Ruis Diaz of Rojas to beseege Orosco, the which Iohn of Abendagno,House of Lara.
son to Martin aboue named, held, who yeelded the place by composition: In the 
meane time D. Nugno of Lara died, being but three yeers old, in the towne of Vermejo,
by whose decease the Siegneuries of Biscay and others, came to his two sisters, or to the
eldest of them, called D. Ieanne of Lara, and if she died, to D. Isabel the yonger: but the
King had these yong Ladies in his power, with al the lands and Siegneuries of the deceased
D. Iohn Nugnes. The father of these children, had three sisters, whereof the eldest, named
D. Blanch, was wife to D. Iohn Manuel. The second called D. Marguerite, was a religious
woman in the towne of Caleruega, in the Monastery of Saint Dominike, built by

King D. Alphonso father to this King: and the third D. Maria was married intso France
twise* first to the Earle of Estampes, and next to Charles of Valois Earle of Alencon, brother
to King Philip the sixth, or as some hold, his brothers sonne. Of the first bed shee
had one sonne, who was Earle of Estampes; and of the second foure, whereof the one
was Earle of Alencon named Peter, the second whom they called Robert Earle of Perch:
and the two other of the church. This Lady Mary did afterwards contend, in the time of
King Henry the second, for the Siegneuries of Biscay, as we shal shew: at the time of the
death of this yong Lord D. Nugno de Lara,Siegneuries and rights of the house of Lara. there were in this house, besides the Siegneury
of Biscay, the townes of Saint Gadee, Locoya, Eglise, Salouer, Font Burvene, Bercoso,
Cibico of the tower, Galez, Paredez of Naua, Villallon, Cuenca of Tamarit, Melgar of
the frontier, Barzon. Moral of the Queene, Aquilar del Campo, Caleruegos, Beluer, St.
Iames de la Puebla by Salamanca, Orepeca, the field of Arrannelo and other townes; besides
these great Siegneuries, the house of Lara and Lords of Biscay, had this prerogatiue,
alwaies to lead the foreward in armies, whereas the King was in person. In assemblies of
the Estates, the Lords of Lara were general Attorneies, or Deputies for the Nobility by
an especial preuiledge, and often times they did carry the standard royal. Besides these
things, Don Iohn Nugnes de Lara deceased, held by reason of his marriage, the
townes of Lerma,Lands called Beetries in Biscay Alaua and the neighbor countries* Villa-franca in the mountaines of Oca, Busto, Amejugo, Balorcanos,
Tor de Blanco and other places, besides the rights of Linager which he had, as chiefe of the
house of Lara, and Lord of Biscay, to the lands called Beetrias. They were certaine lands,
and passages of the country so named, hauing this preuiledge from all antiquity, to
choose what Lord they pleased out of the nobility, of that lynage or family soeuer, to
command ouer them, and to defend them: and among them there were some that might
change their Lord 7. times a day, if they pleased: others hauing the like power to change
their Lord, were yet bound to choose of the same family to those that were first recommended:
so as they were rights purchased to families, many such prerogatiues had the
Lords of Biscay, and of Lara. The liberties of these lands called Beetries, the King D. Pedro
sought to abolish, at the Estates assembled 1351. and the 2. of his raigne at Vailledolit.An. 1351.
3 Before he came to the said Estates, he was visited by Charls King of Nauar, and as they
did sympathise wel in nature and disposition, they made great shewes of loue, and gaue
royal presents one vnto an other. After this enterview, the King D. Pedro came to Vailledolit,
from whence Iohn of Ruel as Bishop of Burgos, and Aluar Garcia of Albornoz,Marriage treated of betwixt D. Pedro King of Castile and Blanch of Bourbon. were
sent Ambassadors into France, to treat of a marriage betwixt the king, and Blanch daughter
to Peter duke of Bourbon, whose elder sister Ieanne, was married to Charls the Daulphin,
son to king Iohn, then raigning in France, the marriage was concluded, but vnfortunate
was the issue, as wil appeere. D. Pedro hauing begun his raigne by such violences, he
abated nothing in the continuance: for the assembly of Vailledolit being ended, hearing
that D. Alphonso Cornel was discontented with those things which he had done, and that
he fortified himselfe in his town of Aguilar in Andalusia: and on the other side D. Tello,
one of the children of D. Leonora with his brother D. Henry, fortefied, the one at Arande
of Duero, the other at Gijon, he went against them in person, and first beseeged Gijon. Bein
at this seege, he fel in loue with a gentlewoman, attending vpon D. Isabella of Meneses,
wife to D. Iohn Alphonso of Albuquerque, her name was D. Maria of Padilla: she was smal
of statute,Loues of the King D. Pedro. but exceeding faire and pleasing, with whom he was so far in loue, as notwithstanding
he attended the comming of his new spouse out of France, yet must he satisfie
his lust with this, imploying therein not only D. Iohn Alphonso of Albuquerque his mignon,Vncle boude to his Neece.
but euen an vncle of the gentlewomans, her mothers brother, called Iohn Fernandes
of Hinestroca, who managed the businesse so wel, as he brought her, and deliuered her vnto
him at Sahagun, very tractable. Gijon yeelded, and D. Henry retired, so as the army
was led against D. Tellos conutry, who was retired into Arragon: but by the meanes
of the King of Arragon, their peace was concluded, betwixt the Ambassadors of these
two Princes, at Soria, with shew that it would continue: wherefore there was not any
one more to subdue, but D. Alphonso Fernand Cornel, for the which the troupes had
marched towards Andalusia, and he was beseeged in Aguilar, where he was wel fortefied,
but what can one knight doe (how powerfull soeuer) against the power of a King; the

place was taken, and Alponso being retired into a tower, he yeelded to D. Diego Gomes of
Toledo, whose great friend he had beene, hoping that by his meanes he should obtaine
his life, or that his goods should be preserued for his children. As they led him prisoner,
he met with D. Iohn Alphonso of Albuquerque, who said vnto him, that he wondred how he,
who had shewed himselfe so braue a knight, had vndertaken so foolish an enterprise. To
whom he answered, That it was the custome of Castile, to make men and to vndoe them sodainely.
D. Alphonso had beene at the taking and death of D. Goncalo Martines of Ouiedo,Aquilar taken and the vnworthy death o^ D. Alphonso Fernand Cornel.
maister of Alcantara. During the raigne of King D. Alphonso: and the same day and
month that he was slaine by the father, this man was put to death by the commandment
of the son, and with him were also executed D. Pedro Cornel, his cousin, Iohn Alphonso Carillo,
Iuanes of Biedma, Iohn Goncales of Asa, and Ponce Diaz of Quesada. The wals of Aquilar
were ruined, and the goods of D. Alphonso Cornel confisked, and giuen by the King to
diuers: among other D. Maria of Padilla, the Kings mistres, being deliuered in the city of
Cordoue of a daughter, whom they named d. Beatrix, the King gaue her the townes of
Montalban, Capilla, Burguillos, Mondejar and Ioncos: of this confiscation Pedro Suarez
of Toledo had Bolano. To his brother Diego Gomes was giuen Casarubros of the
mountaine, and to Inigo Lopes of Orosco, Torija.
These things happened in the 1353.An. 1353. to the great discontentment of many, who did
much esteeme the vertue of D. Alphonso Fernandes Cornel. The King came afterwards to
Torrijos in the country of Toledo, where running at a Tourney, he was hurt in the right
hand, by the which he lost such aboundance of bloud as he was in danger of his life, for
they could finde no meanes to stanch it. Being in this cure, he was aduertised of the arriuall
of Blanch of Bourbon his spowse at Vailledolit, being accompanied by the Vicont
of Narbone, and many other Noblemen and Knights of France, who had beene receiued
with great shewes of ioy by D. Maria the Queene mother: but the King was wonderfully
troubled, for he was so transported with the alurements of D. Maria of Padilla, as hee
was amazed at these newes, as if hee had beens strooke with a flash of lightning, and
would gladly that they had neuer spoake of marrying him; yet he must of force goe to
Vailledolit, to celebrate the marriage, and to perswade him therevnto, D. Iohn Alphonso
of Albuquerque returned happely out of Portugal, whether he had beene sent, and without
him, who gouerned all, the King had not dislodged. D. Iohn Alphonso brought with
him from Portugal, D. Iohn de la Cerde, sonne to D. Lewis, who was sonne in law to D.
Alphonso Fernandes Cornel, and came out of Affrike, whether he had retired himselfe, during
the dissentions and ciuil warres of Castile, and had conducted some enterprises happely
for King Alboanen against Alfohacen his father. Bringing letters of fauour and recommendation
from the King of Portugal, this Prince was receiued into grace, by the
King, but he gaue him not any part of his father in lawes goods. In Spaine they report
a strange case of D. Maria Cornel his wife. That hauing some prouocations of desire
in her husbands absence, she quencht her lust by death, thrusting vp burning fire brands
into her body. Before the Kings going to Vailledolit, he made an accord with his brethren
D. Henry and D. Tello, who were come in armes, and wel accompanied to Cigales,
and then he went tio celebrate his marriage much against his will, but perswaded therevnto
by D. Iohn Alphonso of Albuquerque, who desired to see the King to haue a lawfull
heire, and was in some iealousie of his owne authority, fearing least the kinsmen of D.
Maria of Padilla, whom he himselfe had giuen vnto the King, should get before him in
the gouernment of the affaires, as it was likely.
The third day after the marriage, notwithstanding any perswasions or intreaties,
which D. Maria the Queene mother, and D. Leonora Queene Dowager or Arragon, his
aunt,The King D. Pedro quits his new spouse there daies after his marriage. he left his new bridge, a young Princesse of 18. yeeres of age, and went with all speed
to Montalban, nere vnto Toledo, to visit Donna Maria of Padilla, by whom he was inchanted.
This vnworhty part of the Kings, did much trouble the whole court, especially
D. Iohn Alphonso of Albuquerque, who finding by some signes that the King was not
pleased with him by reason of this marriage, hee durst not to follow him, but retired
to his houses. Don Fernand and D. Iohn, Infants of Arragon, with many other knights
followed him. He tooke D. Maria of Padilla from Montalban, and brought her to Toledo.

These that were about him preuayled so by their intreaties, as he returned to Vailledolit
to his wife, but he stayed but two dayes, and went away againe leauing the Lady much
perplexed at these strange courses.
The Queene D. Blanche retired with the Queene-mother to Tordesillas, and the king
returned to D. Mary of Padilla, who entertained the hatred and dislike which the king had
of his wife, that shee alone might enioy him. It is written by Diego of Valera, that among
all the precious iewels which the Queene had brought out of France, there was a rich
girdle, which she presented to the king her husband, the which D. Mary of Padilla hauing
in her power, she found out a Iew,Girdle inchanted. a Magitian, which did inchant it, so as when the
king would put it on, beeing amazed, and demanding what Prodigie it might be, his minions
(who were allyed to his concubine) answered, that they were the goodly presents
which this French Gentlewoman had brought him. Whereupon he was much incensed
against this poore Lady. In the meane time D. Tello, the kings base brother, married D.
Ieanne, the eldest daughter of D. Iohn Nugnes de Lara deceased: whereuppon by this marriage
he became Lord of Biscay, and of the other places and lands aboue-mentioned, the
which did much offend the king, causing him to grow into a greater furie and rage against
him and the rest then before, whereof the sharpest effects were against them that reprooued
his leud life, and the indignities he did vnto the Queene his wife: whom for spite, hee
caused to be led to Areualo with a guard, and vnder the custodie of Don Pedro Gudi^l,
Bishop of Segobia, and a Bourgesse of Toledo, in whome he trusted (his name was Tello
Palomochio) as a prisoner, and began to displace all the Officers of her house, and al others
which had beene aduanced by the fauor of D. Iohn Alphonso of Albuquerque: hee tooke
away the Office of Chamberlaine from Guttiere Fernandes of Toledo, and gaue it to Diego
Garcia of Padilla, brother to his Mistris: that of Cup-bearer, which Iohn Rodrigues of
Viedma held, was giuen to Aluar Garcia of Albornoz: the allowance of diet was taken
from Guttiere Gomes of Toledo, and giuen to Pero Goncales of Mendoca, a great Lord in
Alaua, from whence are descended the Dukes of Infantazgo. In Seuile the king did also
change many of the chiefe Officers of the Realme, which had beene aduanced by the fauour
and councell of Don Iohn Alphonso of Albuquerque, giuing them to others that
were recommended by Diego Garcia of Padilla, and Iohn Fernandes of Hinestroca: namely,
he looke the gouernment of the frontier from Don Garcia Fernandes Manriquez, and
aduanced Fernand Perez Puerto Carrero.
Thus the king altered things within his Realme, and forced the greatest to humble themselues,
and to sue vnto the kinsfolkes and fauorites of Donna Maria of Padilla, hating all
them deadly that did but tell him, that he ought to loue Donna Blanche the Queene his
wife, and liue Christian-like and honestly with her: as Don Gil Carillo of Albornoz, Arch-bishop
of Toledo, had sought to do, who being of his councell, and a Prelate of great
dignitie in Spaine, had presumed to reprehend his disordered life in that behalfe:Arch-bishop of Toledo forced to leaue Spaine but hee
tooke it in so ill part, as this reuerent man was forced to abandon all the liuing hee had in
Spaine, and retire to Auignon to Pope Clement, by whose successor Innocent the sixth,
who came to the Popedome that yeare 1353. he was made Cardinall, and in his life-time
they proceeded to a new election in the Arch-bishoppricke of Toledo, and Primacie of
Spaine, putting in his place one Don Blaise.
This King made himselfe to be feared, and so much hated of all the Noblemen of his
Realme, as euery man made choice of a party, and sought how to assure himselfe from
his fury and violence. Don Iohn Nugnes of Prado, Master of Calatraua, a friend to Don
Iohn Alphonso of Abuquerque, retired into Arragon, to the Commanderie of Alcaniz:
but the king who had a desire to haue him in his power, sought all meanes, lawfull and vnlawfull
to assure him, so as he made him come vppon his faith and promise, that he should
haue to harme. This good Knight, who found himselfe guiltlesse of any crime, but that he
had beene a friend to the Lord of Albuquerque, came into Castile, to the towne of Almagro,
but he was presently beseeged by the kings commandement, by Don Iohn de la
Cerde, and by Peter Nugnes of Godoy, who notwithstanding did secretly aduice him to
returne into Arragon, before that the king (who was gone out of Seuile to come thither)
were arriued: the which he would not do, saying, That he found his conscience free from

all rebellion, and that he had no cause to feare to put himselfe into the kings mercy: but it succeeded
ill for him. The king beeing come the master came vnto him, and cast himselfe at
his feet, intreating him to receiue him in his iustifications: but this cruell Prince refusing
to heare him him,Imprisonment and murther of D. Iohn Nugnes of Prado* master of Calatraua. depriued him instantly of the Master-ship of Calatraua, the which he
gaue to Diego Garcia of Padilla, and commaunded that he should bee carried prisoner to
the castell of Masqueda, whereas Stephen Domingo of Auila commanded: an there within
few dayes after he was murthered by Diego Lopes of Portas, seruant to Diego Garcia of
Padilla; whereof the king would haue excused himselfe, saying, That it was done without
his commandement: but it appeared sufficiently that he was not discontented there-with.
Going from Almagro the king came before the towne of Medellin, belonging to the
Lord of Albuquerque, whereas Diego Gomes of Silua, a Knight of Galicia, a commanded*
the towne yeelded fearing the kings furie, and soone after the castle, the which the king
in disdaine of the Lord of Albuquerque, caused to be instantly razed: after which hee led
his army before Albuquerque, the which was held in the name of their Lord, by Martin
Alphonso Botello, a Genlteman of Portugall, and vnder him commanded Peter Esteuanez
Carpintero, Commander maior of Calatraua. The King hauing summoned them to yeeld
the place; vppon refusall, he proclaymed them Rebels, whereof the Portugall, (who was
not his subiect) made no accompt. The Commander excused himselfe, saying, That the
place was not in his power. Wherefore he past on towards Cobdesera, another place belonging
to Don Iohn Alphonso, the which he would not take, so as after some skirmishes
he left Don Henry Earle of Transtamare, and Don Frederic Master of S. Iames, his breethren,
who followed him against their wils, and he came to Caceres. Afterwards he
resolued to send ambassadors into Portugall, whither the Lord of Albuquerque was retired,
to demand him of the king of Portugall as his subiect and a rebell: but the king of
Portugall excused himselfe, and sought to bring D. Iohn Alphonso of Albuquerque again
into fauour: but it tooke no effect: for D. Iohn Alphonso entred into league with the Erle
of Transtamare, who was one of these Ambassadours, and with Don Frederic master of
Saint Iames, and they proceeded so farre, as beeing thrust on with hatred and disdaine of
their king, they sought to perswade D. Pedro, Infant of Portugall, to ioyne with them,
promising to make him king of Castile, shewing him that hee had a title; beeing Nephew
or Grand-child to King Sancho the Braue, sonne to his daughter Donna Beatrix. But the
king Don Alphonso his father crost this proiect, and would not suffer his sonne to ingage
himselfe in this enterprise.
The more to haue modestie in contempt, and to ouerthrow all diuine and humane
lawes,1354. the king Don Pedro, in the yeare 1354. wihtout any dispensation from the Pope,
but onely assisted by two bishops his owne creatures, Sancho of Auila, and Iohn of Salamanca,
caused himselfe by their sentence to bee separated from the Queen Donna Blanche,
and in the towne of Cuellar, hee married a Ladie, widow to Don Diego of Haro, called
Donna Ieanne of Castro,Second marriage of King D. Pedro his first wife yet liuing. daughter to Don Pedro of Castro, of whose exquisite beauty
hee was much enamoured: hauing married her, hee had newes of this league made
by his breethren with Don Iohn Alphonso of Albuquerque, wherefore hee went from
Cuellar, and gaue this Lady her last adiew, who retired to Duegnas, where shee past her
dayes, hauing brought the King a sonne, who was named Iohn, and causing herselfe to
be styled Queene of Castile and Leon. To oppose himslfe against this new conspiracie,
the king beeing come to Castro Xeris, he made the marriage of the Infant Don Iohn of
Arragon his cousin, with Donna Izabella, the second daughter of the deceased Don Iohn
Nugnes of Lara. And for that hee vnderstood that Don Tello his brother followed the
partie of Don Henry and Don Frederic his other breethren, he would haue Don Iohn of
Arragon take vpbon him the title of Lord of Biscay. From thence he past to Toro, leauing
Donna Maria of Padilla at Castro Xeris, beeing readie to be deliuered of a daughter
which was named Donna Constance, future wife to the Duke of Lancaster an Englishman.
The Confederates were fortified by Don Fernand of Castro, brother to Donna
Ieanne, married, and suddenly abandoned by the King, is hatred of the contempt of his
sister.
This king seeing that so many great personages rebelled against him, imputing all the

cause of this mischiefe vnto his wife the Queene Donna Blanche, he caused her to bee taken
out of the castell of Areualo, and conducted to Toledo, Don Iohn Fernandes of Hinestroca,
Vncle to Donna Maria of Padilla, hauing taken the charge thereof. This pore
Princesse seeing her selfe in her enemies hands, and attending nothing but death from her
cruell husband, as soone as she was entred into the cittie of Toledo, shee intreated them
to lead her directly vnto the great Church, vnder color of deuotion, the which was granted
her: but beeing once entred, she would not go foorth, but challenged the priuiledge
of the place, so as presenlty all the cittie of Toledo shewed themselues for her, euery one
pittying her vnworthie vsage: wherefore Don Iohn Fernandes of Hinestroca, durst not
attempt to force her, but returned vnto the king, beeing at Segure de la Sierre, whither
he was come to make warre against Don Frederic Master of Saint Iames. At this newes
the king came in a furie to Ocagne, and there in the place of Don Frederic, Master of S.
Iames, hee created D. Iohn Garcia of Padilla,Master of S. Iames married Lord of Villagera, brother to his mistris D.
Maria of Padilla, the first of all the Mastes of S. Iames that was married. In the mean time
the Inhabitants of Toledo in generall, resolued to keepe the Queene within their towne,
from all violence, and not to receiue the king, vntill he were reconciled and did promise
to lead an honest life with her. As the incensed King thought to be reuenged of all these
things, he found himself abandoned by many Noblemen of his trayne, among the which
were the Infants of Arragon his cousins, and Don Lopes Sanches of Abendagno, great
commander of Castile, who beeing discontented with his excesse, as well in the course of
his life, as in the gouernment of his Realme, and at his ill vsage of the Nobility, they ioyned
with his brethren, and with the citty of Toledo, and all those of Andalusia, and other
Noblemen and Communalties, who altogether made petition vnto the King, beleeching
him, that for his owne honour, and the publike good, he would leaue the company of
Donna Maria of Padilla, and liue with the Queene Donna Blanche his wife, as God had
commanded him, and common honestie required: and that he should gouerne his realm
by the good and faithfull councell of good men.
Donna Leonora his aunt, Queene Dowager of Arragon, presented this petition vnto
him, the reuerence of this Lady gaue the confederates hope to obtayne something,
but she laboured in vine: for the king was so much incensed against the confederates,
and on the other side did so doate on D. Maria of Padilla, as he made no accompt of this
admonition: so as the whole Realme was in combustion, and the Princes, with others of
their faction, came to Medina del campo, whereon they seazed. There Don Iohn Alphonso
of Albuquerque was poisoned by an Italian Phisition called Paul Romain, beeing hired
thereunto by the king.D. Iohn Alphonso of Albuquerque poysoned. He was Grand-child to Don Denis King of Portugal: within few
dayes after there were aboue seuen thousand horse at Medina del campo, holding the Q.
D. Blanches party and the confederates presented a new petition vnto the king, who had
taken his way to Toro, and the chiefe of them spake vnto him about Tejadillo, neere vnto
Toro, beeing fifty Knights in field of either side, but they preuayled nothing: for the king
leauing all, went to Vruegna, where Donna Maria of Padilla was, to bee merry with her.
Queene Mary the kings mother receiued the Confederates into Toro, and wrought so,
as she drew the king thither, where they began to make a kind of accord, and to dispose
of the Offices of the kings house, and of Gouernments and places, displacing some, and
aduancing others, as they thought good: and namely, they disappointed all them of Padilla,
and their adherents: the which the king ratified, but against his will, as it appeared
soone after: for he made a dispatch from Tordesillas, to Don Pedro Infant of Arragon,
Earle of Ampurias, who gouerned the country of Arragon the King his Nephew beeing
then in Cattelogne, by the which he complayned of that his subiects had forced him vnto:
intreating him by the bond of their allyance to be his friend: and thereupon he came
to Segobia, in the beginning of the yeare 1355. and from thence to Burgos,1355. where hee
called a generall assembly of the Estates, in the which hee complayned greatly of the
Queene his mother, and of the Princes and Noblemen confederates, saying, that they
had detayned him prisoner in the city of Toro, and had forced him to do many things against
his will and dignitie: demanding mony from his subiects, that hee might make war
against them, and punish them according to their merits, the which he obtained. After

the end of the Estates he came to Medina del campo, where he caused to bee slaine in his
owne lodging one day in the holy weeke,Murthers commited by Don (...) king of Castile. Peter Ruis of Villega, Gouernor generall of he
frontier of Castile, and Sancho Ruis of Rojas: and caused many to be put in prison. Returning
to Toro, he had an incounter with Don Henries men, who went to ioyne with Don
Frederic his brother at Talauera, from whence they after marched to Toledo, and had
meanes to enter, although their comming was not pleasing to all the Cittizens, beeing
the meanes to draw a warre uppon them as it happened, for that the king followed them
soone after, and entred as it were by force, constrayning them to depart. This was a
meanes for him to haue the Queene his wife in his power, who was poorely defended by
the diuided Toledains, so as shee was sent to the castle of Siguenca. The king caused about
foure and twenty Burgesses to be executed in the cittie by Iustice, who had taken the
Queenes part too openly: among the which a Gold-smith, about 80. years old, beeing
condemned, and ready to be executed,Cruel executions the city of Toledo. his soone, a young man of eighteen yeares of age,
presented himselfe, who (mooued with pietie and a filiall loue) besought the king to do
him the grace, not to suffer his father to end the dayes of his old age after that manner,
offering to suffer death for him. The king (who had no royall part in him) accepted the
condition, and caused this young innocent man to be executed, who in regard of his pietie
did merit to saue his fathers life, and to liue himselfe with honour and reward due to so
great vertue: the name of this yong man through the negligence of Writers, is supprest.Piety of a son ill rewarded by D. Pedro.
After these dishonorable exploites, the king went to Cuenca, which held for Queene
Blanche, but he could not take it: whereupon he marched against Toro, and brought all
the warre into the territories of Leon and Biscay, where his men were twise defeated, by
D. Tello, and Iohn of Abendagno, with the death and imprisonment of many. The K* being
before Toro, he had newes of the death of Don Iohn Garcia of Padilla, brother to Donna
Maria, his mistris, being chosen master of S. Iames, against his brother Don Frederic,
whereat he was much grieued.
During this heauines, there came vnto the campe, William Bishop of Bolonia, Cardinall
of Saint Marie in Cosmedin, Legate to Pope Innocent the sixth, beeing sent to pacifie
the troubles of Castile, and to reconcile the King and Queene: but he lost his labor,
and obtayed nothing of him, but that hee procured the deliuerance of Peter Barroso, a
Doctor of the Lawes, and bishop of Siguenca, who was prisoner, for that he had held the
Queenes party. The king wrought so, partly by force, and partly by parlees and promises,
he as hee was suffered to enter into Toro, vppon condition that hee should not kill any
man: the which he promised, and kept according to his faith: for he was no sooner entred
but he caused to be slaine within the castell, in the presence of the Queene his mother,
Peter Stephen Carpinter, Master of Calatraua, Ruis Goncales of Castagneda, Martin Alphonso
Tello, and Alphonso Telles, the which Queene Mary did so abhorre, as shee swounded,
and was in danger of death: and soone after, not able to endure the sight of her sons
cruelties,Queen mother vnchast. she demanded leaue to retire into Portugall to her father king D. Alphonso, who
caused her to be slayne soone after, for that shee liued vnchast with Don Martin Telles.
The King Don Pedro did also cause to be slaine in Toro, Gomes Manriques of Orihuela,
Diego Perez of Godoy, Alphonso Gomes, great Commander of Calatraua, and many
others.
The knights which defended the towne of Cuenca hearing of these bloudie executions
left Castile, and retired into Arragon: others which held other places, distrusting their
strength, abandoned them, and past into France: wherefore the king thinking himselfe
now in a manner a conqueror, transported with a tyrannous hatred against the Nobility
of his Realme, yea against his owne bloud, he resolued to roote them out one after another,
not trusting in any one of them. Hauing beseeged Palenccuela, he watched an oportunity
to kill the two Infants of Arragon his cousins, Don Frederic his brother, who was
partly reconciled, and Don Iohn de la Cerde: but by reason of the absence of Doth Tello,
his brother (whom he would catch in the same net) he deferred it: and the better to surprize
him, he made shew to pardon him, and Don Iohn of Abendagno also, and to remit
all that was past. This Don Iohn of Abendagno was one of the chiefe Knights of Biscay,
and without whose aduise Don Tello, Lord of Biscay, did not any thing. Notwithstanding

as the fauours of great men are vncertaine and wauering, Don Tello enuying him, for
that he was rich,D. Tello Lord of Biscay causeth D. Iohn of Abendagno to be murthered. and welbeloued in the countrie, caused him to bee slaine awhile after in
the towne of Bilbora. Palencuela being taken by composition, the king Don Pedro made
a tourney at Tordesillas, whree he had resolued to murther Don Frederic his brother, and
others: notwithstanding hauing by the same treason, caused two other Knights to bee
slaine, the one of Toledo, the other of Vailledolit, he thought it sufficient for this time,
and deferred this execution vntill another oportunitie.
Don Henry who was in the Asturia's, seeing that all were brought vnder, and reconciled 
vnto the king, he demanded leaue afarre off, and obtained it (for hee would not trust
the king but vpon good termes) and went to serue the French king. Passing by the mountains
of Asturia, he escaped many ambushes which the king had layd for him, notwithstanding
his assurance giuen, but he was ordayned to better fortune: wherefore beeing
come into Biscay, and hauing there conferred with Don Tello his brother, hee imbarked
and landed at Rochel, from whence he went to Paris to King Iohn then raigning, who receiued
him, and honoured him much. The king of Arragon was aduertised of all these
troubles and alterations, beeing then resident at Perpignan, for the which he was not sorie.
At that time there raigned three bad kings in Spaine, this Don Pedro king of Castile,
Don Pedro of Arragon, and Don Charles of Nauarre, violent Princes, who whilest they
liued, did continually afflict both themselues and thier subiects, by tyrannies: so as they
purchased the surnames of Bad and Cruell.


Charles the second of that name, and the thirtith
king of Nauarre.
5. LEauing the Estate of Castile at this time somewhat quiet,Nauarre we will returne to the affaires
of Nauarre, the which we left at the death of Donna Ieanne, wife to King Philip
of Eureux: to whome of three sonnes, Charles, Philip, and Lewis: Charles the eldest succeeded
to the Crowne of Nauarre; who was surnamed the bad, by reason of the troubles
he caused, as well on this side, as beyond the Pyrenee mountaines, and of his strange disposition.
Beeing called by the three Estates of the Realme, hee came in the yeare 1350.
and was crowned in the cittie of Pampelona, in an assembly made to that end after the
manner of his Predecessors, swearing to obserue the lawes and liberties of the country.
His coronation was accompanied with some bountie to the Cathedrall church of Pampelona,
to the which among other things, he gaue a great crosse of siluer, enameled with
Flower de Luces azure.
During his coronation, some of his people mutined, pretending a breach of thier priuiledges,
whome the king did punish to seuerely, causing many to be hanged, and to bee
executed by other cruell punishments, as the cure farre exceeded the disease. With the
like violence he afflicted the Nobility of Nauarre,Manners of K. Charles the 2. so as they decayed greatly: and he shewed
himselfe in all his actions inconstant, wauering, and light of beleefe: If hee had any
good in him, it was a certaine respect he bare to Clergie men, and to schollers. At his coming
the king of Arragon sent a Secretarie of his vnto him, called Peter of Tarrega, to
confirme the League which was betwixt these two Realmes: and soone after hee sent him
another ambassage, by Don Lope Earle of Luna, and Don Iohn Fernandes of Heredia,
Castellan of Amposta, for a more ample confirmation of the league and allyance betwixt
them two: propounding vnto the king of Nauarre an allyance by marriage, to the end he
might hold the kingdomes of Nauarre and Arragon well vnited, for the king of Arragon
feared much, least Don Pedro king of Castile, (who was a violent, dangerous, and faithlesse
Prince) should breake the peace that was betwixt the two Realmes, imbracing the
quarrels of the Queene dowager of Arragon and of her children, and should ioyne with
Nauarre, by some allyance which might be preiudiciall vnto him. Hereuppon the Ambassadors
propounded a marriage betwixt Don Charles king of Nauarre, and one of the
daughters of the king of Sicily, who was of the house of Arragon. And for that it was

bruted, that the king of Castile (who had not then concluded a marriage with Blanche of
Bourbon) pretended to marrie Blanche of Nauarre, sister to this King Charles, and widdow
to Philip of Valois the French king, he was intreated to hinder it. King Charles who
had a desire, and was councelled to take a wife in France, excused himselfe from marrying
with Sicile, assuring the king of Arragon, that the Queen Dowager of France would not
marrie any more: for it had beene a custome long obserued in France, that the Queenes
remayning widowes, how young soeuer, did not marrie againe: finally, hee conclded
with the Ambassadours of an interview betwixt the king of Arragon and him: but before
it could be effected, Don Pedro king of Castile (who had beene aduertised of all which had
past betwixt the King Don Charles, and the ambassadours of Arragon) wrought so as he
drew the King of Nauarre to Bourgos,Enterview of the Kings of Nauarre and Castile. where there was great embracings, and rich presents
giuen of either side, in the yeare 1351. as we haue sayd. At this enterview was Philip
brother to king Charles. Beeing returned into Nauarre, and hauing many great desseigns
in his head, hee made preparation to passe into France: Whereof the King of Arragon
beeing aduertised, he sent to summon him of his promise, that they should meete together,
whereunto he yeelded, assigning the place at Momblanc, where by the same meanes
he should visit,Enterview betwixt the kings of Arragon and Castile. passing by Huesca, his Neeces D. Constance and D. Ieanne, Infants of Arragon.
Then the King Don Charles tooke his way towards France, leading with him his
two breethren, Don Philip and Don Lewis. The enterview of these Princes at Momblanc,
made them no better friends, neither did they conclude that which D. Pedro king
of Arragon did expect.
The king of Nauarre being come into France, he beganne to make claime to many
things, for besides the Earledomes of Champagne and Brie, which he pretended to belong
vnto him, hee made a title to the Duchie of Bourgongue, by reason of his mother
Queene Ieanne, issued from that house of Bourgogne by her mother, with many other
claimes, wherein king Iohn had no intent to do him right, finding it so by his Councell.
^ He had for his chief aduersarie another Charles or Iohn, according to the French Histories,
who was Constable of France, of the house of Castile, Earle of Angoulesme, sonne
to Don Alphonso de la Cerde, of whome wee haue often made mention, whereby there
were great insolencies, murthers, and rebellions committed throughout the Realme of
France, as we will touch briefly in passing, for that these quarrels belong rather to the Historie
of France then Spaine.
The king of Nauarre beeing in these poursuites, by the course of Iustice, before the
Estates of France, and the Courts of Parlament, King Iohn thinking to pacifie him, and
to make him more tractable, gaue him one of his daughters in marriage, and in recompence
of his demands, gaue him Mante and Meulan: but this did not abate his pride, but
wrought a contrarie effect. This Princesse called Ieanne, was the onely wife of King
Charles of Nauarre,Genealogie of Nauarre. who had a great and a noble issue by her. Charles was the first borne
of this marriage, who was king after his father Philip, who dyed young, Peter who was
Earle of Mortaing in Normandie. Moreouer, they had these daughters following, Mary
who was Countesse of Denia, married to Don Alphonso of Arragon, Blanche who died
at the age of thirteene yeares, and Ieanne future Duchesse of Brittaine, and after that
Queene of England.
Of the Earle of Mortaing, some Histories say, is issued one sonne named Peter of Peralta,
who was Constable of Nauarre, the stemme of the Marquis of Falses, yet by the
feminine line, who are also Earles of Saint Esteuan. Before the marriage of King Charles
hee had a bastard sonne, called Don Leon of Nauarre, or Lyonel, from whome are descended
the Marquises of Cortes, Marshals of Nauarre, begotten of a Gentlewoman of
the house of Euce. Of him was borne Don Philip, the first of that line, Marshall of Nauarre^
of Don Philip was borne Don Pedro; of him Don Philip and Don Pedro brethren:
of Don Pedro anther Don Pedro, all successiuely Marshals of Nauarre. In this last Don
Pedro fayled the Masculine line of D. Lyonel: for hee left onely one daughter, called
Donna Hieronyma of Nature, who was first wife to Don Iohn of Benauides, a Castillian
Knight, who was also Marshall of Nauarre in regard of her: and to her second

husband shee had Don Martin of Corduba and Velasco, Earle of Alcaudere, who
was in our time Marshall of Nauarre. This is the posterity of the bloud royall of Nauar,
descended of this king Charles, who poursuing with all violence his rights against the
French King, who held the Duchie of Bourgongne and other lands, which had beene the
patrimony of his Predecessors, he had for aduersary (as we haue sayd) Charles of Spaine:
and such was the hatred betwixt them, by reason of these pretensions, as in the end all
France was set on fire with ciuill wars, and the English were drawne in by the king of Nauarre,
who was supported by them: who to be reuenged of his enemy D. Charles of Spain,
Constable and Earle of Angoulesme,Murther of the Constable of France by the king of Nauars men. both being then in Normandy, he caused him to be
surprized in the night in the towne of Aigle, and murthered in his bed, by the hands of D.
Rodrigo of Vriz, D. Iohn Ramir of Arrellan, D. Corbaran of Leet, the Barrons of Garro and
Antiede, and other Knights and souldiers of Nauarre. Hee was so farre from dissembling
this fact, as he confessed it, and did iustifie it to be done by his commandement, and that
he had iustly slaine him: whereat the king, and the whole court were much troubled, seing
the great impudencie of the king of Nauarre, the which was entertayned by many within
the Realme which did adhere vnto him, besides the league he had with the English, to
the which he also sought to draw D. Pedro king of Arragon, who notwithstanding would
not heare of it, for that he was allyed to the French king, whose friendship he resolued to
entertaine. To preuent the mischiefes which might grow by such furies, King Iohn was
forced to dissemble, and by promise of impunity, gifts, and yeelding of townes and places,
according to the demands and pretensions of the King of Nauarre, seeke to break the
league which he had treated with the English, yea giuing him the Duke of Aniou his son
in hostage, to draw him to Court, where being come, the king made a shew that he wold
arraigne him, but it prooued a ieast: for hauing caused him to come before him on his
knees, and to craue pardon, he pa^doned him the Constables murther, and all that he had
committed against the Crowne of France and his authoritie, Queene Blanche, widow to K.
Philip, his sister, and Queene Ieane his wife being intercessors for him: but this reconciliation
was soone troubled: for the king of Nauarre thinking that the French king had rather
dissembled his displeasure, then forgotten it, did not quit the allyances which he had made
to the preiudice of France, but did stil intertaine secret practises both within and without
the Realme: and as he was turbulent, and euer full of iealousie and distrust, King Iohn hauing
called the Estates of his Realme, and shewed the necessities of war, demanding mony
for the leuie of 30000. men, the King of Nauar sought to hinder this subuention, and did
contradict it with all his power: notwithstanding it was granted. King Iohn being wonderfully
incensed at the King of Nauars impudency and pride, who in stead of assisting him,
like a good son-in-law, who had beene newly absolued by him from so great a crime, shewed
himselfe a violent aduersarie to his desseins, he sought a fit occasion to punish him,
the which fell out opportunely in the city of Rouan, at the reception of the Daulphin
Charles in Normandy, who had beene newly aduanced to that Duchie; whither came the
Noblemen of the countrie, namely, the king of Nauarre, as Earle of Eureux, a member
of the Dutchie, where as he with many others were surprized: the King was sent prisoner
to the castle of Alleux in Pallueil, and some Noblemen were executed, as you may read
at large in the French Historie.
King Iohn had aduertised Don Pedro King of Arragon, of all those proceedings, that
he might see he had done nothing lightly, beeing a reasonable thing, that Kings, how soueraigne
soeuer, should iustifie their actions, and to made them apparent, else they were
to be reputed Tyrants, and to be hated of all the world, as violent and vniust. Gaston Phebus
then Earle of Foix, who had married Agnes, sister to the king of Nauarre, was more
discontented then any other at his imprisonment, who passing into Spaine, sought to
incense Don Pedro King of Arragon his brother-in-law, and to procure him to declare
himselfe enemy to King Iohn, if he did not release the King of Nauar, but the King D. Pedro
wold not yeeld vnto it: for he held the friendship of France to be a firm support for his Estates:
besides he stil feared a war betwixt him and D. Pedro; yet he promised to be an intercessor
for him to k. Iohn, and to intreat him to shew his clemency, and to intreat his prisoner
without passion, but by the course of Iustice, and moreouer not to exact all his right of him,



in respect he was a king, and his son-in-law, and of the bloud of France: the which hee did
with great affection; sending ambassadors to that end to the French king: so as king Iohn
as well by the intercession of the King of Arragon, as of the aboue-named Queenes, and
other Noblemen of his Realme, gaue the king of Nauarre to vnderstand, that hee should
prepare himselfe to answer to the accusations of his Atturney generall, and that he wold
allow him to take learned councell vnto him, of what nation he would desire, for his iustification,
assuring him that he would not crosse him in his defences: that if it were found he
had done him any wrong, that he would make him such satisfaction, as he shold rest contented:
but if on the other side he were found guiltie of high treason, it was in him to pardon
him, or not, at his pleasure. Hereupon they entred into processe according vnto iustice,
but within few dayes after King Iohn was taken in Guien by the English, which
stayed these iudiciall proceedings. During his imprisonment, Lewis his yonger brother
came into Nauarre, to gouerne the Realme, who was sollicited by D. Pedro king of Arragon,
and receiued ayde from him against the king of Castile, who had made sharpe wars
against him, as you shall heare. But necessity forceth vs to treat of the affaires of Arragon
during the first yeares of the raign of D. Pedro of Castile, and D. Charles of Nauarre.
6 D. Pedro king of Arragon,Arragon. being reasonably quiet within his realm, by the last accord
made in the fauor, and by the perswasion of D. Alphonso king of Castile, at the camp of Gibraltar,
with his mother-in-law D. Leonora dowager of Arragon and her children, D. Fernand,
and Don Iohn: gaue himselfe to some reformation of politicke things, and in the
yeare 1350. he abolished the vse of Caesars Aera, according to the which they did accompt
the yeares, and did date their contracts all letters, gouerning all their negotiations in
Arragon after the ancient manner of Spaine, commanding from thence-foorth to
follow the computation of yeares taken from the Natiuity of our Lord Iesus Christ.AEra of Caesar abolished in Arragon. This
manner of computation by Aera, had bin brought in by the ancient Spaniards, to gratifie
Augustus Caesar, accompting their yeres from that time that they made a diuision of the
world with Mark Anthony and Lepidus. Spaine among other Prouinces of Europe, was
fallen to him alone, which was the 4. yeare of his Empire, and 38. yeares before the Natiuity
of our Lord. The yeare 1351.1351. following, D. Iohn his son beeing borne at Perpignan,
of his third wife,Girone a principality for the eldest son of Arragon. D. Leonora of Sicile, or Constance according to some, hee instantly made
him duke of Girone, and called him Prince of Girone, which title the eldest son of Arragon
hath since caried, and gaue him to be bred vp to Bernard of Cabrera, one of his most truly
Councellers. Moreouer, he would haue the Estates sweare vnto this Infant, in the towne
of Perpignan, as heire presumptiue of the Crowne: but he was diuerted from this desseine
by the perswasions of D. Pedro of Xerica, D. Iohn Fernandes of Heredia, Prior of S. Iohn,
and of D. Iohn Lopes of Sesebio Iustice of Arragon: who aduertised him, that the oath accustomed
to be made to kings children, and to kings themselues, was alwaies first done in
Arragon, and in the city of Sarragossa, and that to breake this order without vrgent occasion,
could not but breed confusions. The ambassadors of Iohn the French king, came to
him to Perpignan, who treated againe of a marriage betwixt Lewis of France duke of Aniou,
and Ieanne 2. daughter to the king D. Pedro, the which took no better effect, then the
other which had bin treated for D. Constance the eldest. There came also vnto this K. ambassadors
from the Venetians and Geneuois, who were at great wars among themselues,
either of them affecting his fauor but he inclined most to the common-weale of Genoa,
as the most profitable for his affaires, especially in regard of the Iland of Sardinia: but by
the perswasion of D. Bernard of Cabrera, laying before him the ancient hatred of the Geneuois
against the Cattelans, and their many trecheries of their citizens against the crown
of Arragon, he made a league with the Venetians, and in their fauor armed against the Geneuois,
commanding Ponce of S. Paix,League betwixt the king of Arragon and the Venetians. Generall of the Cattelan army, to go into Sicily
with 26. gallies well armed, the which he did, to whom there afterwards ioyned 20. Venetian
gallies, in the port of Messina, commanded by Pancrace Iustinian. The Geneuois for
their parts had rigged out 65. gallies, whereof Perin of Grimaldi was Generall: who being
past litle before, sayling towards Constantinople: (against the walles of which citty the
common-weale of Genoa held the town of Pera) were followed by the Arragonois and
Venetian armie, beeing increased, besides the gallies of Iustinian, by 16. other Venetian

gallies, commanded by Nicholas Pican: and of 4. of Valence, whereof Ripol a Cattelan had
the charge: and moreouer of 9. gallies of Iohn Paleologue, Emperour of Constantinople
then raigning. The two armies coming to fight in the streight of the Bosphore of Thrace,
the Cauelans and Venetians had the victory, but very bloudy: for they lost 14. gallies, yet
most of the soldiers were saued. Ponce of S. Paix, chiefe of the Cattelans, with the toyle he
had endured that day (and it may be by some wounds he had receiued) dyed soone after at
Constantinople:Battel very cruel betwixt the Genouois and Venetians. Ricol was slaine in the fight. Pancrace Iustinian dyed also at Constantinople
of the wounds he had receiued, and there dyed many other Gentlemen and Venetian
soldiers during the conflict. As for the Geneuois, there were 24. gallies taken or sunke,
with all their burthens: the rest of the Cattelans hauing repaired 11. gallies which remayned
of their fleet, able to serue (for the rest were so broken as they were altogether vnprofitable)
mette at Negrepont, whereas 12. gallies of Cattelogne and Valencia, sent
for a supply by the King D. Pedro, did also enter: and there they also ioyned with the rest
of the Venetian gallies. These two States being perswaded by the Pope and Christian Princes
to make a peace, the king of Arragon in the end remayned an enemy to Genoa, for
notwithstanding all the perswasions of the Popes Nuncio, he stil answered, that he would
haue no friendship with the common-weale, vnlesse they would quit vnto him the Iland
of Corsica, and that their souldiers should dislodge out of Sardinia. To crosse this peace
betwixt the Venetians and Genouois, the king D. Pedro sent Raymondus Lullius, in ambassage
vnto Venice, he was son or kinsman to him that was the greatest Philosopher of his
age. This was in the yeare 1352, in the which the Prince D. Iohn, the kings son,The Prince D. Iohn sworne heire presumptiut. was sworne
heire, and successor to the realme in the city of Saragossa, after the accustomed manner.
There were ciuill warres, with strange and trecherous reuolts at that time in Sardynia,
where as the Geneuois held Alguer, and the castle Genouois, with whom many Sardinians
ioyned, and Marian Iudge of Arborea (a great fauorer, vntill that time of the Arragon
name in that Iland) with others; whom they suspected not, fel from the king D. Pedro:
so as D. Rambaud of Corbera the Gouernor, could hardly resist so great a fury, to whome
there arriued D. Stephen of Arragon, son to William Duke of Athens, being sent by the K.
D. Pedro with gallies and soldiers: and in the yeare 1353. D. Bernard of Cabrera was sent
with 45. vessels called Vxeres: who hauing ioyned with 20. Venetian gallies,An. 1353. whereof Nicholas
Pisan was chief, they came to fight with an army of Genouois, led by Anthony Grimaldi,
in the view of Alguer, where as the Genouois were defeated, with the losse of 35.
gallies, and aboue 3000. prisoners: wherupon Alguer was then abandoned by the Dorian
faction, of which family Fabian Rosso, (found among the prisoners) was beheaded for that
he did rebell vpon euery occasion. This rigour vsed to Fabian, did so incense him against
the Arragonois, as hauing perswaded them of Alguer to a new rebellion, and in steade of
Iudge of Arborea, he caused himselfe to be called king of Sardinia; which title he tooke at
the instigation of Timber of Rocabertin his wife, beeing desirous aboue all the women of
her time to be called Queene. D. Bernard of Cabrera did afterwards giue a defeat at land,
to the reuolted Sardinians, neere vnto Cailleri, in Bourg called Quarto: and hauing manned
th fort of Cailleri, the town of Sasseri, and other places* he returned into Cattelognes;
leauing the gard of the Iland to D. Rambaud of Corbera, and ouer the soldiers Count Arnaud
of Pallars, who being prest by the Sardinians, and the Genoa faction, were soone after
somwhat fortified by 500. archers, 80. men at armes, and 20. light horse, which D. Michel
Peres Zapate, an old experienced Captaine, brought vnto them. The K. being much
incensed against the Genouois, who hee knew were assisted by Iohn Archb. and Duke of
Milan, hee held his reputation to bee so ingaged in this war of Sardinia, as hee resolued to
passe into that Iland in person, and to lead such forces, as he might both root out all his enemies,
and inuade Corsica, which he still demanded for the price of any peace that was
propounded vnto him with that common-weale by the Pope and other Christian Potentates.
He came with this dessein to Barcelona, where in the yeare 1354. he caused the standard
royal to be displayed; a signe,An. 1354. that a royall army should go to sea. Zachary Contarin
Ambassadour of Venice, did presse him to this expedition, for the which there were inrolled
a thousand men at armes, fiue hundred Genets or light horse-men, and ten thousand
foote, all vnder the command of Don Bernard of Cabrera, who in this warre held

the place of Seneshall; which was that which we call Constable: and hee had in like manner
the generall command ouer the gallies and shippes. The king left his Vncle Don Pedro
Earle of Ribagorca and Ampurias, Regent or Gouernour in his absence, and parting
from Roses with twenty shippes, fiue Gallies, and many other vessels, hee arriued
in a port called Comte, three miles from Alguer in Sa^dynia, but with great difficultie by
reason of the torment. There passed in his companie Iohn Graille, Captall of Buch, with
many other Noblemen strangers, and of his owne subiects, Don Lope of Luna, whome
hee had made Earle of Luna, for his merits and good seruices: Philip of Castro, Iohn Ximenes
of Vrrea, Iohn Martines of Luna, Fernand Ruis of Thaust, Blasco Fernandes of Heredia,
Lope Gorrea, Don Stephano of Arragon, sonne to the Duke of Athenes, Don Pedro
of Xerica, Gilibert Scintilla, Olpho Prochita, Alphonso Roger of Loria, Pedro Maza, Raymond
Ruiseco, Gisbert of Castelet, Mathew Mercier, Goncal of Casteluis, Pedro Lopes Otecia:
moreouer, Don Hugues Vicount of Cardona, Bernardin of Cabrera, sonne to Bernard,
Andrew Vicount of Cannet, Othon of Moncade, Roger Bernard Vicount of Castelbon,
Don Fernand of Heredia, Don Arnaud Roger, and Raymond of Palliars, Artal of
Fosses, William Bellera, Bernard Cruillia the elder, and Bernard Cruillia the younger, the
first famous for the warres of Italy, the other newly come from beeing a page, Ponce Fenouillet,
Francis Ceruia, Galcerand of Pinos, Galuian Anglesole, with other Noblemen,
Arragonois, Cattelans, and Valencians, whereof some had charge of men, the rest followed
the kings Cornet.
Marian (who caused himselfe to be called King of Sardynia) hearing of this great preparation,
and fearing due punishment, sent vnto the king, as he was readie to imbarke, to
offer him all obedience, and to deliuer him the places which hee had taken, with a good
summe of money: but the king past on. At his arriuall he found the enemies had taken the
towne of Eglise, a strong place, and of importance, but the castell had beene defended
and preserued. This castell and that of Cailleri, Ioicusegard, Aquafredda, the towne of
Sasseri, and the castell, with those of Oria and Osoli, were the forts which held for the
Arragonois in the Iland. The seege was layd to Alguer, and that place was suriously bartered
and assaulted: to diuert which seege, there were ten gallies of Genoa, which shewed
themselues, at sea, and Marian with Mathew D'Oria vppon the land, hauing in his companie
two thousand horse, and fifteene thousand foote, who striued in vaine: for Alguer
yeelded,Alguer taken. notwithstanding that the king fell sicke, andhis armie was grieuously afflicted
with the plague, and Marian had no other fruites of his paines, but the taking of the castell
of Quitra. Marian was allyed to Don Pedro of Xerica, the which disappointed many
good exploits, many conditions of peace beeing often propounded, whereunto the
king was often drawne and inclined. During this seege there came thirty Venetian Gallies,
to ioyne with the army of Arragon: and thither did Abrahim King of Tunes and Bugie,
send an ambassage to the king D. Pedro to conclude a peace with him, in consideration
of a tribute of 2000. doublons, which he promised to pay him yearely. After the yeelding
of Alguer, the king of Arragon past to Cailleri, where hauing called the Estates of Sardynia,
at the least from those places which held his party, hee condemned Gerard Earle of
Donoratico, as the motiue and fauourer of Marians rebellion: so as the famous family of
Donoratico was extinct in Sardinia. Those of Malespine were in like manner forced to
retire to Nice, and other lands which they had in Prouence, and to leaue the Iland Marian
kept the field for a time, and had many
light incounters with the kings men: but in the end
by the intreatie of his friends, he obtayned a peace, excusing his rebellion vpon the kings
seuerity, and the vniust proceedings of his ministers: and for that during these wars of Sardinia,Peace in Sardinia.
the Pope had reconciled the two common-weales of Venice and Genoa, who had
made him vmper of their controuersies, the king shewed himselfe moer plyable to treate
of peace with the Genouois, for the which he was wonderfull importuned by the Princes.
Matters standing vpon these termes, D. Pedro returned into Spaine, and from thence past
to Auignon, where as the Pope propunded, that he should leaue the Iland of Corsica in
the Geneuois hand, to enjoy it quietly, vpon condition they should hold it of the kings of
Arragon, and do them homage for it, and paying him rent, the which the king yeelded vnto:
but he demanded an excessiue tribute, that is, 50000. florins of gold euery yeare.

The Geneuois reiecting this burthen, as too grieuous, did shew, that they had right
to that Iland, aboue two hundred yeares before, by donations made vnto them by the
Popes. The Duke of Milan dealt also in these treaties, and pretended the lands of Galluri
in Sardynia, by hereditarie right, as descending from the daughter of Nino Iudge of Galluri,
of the familie of Viscontez.
All these controuersies were left vndecided, neither could the Pope, nor other Mediators
bring the parties to any conclusion: and vppon these occasions the Iland of Sardynia
was againe troubled with seditions and reuolts, whereof Matthew D'Oria was the
chiefe author, who did also ingage Marian Iudge of Arborea. Whilest the king was in
Arragon, he made Denia an Earledome, to the which he did aduance D. Alphonso of Arragon,
son to D. Pedro Earle of Ribagorca, and likewise Vich, the which he gaue to Don
Bernardin of Cabrera, son to Don Bernard. After his returne into Spaine, the treatie of
peace betwixt him and the Common-weale of Genoua was againe debated before the
Pope, by the Ambassadours of both parties: but all came to nothing: wherefore the tumults
increasing in Sardynia, and Mathew D'Oria hauing forced the castell of Oria, the
king sent D. Gilbert Chintilla thither with what forces he could, and entred into a cruell
war against Castile in the yeare 1356. the cause whereof was as followeth.
7 Don Pedro king of Castile beeing at some peace with his subiects, and soiourning
in the cittie of Seuile, he went one day to Saint Lucar of Barameda,Castile and Arragon. to see the fishing of
Thuns, which is very plentifull in those parts: where it happened, that as the army of Arragon
(consisting of ten gallies and some other vessels) commanded by Francis Perillos,
past along that Coast, to go into France, in fauour of King Iohn, against the English,
they met with two ships of Genoa laden with oyles, which the gallies had poursued, and
taken in the port of Saint Lucar: whereuppon the king of Castile (who was vppon the
place) gaue the Admirall of Arragon to vnderstand, that that prize was an injurie done
vnto him, and therfore he shold restore the ships, with their ladings and furniture: wherof
the Admirall Perillos made no accompt, saying, that they were shippes belonging to
the enemies of his king: and the Arragon Authors say, that Perillos entred euen into the
mouth of Guadalquibir, and their made prey of all he found: whereat the king of Castile
beeing moued, he caused all the Cattelan shippes and Merchants to bee arrested within
his Realme, and seazed vppon all their goods and merchandise. And as he was cholericke
and furious, not respecting peace, truce, league nor allyance whatsoeuer, hee sent to denounce
warre against the Arragonois, and began to put it in execution. Notwithstanding
that he offered to recompence vnto the Merchants, whome his Admirall had spoyled,
and to make all other honest satisfactions accustomed betwixt Prince and Prince.
All this preuayled not: for about the end of the yeare 1356. hee sent troups of horse
and foote to spoyle the territories of Valence,An. 1356. towards Murcia, and also of Molina, thrust
on by some about him, who were desirous of stirres, thinking to assure and increase their
Estates by the meanes of forraine warres: so as the king of Arragon found himselfe suddenly
engaged in a dangerous warre against a mighty enemy: to preuent the which, hee
drew vnto him. Lewis brother to the King of Nauarre, Gouernour of that Countrie, and
had from thence such succours, as the Estate of their affaires could well beare: wherein
Lewis shewed himselfe so discreet and wise, as the King of Castile held him a neuer betwixt
both, parties. Moreouer, he called vnto him out of France, Henry Earle of Transtamara,
base brother to the king of Castile, and much hated by him, who made himselfe
Vassall to the Crown of Arragon, and had from the King the lands of Villegrasse, Montblanc,
and others in Cattelogne, Arragon, and Valence, doing fealtie and homage: yea
in a manner all that had beene held by Donna Leonora the Queene Dowager, and her
children Don Fernand, and Don Iohn of Arragon, and was made Commander of the
men of warre for the defence of the frontiers against Castile: which made the king of
Castile to come into Arragon in person, with greater forces, and to make warre with
all violence and extremity, where hee tooke Bordalua and Embite, and so prest Tarassone
with the force of armes, as hee forced the Inhabitants to surrender and yeeld the
place without opposition, vppon condition that they might retire to Tudele a towne of
Nauarre.

Besides this he tooke Alcala of Firuela, Verrejon, and the castell of los Fajos, hauing in
his ar^^ie nine thousand horse,span. and a great number of foote, against the which forces the
Arragonois durst not present themselues: wherefore he marched as farre as hee pleased,
and then returned to Tarassone. There by the meanes and industrie of Cardinall William,
the Popes Legate, there was a truce concluded for a yeare: whereuppon he took his way
towards Seuile. Beeing yet at Tarassone, he had newes that Don Iohn de la Cerde, and D.
Aluar Perez of Guzman were reuolted from him, and had taken the party of Arragon,
and that at that instant they had beene charged, and defeated by his men in Andalusia,
and Don Iohn de la Cerde taken,D. Iohn de la Cerde slaine by the (...) Commandement. whom he commanded to bee slaine before his arriuall:
then being come to Seuile, he spent the rest of the yeare to prepare in armie at sea for the
future warre: for his intent was not to conclude a peace, neither would he yeeld the cittie
of Tarassone into the Legats hands, according to the capitulations, nor performe any
part of that which had beene treated, notwithstanding that the king of Arragon had performed
all on his part: whereuppon the Leagate beeing at Tudele, in Saint Maries church
he propounded a sentence of Excommunication against Don Pedro King of Castile, and
did interdict his Realme, in the presence of the Bishops of Cominges and Tarrassone,
and the Ambassadors of Castile and Arragon, the which put the king of Castile into a
greater furie. The Legate beeing at Huesca, published the Decree and Censure against
the King of Castile and his Realme, by the which, besides that which hath beene spoken,
he was condemned in hundred Markes of siluer to the Sea of Rome: and defence made
to Lewis brother to the king of Nauarre, to the kings of England and Portugall, to all
Christian Princes, yea and to those that did in any sort belong by consanguinitie to this
excommunicated king, not to conuerse with him, nor to giue him ayde nor succours.
Then was the Infant Don Fernand of Arragon perswaded by some Noblemen of Arragon,
to meete with Don Pedro king of Arragon his brother, in a valley, couered with
trees, where they had a long and friendly discourse so as the Infant returned, full of promises
and hopes.
The Captaine of Tarassone for the king of Castile, called Goncales Lusio, was
also drawne by the perswasions of Suero Garcia of Toledo, who was fled into Arragon,
sonne to Garcia Suero, to yeeld vp that place to the King of Arragon, vppon promise of
fortie thousand Florins, the which he did soone after execute. And for that the effects of
the King of Castiles bad inclination appeared daily, there was a League made betwixt
the King of Maroc and hee of Arragon to the preiudice of Castile, and Don Tello of
Castile, and the Earle of Luna, entred with an armie towards Soria, where they spoiled
the Countrie.
Thus these two Kings Don Pedro King of Castile, and Don Pedro king of Arragon,
wilfull, cholericke, and madde, sell againe into a cruell and pernitious warre, to the inestimable
prejudice of their subiects, and shame and dishonor to the name of Christians.
Whilest the King lay idle in Andalusia, beeing too much giuen to women, he courted
Donna Aldonca Cornel, daughter to the deceased Don Alphonso Fernandes Cornel,
whom he had caused to be slain, and wife to D. Aluar Perez of Guzman, his rebell: but yet
he did not forget D. Maria of Padilla. Besides this vice, hee continued his cruelty against
the Nobility: for that yeare 1358.An. 1358. he caused his brother D. Frederic Master of S. Iames, to
be slain in the town of Carmona,D. Frederic the kings brother and other Noblemen put to death. being newly come out of Murcia, where hee had in his
name recouered Iumilla, from the Arragonois who had taken it. There was also slaine by
his commandement Sancho Ruis of Rojas: at Cordoua he also put to death Peter Cabrera,
Fernand Alphonso of Gates: and at Salamanca Alphonso Geoffrey Tenorto: at Toro Alphonso
Peres Fermosino: and in the castell of Moja, Garci Mendez of Toledo: and moreouer
he caused Lope Sanches of Abendagno, great Commander of Castile, to bee put to
death, and others in diuers places according to his humour and discontentment: yet seeking
to couer these executions with a cloake of Iustice, publishing declarations, containing
the crimes of such as he had put to death, although it were apparent that they were
but reuenges, for that all, or the most part of them had not approued his excesse, or had in
some sort opposed themselues.
In which murthers employed two, were much fauored by him, who afterwards

fell into the same misfortune, for a recompence of their good seruices; as it happened
to his cousin D. Iohn of Arragon, sonne to the Queene D. Leonora, who being an actor in
the death of D. Frederic maister of Saint Iames, did willingly follow the King in a voiage
he made into Biscay, to disposse D. Tello his other brothr of that Lordship, and to kill
him. The King being sodainely arriued at Aguilar del Campo, he had surprized D. Tello
being a hunting, and not dreaming of his comming, had he not beene aduertised by a
Squire of his, called Guttiere Guerra; but through this aduertisment he escaped and retired
to Vermeo; the chiefe towne of Biscay, where getting into a fisher boate, he saued
himselfe at Saint Iohn de Luz, and from thence retired to Bayone. He was not farre at
sea before the King came to Vermeo, who hearing that he was dislodged, he beganne to
pursue him by sea, and went as Farre as Legueytio, but descouering nothing (and the sea
withall beginning to grow high) returned, and carried away prisoner D. Ieanne of Lara,
wife to D. Tello, Inheretrix of Biscay.(...). The King being at Vermeo, D. Iohn of Arragon,
who had married D. Isabella of Lara the other sister, besought him to grant him
that Lordship, seeing that D. Tello had shewed himselfe contumacious, his wife being also
prisoner, and that he had married the other sister: to whom the King answered cunningly,
that hee would haue the Biscains assemble in the towne of Guernica, according to
their ancient preuiledges, and there choose their Lord, and that for his part he would labour
to haue him chosen; the which did satisfie D. Iohn for the present.
In the meane time the King did let the chiefe of the assembly vnderstand, that when
they were together, and the King should propound vnto them for to choose D. Iohn of
Arragon, they should all cry out, that they would haue no other Lord, then the King
himselfe, and his successors Kings, the which they did, as they had beene enioyned: so
as D. Iohn of Arragon found himselfe frustrate of his hopes. This generall assembly of
Biscay, is called in her countrie language, Batcaar, which is as much to say, as an assembly
of ancients. The King being come from Guernica to Bilbao, hee sent for D. Iohn of
Arragon to his lodging, and there commanded he should be slaine in his presence,D. Iohn of Arragon slaine in the Kings lodging and in his presence. and
his body to be cast out at the window which looked into the court (the which was ful of
people) and crying woth a loude voice: Behold your Lord of Biscay who demaunded
you: then he caused him to be carried to Bu^gos, and there to be cast into the riuer, and
would not suffer him to be buried: and for that his mother D. Leonora Dowager of Arragon,
and his wife D. Isabell, were greeued for this cruel act he caused them to be shut
vp prisoners in the castle of Castro Xeris. This was the reward of Iohn of Arragon,
who had, to please a tyrant, consented to the death of many great personages, yea his
neere kinsmen.
The King being come to Vailledolit, he had resolued to sacrifice some in that towne:
but hearing that D. Henry of castile, Earle of Transtamara, and D. Fernand of Arragon,
brother to D. Iohn, did ouerrunne the countries of Soria, and Almajan, and that of Murcia,
he did forbeare, and hauing put great garrisons into the places about Soria, he came
to Seuile, being resolued to doe all acts of hostility both by land and sea against the
King of Arragon. He had made ready eighteene gallies with the which and great forces
by land, he came and beseeged Guardamar, and tooke it: and for that it did belong
to the Infant D. Fernand, he burnt the towne, but he could not take the castle. But sodainely
a violent winde tooke his gallies vpon that coast, so as sixteene of them ranne
on ground: yet he returned againe into Murcia, and was nothing amazed thereat (for he
was of a proude and haughty spirit) but caused many other gallies to be built at Seuile,
and commanded that all the ships in Galicia, Biscay and Guipuscoa, should come thether
in the beginning of the yeere 1359.An. 1359. to inuade the Realmes of Valence, Cattelogne
and Arragon.
During these exploits of warre, D. Pedro King of Arragon charged him of Castile
with disloyaltie and treason before the Pope, and challenged him by Bernard Galscran of
Pinos, to whom the King of Arragon would haue giuen the title of King of Majorca,
that he might be equal in quality to the King of Castile, but this was a mocquery.Marriage of Isabel of Ma^orca to the Marquis of Montferrat. This
yeere was married D. Isabel daughter to the vnfortunate Don Iames King of Majorca,
to Iohn Marquis of Montferrat, to whom the King of Arragon gaue fifty thousand

florins in dowry, vpon condition that she should renounce all her fathers rights, and so
she did. The King of Arragon being then at Saragossa, he renued and confirmed to the
Nobility of that city, whom they call Ermunios, the preuiledge they haue not to goe
to the warres, but when the King is in person ready to giue battaile, or to assaile some
place, and declared that if any one of these preuiledged persons had followed him beyond
these limitations, that it should be no preiudice to their rights. There he gaue the
charge of the warre, for the preseruation of the country, to the Archbishop of Saragossa.
Whilest that the confederate Noblemen of Castile, together with the Arragonois, did
ruine and burne the country of Alua; the King of Castile led a great power by land
against Arragon, by the way of Almacan, where he tooke Negasta and Torrijo. During
this warre D. Henry Earle of Transtamara had a sonne by his wife in the towne of Epila
(the which at this daie belongs to the Earle of Arande) who was called Iohn, and raigned
in Castile. Cardinal William being no longer fit to make a peace betwixt these two
Princes, the Pope sent Cardinal Guy of Bolonia, Bishop of Portuense, this yeere of our
Lord 1359. who preuailed as little as the other, but by hid diligence and importunate
pursute he incensed the King of Castile more against the house of Arragon, and his rage
proceeded so farre, as he condemned all the Knights of Castile that were in Arragon,
by proclamation:Cruelty more then deuil sh of D. Pedro King of castile. he caused the Queene D. Leonora his aunt to bee cruelly murthered,
being widow to D. Alphonso King of Arragon: and hauing caused D. Ieanne of Lara,
the Lady of Biscay, to bee transported to the castle of Almodouar del Rio, and from
thence to Seuile, he there also caused her to be murthered: such was the diuilish fury of
this monster, who being once moued vpon any subiect, discharged his rage vpon al that
came into his fantasie: He did the like vnto D. Isabella of Lara, widow to D. Iohn of Arragon,
to whom by the death of her elder sister, leauing no children, the Siegneurie
of Biscay, did belong, but shee died not by the sword, but by poison, which this tyrant
caused to be giuen her. In these Ladies was extinct the succession of the ancient Lords
of Biscay.
The season being fit for nauigation, the King of Castile went out of Seuile, or Saint
Lucar, with foure score ships, and one and forty gallies, and sailed towards the coast of
Valence and Cattelogne; he ruined the towne of Guardamar, and the Castle againe, and
presented himselfe in view of Barcelona: but the army of Arragon, which was but fo
forty foists and gallies hindred him from staying at any place vpon the coast, and skyrmishing
often with him, they forced him to bend towards Iuiza, and to way anchor in
hast from thence, and to saile towards Alicant and Carthagena, and in the end to retire
himselfe, hauing with this great preparation done nothing of import. The King of
Arragon was in the meane time in the Island of Majorca, being aduised not to be in his
army at sea. The gallies of Castille retired to Seuile, and the ships of Guipuscoa, Biscay
and Galicia, returned into their countries: as for the King of Castile, he went to Tordesillas
to visit Donna Maria of Padilla.
The coast of Cattelogne and Valence was this yeere ill prouided of ships of warre:
for that the King of Arragon was forced to entertaine many gallies continually in the
Island of Sardynia, beeing still subiect to reuolts, and moreouer he had sent a good number
into Sicile, to aide the King D. Frederic his son in law, against whom Ieanne Queene
of Naples made warre.


D. Pedro alone of that name, the eight King
of Portugal.
8 DOn Pedro surnamed the Iusticer raigned in Portugal,Portugal. who had succeeded his father
D. Alphonso the fourth, deceased in the yeere of our Lord 1357. Hee was about
seuen and thir^y yeeres old when hee beganne to raigne, and therefore being ripe in
yeeres, and of a good Iudgement he gouerned his realme with great equity, so as he purchased
the name of Iusticer, and was much vnlike in manners to the other two Kings of

his time, and the same name. This King (his father being yet lyuing) was married to
Blanch, daughter to D. Pedro King of Castile,Genealogy of Portugal. sonne to d. Sancho, who falling into a palsey,
was left by him, and then he married D. Constance Manuel, daughter to D. Iohn Manuel,
by whom he had these children following. D. Lewis, who liued little, D. Fernand,
who raigned, Donna Maria,D. Pedros priuat marriage with Donna Agnes of Castro. married in the life of D. Alphonso her Grandfather, to D.
Fernand Infant of Arragon, sonne to the King D. Alphonso, by his second wife D. Leonora
of Castile. D. Constance dying in the yeere of our Lord 1345. he married Donna Agnes
of Castro, a gentlewoman which had followed her, and with whom they sayd he had
familiar acquaintance during her life, for she was exceeding faire and amiable. The Infant
D. Pedro (although she were somewhat allied vnto him, and had christened his son D. Lewis)
married her secretly, for feare of his father, in 1354. hauing enioyed her many yeeres,
and the witnesses of this matrimoniall promise, were D. Gil Bishop of Guardia, and
Stephen Louat Maister of his Wardrop, whom he commanded to keepe it secret. By her
D. Pedro had three sonnes: D. Alphonso, who died in France, D. Iohn and D. Denis, who
were afterwards expelled by their brother D. Fernand then raigning, and died in Castile.
Of this Lady Don^ia Agnes, was also borne one daughter, called Donna Beatrix, who
was married to D. Sancho Earle of Albuquerque, base sonne to D. Alphonso the thirteenth
King of Castile. This clandestine marriage being vnknowne to the King D.
Alphonso, father to D. Pedro, and yet his loues knowne and blamed by all men, it was treated
of to marry him with some Princesse, but hee would not heare of it: wherefore the
King tooke a cruell resolution to kill D. Agnes de Castro, thinking he should not otherwise
withdraw his sonnes loue. Being come to this effect to Coimbra where this faire
Lady remained,Cruel massaker of D. Agnes of Castro wise to the Infant D. Pedro. whilest that the Infant D. Pedro was a hunting, he caused her to be slaine
by three of his gard, which were Diego Lopes Pacheco, Peter Cuello, and Aluar Goncales,
who did this execution in the old pallace of Saint Clare. This death being in the yeere
of our Lord 1355. made the Infant rebel against his father, who with the aide of many
of his friends, entred the country betwixt Duero and Minio, where he committed great
spoile, and had done more, if many great personages had not labored happely to reconcile
them. After that he loued other Lady, called D. Theresa Gallega, by whom hee
had one sonne, called Iohn, in the yeere 1357. He was first Maister of the Knights of Auiz,
and afterwards King after D. Fernand his brother, and the same yeere 1357. died king
D. Alphonso the braue.
D. Pedro being come to the crowne, he shewed himselfe a iust Prince, obseruing aboue 
all things the lawes and ordinances made by his father,Disposition of D. Pedro King of Portugal. for the ordring of his house and
traine, the Officers whereof were expresly forbidden not to molest his subiects, especially
puruo^ers, nor to take any prouision for his house, before they had paied the price
which the seller demanded, vpon great penalties, yea death in some cases. Hearing
that aduocates did multiply sutes, and that of one they often made many, he discharged
them all throughout his realme, and imposed great punishments vpon Iudges that
should suffer themselues to be corrupted with money or otherwise, yea losse of life, and
confiscation of their goods: he made in any lawes for the shortning of sutes, appointing
fit men for Iudges: causing his ordonances to be executed with all rigor. Hee appointed
great punishments for light offences, and if any one told him that he was to seuere,
he answered, that it was the meanes to reforme vice, and that it was pleasing vnto God;
for if the wicked were not kept in awe with the feare of death, they would neuer bee restrained
with lesser punishments; Finally to haue the good liue in peace, it was necessary
to punish the bad seuerely. As soone as the pleaders had made their demaunds, and
pertinent answeres giuen, they were presently dispatched if it might be: If by any trickes
and deuises matters were delaied, the offenders were punished, that is, the poore by the
whip, and the rich by great fines: by reason whereof his realme florished in peace and
aboundance of all things, and he was honoured and beloued of his subiects as much as
any Prince lyuing. Hee had often in his mouth the saying of the Emperour Titus.
That he held that day lost, wherein hee* had not done good to some one. Hee did not
greeue to be himselfe in person at the deciding of causes, and did often assist at the examination
and torturing of criminal persons; he did so hate malefactors, as hee did often

times rise from the table to haue them punished, yea he tooke such pleasure to doe iustice,
as he caused to be borne before him, or did carry himselfe, a whip or rod wherewith
offenders should be punished, to the end he might cause himselfe to be feared, and
Iustice more respected, so as to many this seuerity seemed to approch neere vnto cruelty:
Moreouer he was carefull to dispatch all sorts of businesse,His dilligence and equity. with great breuity, especially
if a stranger came into his court, he commanded he should be presently dispatched,
to the end hee should not consume himselfe in charges. With his royal vertues, hee
loued hunting,His delights. dauncing and Ladies, and all other sports, but not with such excesse as
the other Kings of Spaine of his time, neither was he free from desire of reuenge, mixt
with some infidelity: for his, father being once dead, he affected nothing more then to
reuenge the death of his best beloued D. Agnes of Castro, wherefore knowing that Diego
Lopes Pacheco, Peter Cuello and Aluar Goncales, who had slaine her,^esi^e of reuenge moues the King of Portugal to betray them that were retired vnto his protection. were in Castile, hee
made an accord with his Nephew D. Pedro King of Castile, to deliuer vnto him in exchange,
some Castillan Knights, who to flie the fury of this tyrant, were retired into
Portugal, vnder his protection, so as they made this dishonorable exchange, when as
these three men were brought to Saint Iren, whereas the King was, hee would insantly
haue them put to sundry torments, but the Noblemen which were about him disswaded
him: yet could he not forbeare to vse outragious speeches, yea hee strooke Peter Cuell^
on the face, and notwithstanding that they excused themselues vpon the commaundement
of the King his father, yet hee condemned them to cruel deaths. Peter Cuello and
Aluar Goncales, were executed first before the court gate, causing the one to bee opened
by the brest, and the other by the backe, to pul out their hearts. Diego Lopes Pacheco appointed
to the same death had the hap to escape, flying in a pilgrimes weed into Castile,
where he lay concealed vntil that Don Henry came vnto the crowne,Family of Pacheco in Castile. whom hee serued,
and was much beloued of him. They say he was the stem of the house of Pacheco in
Castille, which gaue beginning to the Marquis of Villena, and Dukes of Escalona.
This cruel example shalbe followed by one more commendable; this King D. Pedr^
beeing in Lisbone, where they had made him a stately entry, and ordained a Tourney
whereas many Knights both Portugals and strangers did runne: hauing beene
aduertised that a Knights wife of the city, called Alphonso Andre abandoned her selfe
to an other, he watched that day (which he held fit to execute such vnlawful loues) these
adulterers in such sort, as he surprized them together, the gentlewomans husband being
in armes at the lists with the rest in the new street; who without making bruit, or suffring
any to aduertise the husband of the wrong his wife had done him,Adulterers punished. hee caused her to bee
burnt, and her adulterer to be slaine. If he descouered any baude, namely of such as vnder
collour of deuotion enter into houses, to carry messages, or which vse charmes, or
giue loue drinkes, and such like, he did punish them seuerely. He was like to haue slaine
his Admiral in that towne, for that hee had imploied a woman of that trade, but hee fled
and so escaped his fury, but hee caused the woman to be burnt. In the country of Vera
he caused a married man to bee hanged, hauing children by his wife, for that hee had
forced her beeing a maide, before hee had married her. If he punished secular men seuerely,
hee did no more spare priests and monkes, yea and prelats if they offended.
Wherevpon being giuen to vnderstand, that hee should send them to their superior Iudges,
he answered. that so he did: for hauing once caused them to bee hanged, they went
directly before God, who was the head Iudge of al, and did the last Iustice. Knowing that
the bishop of Porto, were hee then was, liued loosely with a married woman of that
towne he sent for him, seeming that he would confer with him of some businesses. The
bishop being come, he caused euery one to depart the chamber, and hauing shut the doore,
he began to pursue the bishop, and handled him in such sort, as if some which staied in the
chamber, had not taken him out of his hands, he had slaine him. He was more seuere to
his houshold seruants then to any other: he caused a Secretary to be slaine, hauing taken
money without the priuity of his Tresorer. This we read of the maners and customes of
this king, who spared himselfe sometimes: as for the stately buildings which he le^t, they
hold that the bridge and towne of Lima are of his foundation: he caused Santa Maria of
Charneca to be built; he indowed the Monastery of Alcouaca with sixe Chaplains, and

appointed ordinary masses: to which monastery his sonne Fernand did afterwards giue
the towne of Paredes, in the country of Leyra. Hee was bountifull and courteous to
them that did him seruice, to whom hee gaue many guifts,His liberty. and was accustomed euery
yeere to put a hundred markes of siluer into plate, to giue for new yeeres guifts: he augmented
the wages and pensions of the gentlemen of his house, and other seruants; hee
honoured the Nobility that liued wel, and loued vertue, whereof he gaue good testimony
when as hee made his good seruant D. Iohn Alphonso Tello Earle of Barcellos, with
such pompe, as the like hath not been seene in Portugal in any age, for he had that night
from the Monastery of Saint Dominike, which was in the place del Rusio, vnto the place
called Limonero whereas the Kings palace stood,Pompe at the Iussi^^tten of the Earle of Barcellos. fiue thousand men holding fiue thousand
torches, by the light whereof they might see many tables couered with bread, meat
and wine, whereas euery man might eate and drinke that list. And the King himselfe
laying aside his royal ranke and grauity, led daunces through the city, and by his example
the people, both of the city, and strangers, which came thether by water, shewed al signes
of ioy, to honour this new Earle. They say that this King taking delight to heare a siluer
trumpet sound, would then haue a desire to daunce, and oftentimes when he could
the sleepe, he would goe out of his palace in the night, and haue daunces in the towne,
whether his subiects came willingly, and did practise it much for the loue of him. This
King hauing held the Realme some space, hee would make a publike declaration, in a
great assembly of Noblemen, what Donna Agnes of Castro had beene vnto him, and
produced D. Gil Bishop of Guardia, and Stephen Louat Maister of his Wardrop, for witnesses
of their promises of marriage, who being publikely examined, did sweare that D.
Agnes had beene lawful wife to D. Pedro then Infant of Portugal dispensations were
shewed, which D. Pedro had obtained, for affinity, or other lets which might hinder this
marriage, whereof a Register was kept in the publike acts:Declaration of the secret marri^^e betwixt the King D. (...) D. Agnes of Cast^o. and it was ordained that the
children borne of this Lady should bee called Infants of Portugal: her body, or boanes
were transported from Coimbra, where they had beene buried, to the Monastery of Alcouaca,
with royal pompe, and laied in a rich tomble of white marbe, whereon her Image
was set, carrying a crowne like a Queene.
11 Such was the Estate of Portugal,Nauarre. about the time of the warres betwixt the Kings
of Castile and Arragon, and whilest that D. Charles King of Nauarre was held prisoner
in France, by the Daulphin his brother in law, in safe keeping, yet hee found meanes to
escape, by the helpe of his brother Philip, and of Iohn Pinguignac, Gouernor of Arthois,
with other Frenchmen, beeing accompanied by D. Roderike of Vrriz, D. Corbaran
of Leet, D. Charles of Artieda, D. Fernando of Ayana, and by the Baron of Garro, who
drew him out of the castle of Aleux in Palueil, where hee had beene prisoner eighteene
monthes, which place they scaled by night, and slue the captaine and gard. This act
was much commended, especially in Nauarre: and in memory of this good seruice done
vnto the King, the names of those Knights were registred in the chamber of accounts for
the Realme of Nauarre. What past afterwards betwixt the Daulphin, and the King of
Nauarre in France, I leaue it to the French History, to the which it doth properly belong.
After the returne of Iohn the French King from prison in England, Charles King
of Nauarre beeing reconciled to him and to the Daulphin his sonne, hee went into his
Realme of Nauarre, hauing had by his wife Queene Ieanne, one sonne, in the towne of
Mante, who was also called Charles, and succeeded him in the Realme.
12 In the meane time the warre continued betwixt Castile and Arragon,Arragon and Castile. and moreouer
the King of Castile, as if he would scorne all the world, and shew himselfe an enemy
to all he encountred, had broken with the Venetians, and taken one of their ships,
when as he was before Barcelona with his sea army: and not content herewith hee had
appointed twenty gallies to gard the Straight, and to take twelue other Venetian ships,The King of Castile sp^^^s the Venetians at sea.
in their returne, which had past into Flanders, but hee was deceiued: for the ships comming
in consort with a good gale, and helpt by the floud, they past almost vndescouered.
Soone after the King had newes that his men had beene defeated neere vnto
Moncayo, in the fields of Arauiana, by the Arragonois (where as in old time the seuen
sonnes of Lara had beene slaine) being led by D. Henry and D. Tello of Castile brethren,

D. Pedro of Luna, D. Iohn Martines of Luna, and D. Iohn Fernandes of Heredia, who being
accompanied with eight hundred horse Arragonois,Castillans defeated. defeated one thousand and two
hundred Castillans.
In this encounter died D. Iohn Fernandes of Hinestroca, gouernor of that frontier for
the King of Castile, vncle to Donna Maria of Padilla, D. Fernand Garces Duzio, D. Pedro
Ruis Osorio, Gomes Suares of Figueroa, great Commander of Saint Iames: and there
were taken prisoners D. Inigo Lopes Orosco, D. Fernand Ruis of Villaloba, D. Iohn Gomes
of Bahabou, D. Hurtado Diaz of Mendoca, and D. Diego Sancho Porras, all renowned
Knights of Castile, whereat the King was much moued, but his griefe was moderated
by a new sonne, which Donna Maria of Padilla brought him, in the yeere of our Lord
1360. who was named D. Alphonso, by reason whereof he came presently to Tordesillas.
Being afterwards returned to Seuile, he caused D. Garci Aluares of Toledo to be created
maister of Saint Iames, a Knight which had done him great seruices, both in the warre
against Arragon, and in the seditions of Castille, to whom, besides this dignity, hee gaue
the office of Majordomo,D. Pedro murthers two other of his brethren. or high Steward to his sonne D. Alphonso. This yeere continuing
his cruelties, he caused two other of his brethren to be slaine, sonnes to D. Leonora of
Guzman, D. Iohn, and D. Pedro, hauing kept them long prisoners in the towne of Ca^^mona;
and they say, that hee dispatched them, for that hee doubted they would bee no
more faithful nor obedient vnto him, then their other three brethren. D. Iohn was scarce
thirteene yeeres old, and D. Pedro but foureteene. The victorie which the Arragonois
had gotten vnder the conduct of D. Henry Earle of Transtamara, made the King of Castille
more tractable in the negotiation of a peace, wherein Cardinal Guy of Bologne
the Popes Legat laboured, who in the end drew the Deputies of these two Kings to meet
in the city of Tudelo, in the realme of Nauarre, wherewith King Charles was very well
satisfied.
Thether came for the King of Castile, Guttieres Fernandes of Toledo, and for the King
of Arragon, D. Bernard of Cabrera, chiefe councellor of State, and Admiral of Arragon;
who together with the Legat, did conferre, and dispute long of the meanes to
make a peace, but they could not conclude any thing. And there being also assembled
by the Legats care, in the towne of Sanguessa, D. Iohn Alphonso of Majorca, Chancellor
of the priuy seale for the King of Castile, and the same Admiral of Arragon for the King
his Maister, they effected as little as at Tudelo. Wherevpon the King of Castile beeing
aduertised that his brother D. Henry would enter into Castile, seeing they could not
conclude a peace, he came to Leon, where hee would haue slaine D. Pedro Nugnes of
Guzman, and some other Knights, which had left him, but they escaped: yet hee tooke
Pero Aluarez Osorio in Villaniebla, as hee was at the table with Diego Garcia of Padilla,
maister of Calatraua.Murthers committed by the King of Castile without respect of order or quality. Comming afterwards to Burgos, he caused Diego Ari^s Maldonado
he Archdeacon to be slaine, for that hee had receiued letters from his brother D.
Henry of Transtamara.
D. Henry with the army of Arragon, entred by Rioja, and tooke great spoiles from the
Iewes inhabiting there, but especially at Nagera: he also tooke the towne of Haro, and
came as farre as Pancoruo, where he vnderstood that the King of Castile came to encounter
him, and was at Birbiesca, so as D. Henry retired to Nagera. The King of Castile
passing by Grisalena, Pancoruo, Ameiugo, and Maranda of Ebro, he came to Saint Dominike
de la Calcada, and then to Acofra. Here areligious man of the towne of Saint
Dominike presented himselfe vnto him, and told him, that Saint Dominike had reuealed
vnto him, and enioyned him to tell him,Predistiou of a Monke to the King of Castile, who caused him to be burned for his reward. that if hee did not take good heed of
D. Henry his brother, hee should die by his hand. The King caused this religious man
to be apprehended, and carefully examined, to finde out whether that which hee had
said had beene suggested vnto him by some one, or that it were a reuelation. The Monke
maintained that Saint Dominike had reuealed it vnto him, and persisted in this answere,
being often examined: But the King did not regard it, and for a reward of his prediction
(the which he found in the end to be true) he caused him to be burned. There were many
skirmishes about Nagera, betwixt the Arragonois and Castillans, whereas the Castillans
had the better, being stil the more in number: but the King of Castile beeing not

come with sufficient prouision to beseege townes, leauing Nagera, and Cont Henry, hee
rerturned to Saint Dominike, and from thence past by Logrogno. But the Legat, who alwaies
treated a peace, procured a cessation of armes in those quarters, so as D. Henry returned
into Arragon by Nauarre: The King also tooke the way to Seuile, where beeing
arriued he found that they had taken at sea the General of the gallies which the King of
Arragon had sent into Barbary, to aide the King of Tremessen: his name was Mathew
Mercier, whose head hee caused to bee cut off: there were foure gallies also taken with
him.Knights of Castile executed. He also put to death there Men Rodrigues Tenorio, Fortun-Sanches Calderon, Fernand
Gudiel of Toledo: they were those Knights, which being retired into Portugal had
beene deliuered to the King of Castile, in exchange, by the king of Portugal, as hath bin
mentioned. He also put to death D. Pero Nugnes of Guzman, who could not auoide his
owne misfortune, and soone after in the towne of Alfar^, he cut off the head of D. Guttiere
Fernand of Toledo, for that hee spake his minde too freely in matters which did
concerne the good of State, and for the zeale he had to his honour and seruice: he caused
as much to bee done to Gomes Carillo of Albornoz, beeing in a galley. Thus this ill aduised
King tooke a delight to shed the bloud of his Nobility, neither did hee for-beare
prelats, for if hee slue them not, he chased them out of his Realme with ignominy, and
losse of their goods: but in the end his excesse procured the iust indignation of his subiects
against him, which made him loose both Realme and life. Hauing as wee haue
saied, put to death D. Guttiere Fernandes of Toledo, hee bent his fury against his brother
D. Blasco Archbishop of Toledo, but hee durst not dip his hands in his bloud, for
that hee was of the Ecclesiasticall iurisdiction: wherefore hee sent Mathew Fernandes
Chancellor of his priuy seale to Toledo, to commaud him in his name to depart his
country, and to retire into Portugal: the which this prelat was forced to doe in such
hast, as hee had no leisure to take any of his stuffe, but went as hee was appareled, without
companie, or any commoditie for his voiage. And the same daie that hee departed,
the King came to Toledo, the which did much afflict all those that had the gouernment
of the towne.
The Archbishop came to Coimbra in Portugal, where soone after hee ended his
daies in the Monastery of Saint Dominike, with an example of notable patience,
from whence his body, by the Kings permission, was carried to Toledo, and there
interred. Don Gomes Manrique was chosen Archbishop of Toledo in his place, and Primate
of Spaine, beeing numbred for the three score and one Prelat, or according vnto
some three score and two of that Church.
Samuel Leui a Iew,A large spoile of a Iew condemned. high Treasorer, was committed to prison in Toledo, by the Kings
commandement, with all his kindred, who were carried to Seuile, where he caused them
to bee put to death, after they had beene cruelly tortured, to make them confesse
where their goods were; of whose confiscation the King got aboue foure hundred
and three score thousand doublons of gold, and foure thousand markes of siluer,
besides many rich iewels and silkes. Beeing in that city in the yeere of our Lord 1361.
the King had an intent for to make warre against the Moores,An. 1361. but hee deferred it for
a time, beeing prest by that of Arragon: for about that time the treatie was effected,
which had beene long before practised with Goncal Goncales Lusio, Gouernor of Tarassone,Tarassone yeelded by practise.
which place hee deliuered to the King of Arragon, and had the florins aboue
mentioned in recompence: And moreouer hee married with Violant daughter to
Don Ximenes of Vrrea, and to Donna Eluira Cornel, with the Lands of Biote, ^ace
and Asinios in dowrie. Don Pedro Ximenes of Sampero was put in garrison into Tarassone.
The warre betwixt these Potentates after some small exploites, was in the
end concluded by a peace, which the Cardinall aboue named did mediate at Deca.
By the which the Castillans which were retired into Arragon, had their Conge, and restitution
of places was promised to either part, for the performance whereof hostages
were deliuered to the King of Nauarre, or to his brother Lewis then viceroy in
Nauarre.
This peace lasted not long; for the King of Castile beeing incensed that the Cardinal,
by the Apostolike Authoritie, had disanulled the sentences which hee had giuen

against his brother D. Henry, and other Noblemen and Knights of Castile, hee brake it
soone after.
And this yeere 1361.An. 1361. to the end he might not forget any thing that might proue himself
inhumaine aboue all men, he caused his wife D. Blanche of Bourbon to be slaine, beeing
kept in prison at Medina Sidonia, but it was by poison, whose body was afterwards carried
away by the French, who vpon this occasion entred into Castile, in fauour of the
Earle D. Henry, and she was buried at Tudela in Nauarre.Murther of Queene ^^aach by the commandement of the King of Castile her husband. Soone after the death of this
miserable Princesse, Donna Maria of Padilla died at Seuile, by whom the King had one
sonne, called D. Alphonso, and three daughters, D. Beatrix, D. Constance, and D. Isabel:
the King did her royall honours, and afterwards declared that hee had married her, producing
witnesses of great authority. They say that she by her wisdome and discreet perswasions,
did many times diuert the King from great effusions of bloud. This King D.
Pedro had by an other Lady, called D. Isabel, two other sonnes, D. Sancho and D. Diego,
who are interred in the Monastery of Saint Dominike the Royall at Toledo. And
moreouer being fallne in loue with a gentlewoman which did serue Queene Mary his
mother, called Donna Theresa of Ayala, beeing exceeding faire, and not able to winne
her but by a promise of marriage, hee plighted his faith vnto her, and had by her one
daughter, called Donna Maria: notwithstanding this Donna Theresa became a Nunne,
in the Monastery of Saint Dominike: thus did the King D. Pedro in all sorts abuse the
lawes. The King of Castile (before he would assaile him of Arragon) had a great desire
to fall vpon the Moores of Granado, who were then in great combustion amongst
themselues, and who had fauored the Arragon partie, during the last warres.
13 To shew their Estate, wee say that after the death of King D. Alphonso before Gibraltar,Moores.
they had peace with Castile, for that the King D. Pedro following his priuat passions,
and thirsting after the bloud of his Nobility, yea and his owne, hee was continually
busie, killing and murthering men and women of all sorts and degrees throughout
his Realme, not regarding the warre against the Moores, but made a truce with Ioseph
King of Granado. This King had some time after receiued D. Iohn de la Cerde, sonne
to D. Lewis, into Granado, being sonne in law to D. Alphonso Fernandes Cornel, and had
giuen him meanes to passe into Affrike, where hee was an actor in the vnnaturall and
bloudy quarrels betwixt Albohacen King of Maroc, and his sonne Alboanen, taking the
sonnes part against the father: where hee made proofe of his vertue and valour, giuing
a notable defeat vnto King Albohacen, and hee had beene happie if hee had not
gone from thence into Spaine, where hee ended his daies miserably. King Ioseph
thinking to bee at peace within his Realme, found himselfe plunged in sedition and conspiracies
made against him by his owne subiects, whereof an vncle of his called Mahomad,
or Mahumet was the chiefe, who beeing desirous to raigne, caused him to bee
slaine, in the yeere of our Lord 1354. the one and twentith of his reigne, and of the
Arabians seuen hundred thirty and seuen.


Mahomad Lagus the eight King of
Granado.
THis Mahomad or Mahumet, surnamed Lagus, which is as much to say, as the old, succeeded,
by this murther, in the Kingdom of Granado: he was brother to King Ismael,
of whom wee haue made mention, and soone to Ferrachen Gouernor of Malaga, and
held his Estate with great trouble and difficulty: for besides that the Arabians are by
nature inconstant, and enemies to rest, it was then the custome in Granado, and hath
alwaies beene, but the Kings haue beene instituted, maintained, or reiected at the will
of the knights Granadins, and of some gouernors of chiefe places, as of Malaga, Almery,
Baca and G^adix, some times raysing one, some times an other, and reiecting and killing
them according to their passions and priuate interests.

This King Mahomad already old, beeing in possession of the Realme of Granado,
hee entertained the friendship of Don Pedro King of Castile, whom hee furnished
with foure gallies well appointed, to ioyne vnto his army, when as he went in person before
Barcelona* as we haue said. But it happened, that in the yeere 1360. some Knights
and captaines Moores, finding themselues ill intreated and little fauored by King Mahomad
the old, they had intelligence with an other Mahumet, called Vermeil, or Aben Alhamar,
who descended (as hee said) from the first Kings of Granado, and wrought so
with the aide of the children of Ozmin, and especially with him who was called Ezdriz
Aben Balua, as being seized vpon the fort and castle of Alhambra, they chased away Mahumet
the Old, and raised Vermeil in his place, so called for that his face was very red: and
they did not onely dispossesse Lagus of the city of Granado, but of most of the strong
places of the country, to the which they were the more imbouldned, seeing D. Pedro
King of Castile very busie in the warres Arragon.
The King thus dispossest retired to Ronda, then held by the King of Maroc, or Fez,
and there kept himselfe for a time: so as at that time in the country of Granado, there
raigned three Kings Moores:Three Kings in Granado. that is this King dispossessed, who held yet some places,
King Mahumet Aben Alhamar, and Alboanen King of Fez, who also enioyed some townes
in Andalusia. King Vermeil fearing that his aduersary Mahumet the Old, would finde
aide in Castile, to bee restored, and finding himselfe vnable to resist the King D. Pedro,
he ioyned with Arragon, and sought friendship and support there, the which hee obtained:
so as when the Arragonois prest their enemies in Castile, the king of the Moores
ran into Andalusia, and the country of Murcia. Notwithstanding Mahumet the Vermeil
sought afterwards to assure himselfe of the King of Castile, by some accord, from whom
he obtained a truce, and they were friends in shew: but the King D. Pedro concealed his
spleene vntill a fit oportunity, as one that did neuer forget an iniury. The Moore (being
wel informed of his disposition) did not greatly trust him, and therefore hee sought to
draw Alboanen King of Maroc into a league, whereof the Affrican King excused himself,
for that hee was in league with the King of Castile, and much bound vnto him, neither
could the King of Granados perswasions preuaile, that ioyning with him, and the King of
Arragon, they might soone ruine the King of Castile: but nothing could alter the King
of Maroc, but he continued firme in the friendship of Castile, from whence he had been
aided with some gallies and soldiers in his conquests, and warre against his father: and
withall he aduertised the King D. Pedro of all these practises, who for these considerations
was the more easily perswaded to make a peace with Arragon, to the end hee might
punish him of Granado, against whom he beganne to raise an army in the yeere 1361.
to which end he came to Seuile. King Mahumet Aben Alhamar seeing these preparations,
did also prouide for his part, but he was preuented by the King of Castile, who hauing
sent for the dispossessed King, and drawne him to Seuile, made an accord with
him, that whatsoeuer either of them should take in the Realme of Granado should remaine
to the taker: These two Princes, D. Pedro of Castile, and Mahumet the Old of Granado
came and beseeged Antequera, but they could not take it: wherefore they began
to ouerrunne the champian country of Granado, thinking that many of the horsemen
Moores would come and ioyne with them, and take part with King Mahumet the Old,
but it succeded otherwise: for the army of Granado stood firme at the bridge of Vilollos,
and came couragiously to incounter the Castillans, yet with disaduantage
and losse.
The Christians pursuing the victory came to the bridge of Pinos, with the same hope
that the Granadins would reuolt, but they made no shew of it: wherefore the King D.
Pedro returned with his army to Alcala of Bencaide. At this retreat the Moores of
King Mahumet the Vermeil tooke courage, so as there parted from their campe about
six hundred horse and two thousand foot, who did ouerrun the gouernment of Cacorla,
sackt Peal of Hesero, tooke many prisoners, and brought away a great number of cattel:
but as they returned with this prey they were incountred about Linueca by Diego Garcia
of Padilla, Maister of Calatraua,The Moores defeated. Don Henry Henriques Gouernor of the frontier, and
Men Roderiques of Biedma, captaine of the Bishoprike or territory of Iaen, who put

them to rout, killing and taking many of them, the rest saued themselues in the rockes.
The yeere following 1362.An. 1362. the Christians, incouraged which this victory, entred the
Moores country, and presented themselues before Guadix, where there were six hundred
horse Moores, and about foure thousand foot, which King Vermeil had lodged there, being
aduertised of the Christians deseigne. These Moores kept themselues close, making
no shew nor offring to sally forth, so as the Christians, thinking the garrison to be weake,
diuided their forces,Christians defeated by the Moores. leading a part of them towards the valley of Alhama: which the
Moores discouering, they sallied forth vpon the remainder, and defeated them easily,
where (among others) D. Diego Garcia of Padilla maister of Calatraua, was taken prisoner,
who being led to Granado, was not onely wel enertained by King Mahumet Aben Alhamar,
but also set at liberty without ransom, and presented with many rich guifts: the King
desiring to make him his friend, and by his meanes to purchase some fauor with the King
of Castile, and the Noblemen of his court; among the which D. Diego Garcia (as brother
to Donna Maria of Padilla, and vncle to the children which the King D. Pedro had had)
was in great credit and authority. Being returned into Castile, the King was glad of his liberty,
but he did not much esteeme the bounty of the Moorish King: for D. Pedro was
cruell and implacable by nature, and reproched the maister, that by his indiscretion
he had beene the cause of the route of his men, and of his owne imprisonment.
The King entred afterwards in person into the country of Granado, and tooke Isnaiar,
Cisnaiar, Ambra, Benamexir and Zagra, and then returned vnto Seuile: but King Mahumet
the Vermeil brought his army presently to Zagra, and assaulted it in such sort, as
Fernand of Gadillo, captaine of the garrison, was forced to leaue it: whereat the King
D. Pedro was so moued, as (notwithstanding that he had defended it as much as he could
and ought, according to the reasons of warre) he caused his head to bee cut off:Rigour of the King D. Pedro. and to
restraine the Moores, he returned instantly into their country, where he tooke Hardeles,
Turon, Cueuas and other castles: king Mahumet the old being also in field. As this warre
was long, and hard for the Granadins to maintaine, against so great a power as that of
Castile: so it began to be troublesome to most of the knights Moores: so as in Granado,
and in the court, there was nothing to be heard but murmuring, and words of discontent;
wherevpon King Vermeil grew very doubtful of his subiects, who obiected continually,
that, for the quarrel of two men, the townes and forts of the realme were made a prey vnto
the Christians. King Vermeil being in this perplexity, and fearing least they should recal
his competitor Mahumet the old, and that he should be ignominiously chased away,
or slaine, was aduised by his chiefe and most confident friends (especially by Ezdriz Alen
Balua who had greatly fauored him in getting the crowne) to quit Granado, and to retire
himselfe to his enemy the king of Castile, thinking, that hauing shewed himself liberal and
courteous vnto Diego Garcia of Padilla, he should also finde some fauor in the court, and
(at all euents) that the King of Castile would be glad to be Iudge and arbitrator betwixt
him and Mahumet the old; and that this assurance and confidence which he shewed, comming
to yeeld himselfe vnto him, would auaile him something. This was a foolish and
rash resolution of his, knowing what a monster in nature the King D. Pedro was, how
greedy he was of reuenge, and how glad to shed bloud. This il-aduised king came to present
himselfe with foure hundred horse, and about twenty hundred foot, before Baena,
where as D. Guttiere Gomes of Toledo Prior of Saint Iohn commanded, who wondring
much at this vnexpected chance did accompany him vnto the court at Seuile, where as
the king D. Pedro receiued him very gratiously at his arriual, and heard the oration that
was made vnto him in this kings behalfe quietly, tending that hee would be pleased to
take knowledge of affection which had moued him to come and yeeld himselfe vnto
him, grounded vpon the remembrance that his ancestors had beene vassals to the
king of Castile, the which he would neuer haue contradicted, had not the fauour which
he had seene done vnto his aduersary Mahumet Lagus, or the old, driuen him into distrust:
notwithstanding hauing in the end considered that hee should finde equity and
iustice in the king D. Pedro, not willing to persist (for his part) in any rebellion, he had resolued
to come and yeeld himselfe vnto him, and to referre vnto his good iudgement,
the controuersies which were betwixt him and his aduersary, to the end that hee might

determine them according vnto reason: That as for himselfe, beeing of the bloud
of the first Kings of Granado, whose royall seat the race of Farrachen had vsurped,
he thought he had done nothing against the duty of a man of honour, to haue sought
to recouer his Grand-fathers Kingdome, beseeching him to haue regard thereof: and if
he should finde it good to depriue him of his crown (the which he could not beleeue) hee
besought him to giue him, and his, meanes to passe into Affrike, into the Moores country.
The King D. Pedro made shew to heare these reasons without any passion, and assured
him that he would reconcile him with his competitor, causing his lodging to be
made in the Iewes place of the city of Seuile; but being displeased with the practises
which he had made to his preiudice, with the Kings of Arragon and Maroc, hee burnt
with a desire to be reuenged. Being afterwards aduertised that this King Vermeil had
brought many iewels, and great store of gold from Granado, he was so farre transported
with a desire to spoile him of this treasure, as without any further deliberation, he commanded
Martin Lopes of Cordoua, his chamberlaine, to goe and take him prisoner,
with all those that were with him, and to put them into the Ataracana, or Arcenal, then
seeking an occasion to dispatch him, he caused his processe to be made, for that he had
beene an actor in the death of King Ismael,Cruelty, coueteousnesse a^^ infidelity of (...) Pedro King of Castile. brother to King Mahumet the old, and condemned
him to die, with seuen and thirty other Knights, which were taken with him; according
to which sentence he caused him to bee drawne out of the Ataracana, and the
seuen and thirty knights with him, who wee led to the field of Tablada, and there executed,
in a great assembly and concourse of people from all parts. This miserable King
Mahumet Aben Alhamar, being brought vpon an asse, clad in a roabe of scarlet, was the
last which suffred: but hee had this consolation, that D. Pedro himselfe, was his executioner,
who reproching him with the alliance he had had with the King of Arragon, thrust
him through with a launce, at which blow Mahumet cried out in his owne language. Ha
Pedro, thou hast done a poore exploit, and purchased a shameful triumph this day: afterwards
he made an end of him, and cut off his head: This was the second yeere of the raigne of
this Moore, and the 745. of the Arabians. King Mahumet Lagus, or the old, being assured
by this death, returned to Granado, ioyful to be thus freed of his enemy, whose head
the King D. Pedro sent vnto him: The Granadins receiued him without contradiction, in
the yeere 1362. And he to recompence the King of Castile for he goodly present hee
had made him of his Competitors head, deliuered all the Knights and Castillans which
had beene taken at the incounter of Guadix, without any ransome. Ezdriz Aben Balua
chiefe councellor to King Mahumet Vermeil, remained prisoner with the King of Castile,
with many others, whereof some were redeemed for money; others were exchanged
for other prisoners in after times, and some died miserably in prison. The truce betwixt
Castile and Granado was renued, and new homage sworne by Mahumet the Old to
the King D. Pedro, paying the tribute which had bin paied to the kings his predecessors.
These things thus ended, the king of Castile staied not long to begin war against Arrago^.
14 For the effecting whereof, with greater aduantage, he sought to ingage the king of
Nauar in this war, being newly come out of France,Nauarre. into his owne realme, in 1361. much
desired, and well receiued, as one that had beene long absent. He rewarded the Noblemen
and knights, which had serued and succored him in his affaires of France, bountifully,
among the which the most remarkable were, D. Roderigo of Vrris who had for his good
seruices, the gouernment of the iurisdictions of Sanguesse, Olite and Tudelo: The Baron
of Garro was recompenced in an other sort, beeing a wandring knight, and sought imployment
in the warres, so as being loath to stay in Nauarre, hee returned into France.
As all things had beene resonablie quiet in Nauarre vntill that time, there was an occasion
offered to trouble all, by the comming of Inigo Lopes of Orozco, and Arrias Goncales
of Valez, Ambassadors for D. Pedro king of Castille, who came in their maisters
name,Charles King of Nauarre practised by him of Castile. to congratulate king Charles his comming, to seeke his friendship, and a new
league, and to procure an interview of these two kings. King Charles was glad
of this Ambassage, and as hee had alwaies an intent to haue warre with the French
King, vnill that hee had restored him the lands which hee pretended to bee his, hee did
much esteeme the friendship of Castile, to make vse thereof at such a neede. Hee

therefore promised the Ambassadors to come to Soria in Castile, and hauing first concluded
with the Ambassadors a kind of peace, he went thether in the yeere 1362. hauing
in his company his brother Lewis, Captal of Buche (a gret Nobleman of Guienne) the
Abbot of Fescain, and others, as well Nauarrois as French. The King of Castile came to
the place assigned, and receiued him with great demonstrations of loue, where for the
first act they confirmed the Articles of peace, conteyning an offensiue and defensiue
league against al men. After some daies spent in feasts, sports and exercises of armes, the
King of Castile hauing inuited the King of Nauarre to a great banquet, he told him, that
he had some thing to say vnto him: wherevpon being retired into a gallery, the King of
Castile vsed these words, in the presence of D. Garcia Aluarez of Toledo, maister of Saint
Iames, Inigo Lopes of Orosco, Martinianes of Seuile, high treasorer, Martin Lopes of Cordoua,
great Chamberlaine, Mathew Fernandes Chancellor of the priuy seale, all of his
priuy councel, and of the chiefe Noblemen and Knights which had accompanied King
Charles; Brother (sayd he) seeing we haue made an oth to aide one an other against our
enemies, I will let you vnderstand, that the peace I haue with the King of Arragon, was
made against my will, and to the preiudice of mine honour: for Aben Alhamar King of
Granado, beeing confederate with him, spoiled my country of Andalusie, which made
me yeeld vnto a peace that I might punish this Moore: and now that I haue had my reuenge,
I am not bound to obserue this peace, vnlesse the places which I yeelded vp bee
restored me againe, and the charges of the warre, caused by the King of Arragon, paied:
wherefore according to the promise which you haue made me, and sworne, I summon
you to aide me with your forces, and person, in this warre. The King of Nauarre was
much amazed at this speech, being thus surprized, and knew not what to answer: for he
presumed the King of Castile had not had any enemies, when he sware this peace and
league. In the end he seemed desirous to doe what the King of Castile would haue him
but he demaunded time to conferre priuatly with his councellors which attended him,
Al were of opinion he should obay the King D. Pedro, else it would be dangerous, that being
in his power he would doe him some affront, being rash, cruel, and without respect:
besides, the country of Nauarre being then vnfurnished, and the forces of Castile round
about them, it was to be feared, that if he seemed vnwilling to doe that which he required,
with his detention, he would cause his men to ouerrunne his country, to the great
preiudice both of himselfe, and the Nauarrois his subiects. He beleeued them, and
made answer to the King of Castile, that both himselfe and his meanes were at his commandment;
prouided, that he yeelded the like vnto him, if he receiued any discommodity
by making himselfe an enemy to the King of Arragon, his brother in law. The allyance
of Castile which he so much sought, to make vse thereof against the French, brought him
into this error, that he made no difficulty to put himselfe into the hands of the most disloyall
Prince liuing.
In the peace made betwixt Castile and Arragon,Castille. there had beene propounded, that
D. Pedro King of Castile, should marry D. Ieanne second daughter to the King of Arragon:
for D. Constance the eldest had beene married to D. Frederic of Sicile; but the Ambassador
of Castile by his maisters commandment, made a motion for the marriage betwixt
D. Alphonso son to D. Maria of Padilla, and D. Leonora the yongest daughter of Arragon,
the which was concluded vpo^ condition, that the king of Castile should cause his
son D. Alphonso to be declared lawful heire of the Realmes of Castile, Leon etc. and that
he should giue him presently the Siegneury of Molina, with the towns of Almacan and
Medina Celi, whereof D. Garci Aluares of Toledo, maister of S.t Iames, and his high Steward,
should be put in possession, and that the pretended marriage betwixt the king, and
D. Maria of Padilla, shold be proued by him to haue bin done after the decease of Queen
Blanche the King of Arragon promising for himself and his successors, that if after the decease
of Don Pedro King of Castile, there should be any question made vnto D. Alphonso
his sonne in law, touching the succession, he should aide and assist him with all the forces
of Arragon. Don Pedro King of Castile, to haue this declaration made, and his
sonne Alphonso acknowledged for lawful heire, had called the Estates to Seuile, and there
the fact being propounded by him, it was receiued, and allowed, and future obedience sworn

vnto the Infant, by the Estates, as heire after his father: consenting that Donna Maria of
Padilla deceased, should be called Queene, and her daughters D. Beatrix, D. Constance,
and Donna Izabella, Infants of Castile: but neither of the marriage, nor of any thing
thereon depending, was there any accompt made, after the interview of the kings of Nauarre
and Castile at Soria: but without all respect of accords, promises or oathes; assoon
as these two kings were parted,Peace broken by the Cast^^a^ with Arragon. he of Castile came with a great power into Arragon, and
tooke Arica, Ateca, Terrer, Mros, Cerina and Alhama, and layed seege to Calatajub,
the which he tooke, and put to route many knights which came to succour it: by reason
whereof, Aranda with other townes and castles yeelded. Then hauing left Don Garci Aluares
of Toledo, Master of the knights of Saint Iames, vppon the frontier, he returned to
Seuile.
On the other part, the King of Nauarre, because hee would not faile of his promise
made at Soria, sent to denounce warre against the king of Arragon, his brother-in-law,
for that during his affaires and imprisonment in France, he would not succor him:VVar declare (...) by the king (...) Nauar against Arragon. whereunto
the king of Arragon offering to satisfie him with good reasons, he would not heare
any. Hauing therefore assembled his forces, he came to beseege the towne of Sos, and
tooke it; then Saluaterra running by the vallies of the Pyrenees, vnto the town of Iacca,
where as the king of Arragon had placed Peter of Pomar for Gouernor. The king Don
Charles being returned into his countrie, he had soone after a supply of two thousand
men at armes sent him out of Castile, which he disposed with his Nauarrois vppon the
frontiers of Arragon, whereas they did spoyle, burne, and murther. In the meane time the
Infant D. Alphonso of Castile, who should haue beene sonne-in-law to the king of Arragon,
dyed.An. 1363. In the yeare 1363. the king of Castile doubting that the French would bee reuenged
for the death of Queene Blanche of Bourbon, whom he had caused to bee poysoned,
after that he had intreated her vnworthily many yeares, seeing also a peace made betwixt
them and the English, he sent Ambassadors to Edward king of England, and to the
Prince of Wales his soone, to demand their allyance and friendship, the which they willingly
granted.
The king of Arragon vnderstanding well that the warre which the king of Nauarre
made against him, was forced, he sought by subtill meanes to diuide him from his allyance
with Castile. And knowing that king Charles had alwaies beene in quarrell with the
French king, for the Dutchie of Bourgogne and other lands, he sent Don Iohn Fernandes
of Heredia, in ambassage to King Iohn, who being come into Auignon, and hauing had
many conferences with the Lords of the French kings Councell, he preuailed so much as
they were content to referre all controuersies to the arbitrement of the king of Arragon
his Master, and to sixe Cardinals: for which cause the kings of Nauarre and Arragon, began
from that time to haue secret intelligence one with another, to the preiudice of Castile.
Notwithstanding the army of Castile returning into Arragon, the king of Nauarre
sent his brother Lewis, with many Nauarrois and Gascons, among others Don Martin
Henriques of Lacarra, Standard-bearer of the Realme, and Captal of Buch vnto them.
Siege was layed to Tarracone, and the place taken, in the which was Albert a Knight of S.
Iohn. Boria was also taken, and Iohn Ximenes of S. Piren, with other Knights which were
within it: the castle of Vaguena was burnt, with the Captiane which defended it, called Michel
Barnabas, whose sonne, carrying the same name, was for this cause made noble by the
king of Arragon, with all his posteritie, by a decree made by the Body of the State. Cariniena
was also taken, where as Don Pedro King of Castile vsed horrible cruelties vppon
the inhabitants; for those that he left aliue, were afflicted with torments more grieuous
then death: of some he cut off the hands, of othes the feete, and of some the noses and
eares. Magallon and the Vicount of Isle which defended it, Teruel, castle Habib, Ademus,
Villel, and the towne of Segorue were also made subiect to the king of Castile. Don Pedro
Maca was taken in the castle of Segorue, and Ximen Doriz at Xerica. After which the K.
of Castile tooke Mormedro, Almenara, Bugnol, Macasta, Benaguazil, Alpuche, with
many other places and forts, euen to the gates of Valence, where as Don Alphonso of
Arragon, Earle of Denis commanded. There the king of Castile and Don Lewis camped,
and had many skirmishes: but hearing that the king of Arragon, and Don Henry and Don

Tello brethren to the king of Castile, (beeing banished) came with three thousand horse,
to fight with them, they dislodged, and retired to Moruiedro, refusing a battell, for that
the army of Castile was much lessened, hauing left garrisons in as many places, as they
had taken. Don Gil Fernandes of Carauallo, Master of Saint Iames of Portugal, was in
that army.
After this retreat the Abbot of Fescan,Nauarre and Arragon. Legate for the Pope, laboured to make a peace
betwixt these Princes, and obtained of the king of Castile, that D. Lewis of Nauarr should
be employed, who went to conferre with the king of Arragon at Burriana, and brought
Don Alphonso of Arragon, Earle of Denia, to the king of Castile, being at Moruiedro:
he was afterwards made Constable of Castile, and Marquis of Vilena: with him came
 Don Bernard of Cabrera with others, but all their indeauours were vaine. For the King
of Castile would not heare speake of peace,The perfidie of Don Pedro of Arragon against the earle of Tra^stamara vnlesse the king of Arragon would promise
to kill Don Henry Earle of Transtamara, and Don Tello his brethren, with Don Fernand
of Arragon, the which he refused to do in the beginning, seeming to haue horrour of so
wicked an act, as to betray them which had fledde to him for protection, and had serued
him: yet afterwards hee made no conscience thereof, seeing himselfe pressed, and his
countrie so spoiled by the King of Castile, but agreed with the king of Nauarre to kill
Don Henry, the which God would not permit; for he had appointed him for the Realme
of Castile and Leon, and to be an exemplarie scourge for the tyrant Don Pedro, who
promised to giue the towne of Logrogno to Charles king of Nauarre, if he would assist
him in this murther.
For the effecting hereof, the two kings of Nauarre and Arragon concluded an
interview at Sos: King Charles pretending that he would quit the allyance of Castile. For
assurance and guard of the towne, where these two kings should meete, there was chosen
for Gouernour, Don Iohn Ramires of Areillan, a knight of Nauarre, Chamberlaine to
king Charles, who tooke for his Lieutenant his brother Ramir of Areillan, with thirtie
men at armes, thirtie Lances, twenty Crosse-bowes, and other souldiers. The kings entred
into Sos, either of them with two men: whither Don Henry and Don Tello had bene
sent for to come: Don Henry came accompanied with eight hundred horse; the which
hauing left without the towne, he entred with two more as the kings had done. There entred
also the Abbot of Fescan, but ignorant of what was intended against Don Henry. The
kings hauing treated long of their affaires in shew, thinking it a fit time to dispatch Don
Henry, they talked secretly with Don Iohn Ramires, perswading him with great promises
to execute this murther: but this knight who was noble and vertuous, would neuer yeeld
vnto it, saying, that he had rather die an hundred times, then to blemish his good name
with so execrable a crime.
The kings seeing that their hopes were vaine to make him the minister of their treason,
they knew not what to do, but to dissemble their enterprise, and retire into their countries,
imposing silence to D. Iohn Ramires; who merited immortall commendation for
this generous act: besides, that God did greatly honour him afterwards, hauing directed
him into Castile, at such time as D. Henry raigned, of whom he was beloued and cherished,
and obtained from him the Segneurie of los Cameros. From him are descended the
Earles of Aguilar of the family of Areillan. This businesse ill attempted, and not able to
be executed, was for that time dissembled. There had past many former treaties and accords
betwixt this. Pedro king of Arragon, and his brother D. Fernand Marquis of Tortosa,
to the preiudice of D. Henry, for that they found him desirous to raigne in Castile,
of which Realme D. Fernand was the lawfull heire, if D. Pedro the cruell died without children
begotten in lawful matrimony: but the king of Arragon had neuer any intent to do
good vnto his brother D. Fernand, nor to procure him any honour and aduancement:
but as he was a man full of disdainfull enuie, and without loue or respect of any that did
him seruice: so he spared no man, and dissembled with all men for his present commoditie.
Don Henry who knew him well, could also dissemble for his part, and stand vpon his
guard: he could handle him so cunningly, as by the meanes and forces of Arragon, hee
made himselfe a way to attaine vnto his desseignes.

16 Soone after there was a new and strict League made with him, whereupon Don
Iohn Fernandes of Heredia, and Francis of Perillos, Captaines to the king of Arragon,
were went with money into France to leuie men.
During these treaties and practises, there was no cessation of armes,Castile. at what time it
fell out, that the king tooke foure gallies of Castile, their king beeing at Moruiedro, from
whence he parted to come into Castile, at which time there was a soone borne him at Almacan,
of a Lady called Donna Izabella, which soone he named Don Sancho: soone after
returning to the warre, more enraged then euer against the king of Arragon, he marched
into the countrie of Valence, hauing alwaies in his company Mahomad the Moore, king
of Granado; he tooke Alicant, Xixona, Gandie, Oliue, and other places, but hee was in
danger to haue beene suddenly surprized, and defeated in his retreat by Don Henry Earle
of Transtamara, had he not beene aduertised by one of Castro of Ordiales. Hauing escaped
this danger, this religious king went in pilgrimage in his shirt, with a halter about his
necke to place called our Ladie of Puch.
The king of Castile entred many times into Arragon and Valence: neither could the
king of Arragon hinder him from forcing of many places, the which he left manned with
good garrisons of Castillans; and at sea he had not alwaies the worst, although the Arragonois
were the more expert marriners: from whome the Castillans tooke in the yeare
1364. fiue gallies, which were carried to Carthagena, and the captaines, mariners, and
souldiers (for the most part) put to death by the kings commandement.
17 The king of Arragon being desirous to be freed from this war,Arragon. sought all meanes
by the king of Nauarre, to draw the king of Castile to some good accord, but it was labour
lost: wherefore the kings of Nauar and Arragon resolued to make a league betwixt them;
for confirmation whereof, they concluded a marriage betwixt the Infant Donna Ieanne
sister to king Charles, and Don Iohn Duke of Girone, the heire of Arragon, being then
foureteene yeares old. And moreouer, the king of Arragon bound himselfe to giue lands
and reuenues to Don Lewis brother to king Charles, and to prouide him a wife, and to
giue fifty thousand florens to vngage certaine townes, which king Charles had pawned to
Gaston Phebus Earle of Foix his brother-in-law, and to intertayne him a certaine number
of men against any enemy whatsoeuer: namely, sixe hundred horse-men of the country
of Nauarre, if it were against Castile; but if it were against France, then to entertaine him
a thousand, and to ayde him at need with all his forces both by sea and land: and moreouer
he quit vnto him for euer, and to remaine to the Crowne of Nauarre, Saluatierra, and
the place called the Terme of Real. For assurance of these things which were very honorable
for the king of Nauarre, he of Arragon promised to lay in deposito the towne of Iacca,
Vncastilla, Sos, Exea, and Thermael, which should be committed to the fidelitie of Raymond
Allemand of Ceruillon, a knight of Arragon, who for this effect should be discharged
of his oath of homage and vassailage, which he ought vnto the king of Arragon; and
should sweare fealty to him of Nauarre, to deliuer him the places put into his hands, if
the aboue-mentioned accord should be broken by the king of Arragon. The king of Nauarre
promised for his part to quit the allyance of the king of Castile, and to make warre
against him and his children: and for his part he layed in pawne the towne and castle of
Sanguesse, Gallipienco, Vxue, Aybar, Caseda, Pitellas and Penna, and moreouer the
person of Arnaud Lord of Luse, his Chamberlaine, who was much fauoured by him: which
articles were sworne at Vncastillo, in the presence of the Earles of Transtamara, Ribagorca,
and others, whome the Kings commanded to keepe this league secret. It was not sufficient
for these two Kings to fortifie themselues against the attempts of the king of Castile,Diuision of the Realme of Castile before they had conqueredit.
for their safeties and defence, but they would also diuide the Beares skin before they
had taken him, sharing the Realme of Castile in such sort, as the king of Nauarre should
haue the cittie of Burgos, with all old Castile, all the country of the mountaines of Oca
vnto the limits of Nauarre, and the Ocean sea: comprehending therein the Prouinces of
Guipuscoa, Alan, and Biscay, and moreouer the townes of Soria and Agreda: And for
the king of Arragon were assigned the Realmes of Toledo and Murcia. They did also conspire
the death of Don Pedro king of Castile: the king of Arragon offering to him of Nauarre
200000. florens, and the proprietie of the townes and castles of Sos, Vncastel, Exea

and Tiermas, if he slue him, or deliuered him prisoner vnto him, and without it hee offered
him presently the cittie of Iacca, with the territorie and vallies. The better to dissemble
these practises, they ordained that Don Lewis the king of Nauarres brother, should
make a roade into Arragon, but he should suffer himselfe to bee taken prisoner by Don
Alphonso Earle of Ribagorca; the which was done: but Lewis of Nauarre was soone deliuered,
and the king of Nauarre did so dissemble his intentions, as the king of Castile could
not discouer any thing.
This last desseigne was thus plotted betwixt the two kings without the priuitie of any
man, in regard of Don Henry Earle of Transtamara, with whom the king of Arragon had
other practises. For Don Henry affecting openly the Realme of Castile, vppon hope of
the fauours which he attended from France, promised vnto the king of Arragon, that if he
assisted him, he would giue him to hold in Soueraigntie, the sixth part of the lands hee
should conquer by his ayde in Castile, whereunto the king of Arragon gaue eare, being
alwaies vniust vnto his brother Don Fernand, Marquis of Tortosa, to whom the Realme
of Castile did belong by right, if Don Pedro the cruell died without lawfull heires. These
bargaines were not so secret, but the Infant Don Fernand had some notice thereof, for
the which he was so transported, and made such a stirre, as the king of Arragon, and the
Earle of Transtamara resolued to dispatch him, of which councell was Don Bernard of
Cabrera, the which was soone after executed: for the Infant Don Fernand seeing that
himselfe was no more secured in Arragon then in Castile,Death of Don Fernand of Arragon. and therefore desiring to retire
himselfe into France, the King of Arragon his brother found meanes to stay him, and
to kill him in the castle of Buriane, in the territorie of Valence.
In the yere 1363. Iohn the French king died, being returned into England,An. 1363. for to deliuer
the hostages which he had giuen, not being able to enduce the States of the kingdom
to accomplish the capitulations with the English. Charles King of Nauarre hearing these
newes, hee made preparation to passe into France; to which Realme Charles the fift his
brother in-law had succeeded, but this warre of Arragon had so intangled him, as hee
could not: so as his affaires prospered not well on this side the Pyrenee mountaines.
In the yeare 1364.An. 1364. the two kings of Nauarre and Arragon, renewed their league, but
with some alteration,King of Nauar open enemy to the king of Castile. the King of Nauarre hauing alreadie discouered himselfe an enemy
to the king of Castile. To this end they met at Sos, where they agreed to continue
this warre against Castile, and that it should not be lawful for the one to make any peace
or truce without the consent of the other. That the king of Nauarre should make no accord
with the French king, but he of Arragon should be comprehended. They gaue hostages
one vnto another for assurance of their conuentions. The king of Arragon gaue
his sonne D. Martin. and he of Nauarre a son of. Lewis his brother, and the children
of Don Iohn Ramires of Areillan, of Don Martin Henriques, of the Lord of Grammont,
of Don Bertrand of Gueuara, Fernand Gil of Asian, Martin Martines of Oriz, and of Michel
Sanches of Vrsua. These articles were sworne by the chiefe knights and townes of either
part: and for that the summes of mony promised to the king of Nauarre, at the capitulation
of Vncastello, were much augmented, it was sayd, that the K. of Arragon shold
deliuer him 50000. florens presently in Sos, and for the rest he should haue deliuered
him in pawne the citty of Iacca, Sos, Vncastello, Tiermas, and Exea. Another priuat accord
was made betwixt the king Don Charles, and Don Henry of Transtamara, in whose
hands the hostages should remaine. The king of Nauarre promised to enter in person into
Castile, and there to make warre, and to be assured of Don Henry, hee would haue in
hostage for his part, his daughter Donna Leonora, who was afterwards Queene of Nauarre,
and a base sonne of his called Don Alphonso Henriques. The Earle promised, that if
at any time he should get the realme of Castile, he would suffer the King of Nauarre to
enioy the lands of the ancient patrimonie of Nauarre, vsurped by the Kings of Castile,
with diuers others.
These treaties betwixt the king of Nauarre, and Don Henry Earle of Transtamara,
were secret and vnknowne to the king of Arragon,Arragon. who gouerned himselfe for the most
part, by the aduice of Don Bernard of Cabrera, a wise Knight, and of great experience, by
whom he was often perswaded from that which the other would haue him yeeld vnto* for

the which he was hated by the king of Nauarre, and Don Henry: besides, beeing a priuie
Councellor, and of greatest authoritie, he was enuied by the other Noblemen of Arragon,
who were lesse fauoured: wherefore these Princes beeing againe assembled at Almudear,
the king of Nauarre, and the Earles of Transtamara and Ribagorca, conspired to
depriue the King of Arragon of this Councellor,D. Bernard of Cabrera in disgrace with his King. and wrought so, as they brought him
into disgrace with the king. Don Bernard, beeing aduertised that they meant to apprehend
him, sought to retire himselfe, and flying came into Nauarre to Carcastillo, the inhabitants
whereof, seeing that he was poursued by Garci Lopes of Sese, shut their towne
gates: but beeing summoned by Garci Lopes in the name of the two kings, to deliuer Don
Bernard, they stayed him, attending the kings commandement, who willed them to deliuer
him vnto Garci Lopes, who conuayed him to Murillo, where he remayned some time
in hope to be deliuered* by which he was so hated by the king of Nauarre, and Earle of
Transtamara, as they neuer ceased by importune accusations, vntill they had put him to
death.
This Bernard of Cabrera has before the yeare 1346. beeing forced to come to Court,
and to employ himselfe in great affaires of State, wherein he was very iudicious, when as
(wearie of the world) he had resolued to become a Monke. The king had cherished and
aduanced him, and receiued many good counsels, and profitable seruices from him, as
well in the ciuill wars within his owne Realme, as in that of Sardinia and Castile. But as
Courtiers, the more they seeke the greatnesse and honour of their Prince and are by them
the more honoured and beloued, are the more subiect to enuie, so fared it with him; for
hauing beene faithfull to the king his master, he purchased the hatred of all the Princes
and Noble-men of the Realme: so as when he was taken by the practises of the king of
Nauarre and Earle of Transtamara, there was not any one that did fauour him: but as it
were by a common conspiracie, his processe was made, and the Infant Don Iohn Prince
of Girone, whome he had bred vp, made his Iudge, where sitting in Iustice, and hauing for
assistant Dominicke of Cerdagne, chiefe Iustice of Arragon, (who by his charge and office
should defend the oppressed) pronounced sentence of death against this poore decrepite
old man.
They write, that his sentence being read by Don Berenger Apilia, and Iames Monelia
Vice-chanchelor, he complayned greatly, that he should be condemned without hearing,
or in a manner any forme of processe: but Apilia answered him, that he ought not to hold
it strange, seeing that by his owne Councell, that custome had beene brought into Arragon:
and that he should remember the processe which was too summarily made against
Iohn Ximenes of Vrrea, and Raymond Marquet, accused to haue slaine Raymond of S. Vincent;
who,Bernard beheaded. by the kings commandement, and in a maner without any forme of processe,
had beene put to death. He was led vnto the ma^ket place of Sarragossa, and there beheaded,
and his head was carried vnto the king, beeing at Barcelona. Such rewards many
times haue the most faithfull Councellors, of their ill aduised Princes. Thus miserably dyed
one of the greatest personages in nobility, iudgement, and vertue, which had beene of
long time in Arragon, who without the king his master had executed great matters, and
the king without him did neuer any thing of worth. All his goods were confiscate to the
king, whereby he pourchased great dishonor, and rightly, both for his death, and for that
of his brother Don Fernand. Bernardin of Cabrera, son to Bernard, had married Marguerite
of Foix, daughter to the Vicount of Castelbon, by Constance of Luna, sister to D.
Lope, a Lady of the bloud royall of Arragon: for she was daughter to Artal of Luna, and
to D. Constance Perez, who was daughter to Don Iames Perez, base sonne to the king
Don Pedro the third. At that time the Prince Don Iohn did not much exceed fourteene
yeares, yet he was employed in great affaires within the Realme, as well for warre as instice,
with a dispensation for his age, beeing assisted by Don Pedro Earle of Ribagorca,
(who hauing renounced the world in his old age, had taken vppon him the habit of Saint
Francis) and moreouer, by Don Pedro of Vrgel, sone to the Infant D. Iames the Kings
brother, and by the Vicount of Cardona for the warre: and for iustice and other affaires
of the Realme, he had for his Councellors Berenger Apilia, Bernard Sous, William Guymerand,
and Thomas Marzan of Cattelogne.

During this last warre betwixt Castile and Arragon, D. Pedro king of Arragon, prest by
necessity, took the reuenues of many benefices, without demanding leaue from the Pope,
and the more inconsideratly,Reuenues of Churches tak^n in without the
Popes leaue. say they, for that Vrban then raigning, had neuer refused him
any thing: wherefore he was in great danger to be excommunicated, and deiected from
the rights of his Realmes, especially from that of Sardinia, which hee held in fee of the
Church: the soueraignty whereof many of the Cardinals were of aduice to giue to
the Iudge of Arborea. The king for this cause sent his vncle D. Pedro, sometimes Earle of
Ribagorca, and then a Friar, and Gaspar Tregure, Doctor of the lawes, vnto the Pope: who
declared in open Consistorie, That in like necessities and miseries, as the Realm of Arragon
was then in, it had bin lawfull for kings, not only to vse the temporall reuenues, but also to lay
hands vpon the relicks, and holy vessell of the Churches: adding, that the Ecclesiasticall Estate
was no lesse bound to the preseruation of the common-weale, then other Estates: and that kings
might freely vse their meanes in such extremities, so as he promised to make them restitution
in a conuenient time. Whereupon the Pope considering of the cause, did not pronounce
any sentence. The Iudge of Arborea, hauing either practised the fauour of the Consistory,
or else moued with a desire to raigne, attempted thereuppon to make sharpe warre
against the Arragonois is Sardinia, a turbulent Iland, which continually bred new matter
of charge and losse to the kings of Arragon, who had a little before ended all quarels
with the Genouois, and by the meanes of Iohn Marquis of Montferrat his allye: but to
leaue a marke of punishment of the Rebels of Sardinia, he had supprest the name of Galluri,
the which was wont to be one of the members thereof, with the title of a Iudge, ordayning
that from thence-foorth that country should bee confused, betwixt the Cap of
Cailleri and of Lugudori.
To returne vnto the promises and capitulations made betwixt the two kings of Nauar
and Arragon, there was no due execution thereof,Nauarre. neither were the hostages, which had
beene promised, deliuered: for it is no ordinarie thing in such treaties, to haue deedes follow
words, these Princes beeing in continuall iealousie and distrust one of another^wherfore
the King of Nauar,Princes in continuall distrust receiuing no mony from the king of Arragon, he did not furnish
him with men to oppose against the army of Castile, which was entred into the territories
of Valence, beginning withall to thinke of many desseins, nothing fauourable for the
king of Arragon. If the king of Nauar, hauing deceiued the king of Castile, sought to do
the like vnto him of Arragon; the king of Arragon for his part did no lesse vnto the king
of Nauarre: for he had sent his ambassadours into France, who treated a league at Tholousa,
with the Deputies of Charles the fifth the French king, and with Lewis. D. of Aniou
his brother, by the which the French promised to ayde the king of Arragon to conquer
the realme of Nauar, and to spoile K. Charles, and hauing conquered it, they bound themselues
to furnish him alwaies with 500. lances, against any one that should seek to dispossesse
him. The K. of Arragon promised also for his part to ayde the the French to conquer
Guienna, and to expell the English. These accords were made in the yeare 1364, Charles
the fifth the French king, and Charles 2. king of Nauar being enemies. But as they were
Frenchmen, and brothers-in-law, they were reconciled afterwards, and concluded a peace:
so as the king of Arragon lost his paines, and the allyance which he had sought in France,
serued him to no vse, yet the war continued that yeare betwixt the French, and the partisans
of the K. of Nauar in France: but in the yeare 1365.An. 1365. Queen Ieanne wife to the king of
Nauar, made hast to come to the French Court, to treat a peace betwixt the two kings;
whereof the one was her husband, and the other her brother: for the K. of Arragon did importune
the French king, to effect the league concluded the yeare before at Tholousa, especially
for the conquest of Nauar; for which reason he had sent new ambassadours vnto
him that yeare. The k. of Nauar being aduertised of all these things, prest the Queene his
wife to go this iourny, notwithstanding that she was with child. Her voyage for that time
did produce nothing but a good truce, but afterward there was a peace made by the great
care of the two Queens, Ieanne wife to the k. of Nauar, and Blanche his sister, and by the dexteritie,
iudgement, and wisedome of Captal of Buch, then prisoner to the French, for the
factions of Nauar. The Q. of Nauar being at Eureux in the yeare 1366.An. 1366. she was deliuered
of a son called Peter, he had the title of Earle of Mortaing: after her vp-rising she returned

into Nauarre, carrying her eldest son Charles who was but foure yeares old with her, and
that which was newly borne.
These kings of Nauar and Arragon,Arragon. being thus busied, and irresolute in their desseines,
durst not inuade one another, and in the meane time he of Castile pursued the war, with al
violence in the country of Valence, and there took Orihuela, where was slaine D. Alphonso
Perez of Guzman Lord of S. Lucar, son to D. Iohn Alphonso of Guzman, and grand-child
to D. Alphonso Perez of Guzman the good. To him succeeded him brother D. Iohn Alphonso
of Guzman. The Arragonois also for their part tooke Moruiedro, for want of victuals,
D. Gomes of Porras Prior of S. Iohn the Gouernor, yeelded it, vpon condition, that
he and his should be safely sent into Castile: yet the Earle D. Henry who was at this seege,
preuailed so by his honest perswasions and promises, as the Prior was content to stay with
him, who by that means retained about 600. men, laying before them the fury of D. Pedro
K. of Castile, who excused nothing, and punished as well those which had behaued themselues
valiantly in the yeelding of such places, as those which had shewed themselues base
and cowards. These were the last exploits of war betwixt Arragon and Castile.
At that time there was brought into Spain the body of the Cardinal of S. Clement somtimes
Archb. of Toledo,Castille. and Legat a latere in Italy, who died at Viterbo, hauing gouerned
the affairs of the Romane sea, to the great content of Pope Vrbon the 5. who did wonderfully
grieue for him, and made all the shewes of mourning which Popes are accustomed
to do at the death of their faithfull friends. This Prelate during his legation, prepared the
Popes accesse into the citty of Rome,Returne of the Popes Court t^ Rome. and was the means to bring the papall seate thither 
againe: for hee supprest many tyrants in Italy, and brought them to the obedience of the
Roman sea, so as Gregory the 11. successor to Vrban, came to Rome in the yeare 1366. This
Cardinal had ordained by his testament, that his body should be buried in the city of Toledo,
if it might be suffered by the K. D. Pedro then raigning, or his successor, the which was
executed, and his bones which lay in the towne of Assisi, in the monastery of S. Francis,
were carried by land to Toledo, many offering to carry the Beere wheron this dead carcas
lay, in hope to get pardon of their sins, for that the Pope had granted vnto them, that
shold employ themselues in this seruice, the like indulgences as are giuen vnto them that
do visit the churches of S. Peter and S. Paul, at Rome in the yeare of Iubile.
The time approched when as the King Don Pedro should be punished for his excesse 
and serue as a witnes to the world,Expedition of D. Henry of Castile against his brother D. Pedro, and his victorie. that the feare of subiects, gotten by the cruelty of Princes,
is a bad gard for their maiesty, and a weak assurance of their Crowns. The death of Q.
Blanche of Bourbon, whom the king D. Pedro had poisoned, after that he had intreated her
a long time most barbarously, ministred the occasion of his ruine: for being for this cause
odious to all the French, D. Henry, Earle of Transtamara, (who was vigilant to embrace
all things that might serue him to reuenge the death of his mother and brethren, and of so
many iniuries which hee had receiued of this wretched king) found fauour and helpe in
France. And it fell out very fitly, that the wars being ended in France, as well against the
English, and King of Nauarre, as betwixt the Earles of Montfort and Blois, contending
for the succession of Brittanie: this Realme was then wonderfully ouer-charged with
idle souldiers, which kept the fields, and committed many spoyles and insolencies, beeing
gathered together in such great numbers, French, English, Brittons, Flemmings, and
of other nations intermingled, as they were fearefull to Princes, yea and to the Pope
himselfe residing in Auignon: so as they demanded but an occasion of some long voyage,
to conquer and subdue Countries, or to be there defeated, beeing impossible without
great danger and disorder, to be otherwise ridde of them.
Vppon these continuall complaints of the impieties and cruelties which Don Pedro
King of Castile committed daily, beeing alreadie pronounced by the Popes Legate,
and confirmed by him, an vtter enemie to God and men: and at the instance and poursute
of the king of Arragon, and of Henry Earle of Transtamara, Bastard of Castile, who
(as some write) were come to this effect in person, to Auignon; the French King, Pope
Vrban, and other Princes, thought good to haue these people dealt withall, (whome
they commonly called Malandrins) to go and make warre in Spaine against Don
Pedro surnamed the Cruell:Malandrins. and Bertrand of Guesclin, a valiant and hardy Knight of

Brittany, (who was then a prisoner of war; for the factions of Montfort and Blois) was chosen
to lead them, who for this cause was put to ransome, and deliuered. Bertrand wrought
so, as these companions were willing to follow him: whereupon some of their Captaines
came to Barcelona, did capitulate, receiued mony, and promised to serue Don Henry,
wherof Bernard Bastard of Bearne, sonne to Gaston Phebus Earle of Foix, was one of the
chiefe: which D. Pedro King of Castile vnderstanding, he retired his troupes, and came to
Burgos, where he called a generall assembly; whither came the Lord of Albret, a knight of
Gasconie well accompanied, who assured him for a certaine number of ducats, to draw away
a good part of those soldiers which D. Henry and the king of Arragon had entertayned*
and wrought so, as they shold abandon them, and come to serue him: but it grieued
the king to spend his treasure, which notwithstanding was very great: wherfore reiecting
the Lord of Albrets good counsell, he sought other pouisions, which serued him to smal
purpose. These men past into Spaine,Malandrins passe into Spaine. being esteemed to be 10000. horse, and an infinite
number of foot, besides those souldiers which the Earle and the king of Arragon had: to
whome were ioyned many great personages, both French and others, among the which
the French Historie names Iohn of Bourbon Earle of March, cosin to the deceased queen
Blanche of Castile, Anthony Lord of Beauieu, Arnold of Andreghen Marshall of France,
Begue of Villenes, Eustace of Aubercourt, Hugh Caurelee, Gualter Huet, Mathew of Gournay,
and Perducas of Albret, who with many other famous men, made this voyage: Bertrand
of Guesclin being chiefe leader of them all, by reason of his valour and great experience.
The K. of Arragon with these succors did presently recouer all that the king of
Castile had taken from him, the Castillans hauing abandoned their garrisons. The bodie
of the army which D. Henry should lead, was made at Sarragossa, from whence they marched
directly to Calao^ra, and entred without resistance, in the month of March, this yere
1366; D. Henry being receiued by D. Fernand bishop of that place, and by D. Fernand Sanches
of Tobar, vpon condition they should be intreated as friends: for the towne was not
strong. There he was sollicited by D. Alphonso of Arragon Earle of Denia and Ribagorca,
and by the Arragonois,D* H^^ry takes the title of K. of Castile. to take vpon him the title of King of Castile and Leon, which at
the first he did refuse: but being prest and importuned, in the end he yeelded, so as from
that time he had more need of a bridle to restraine him, then a spurre. Being thus proclaimed
king, and hauing aduanced his royall Standard, the Knights which were there present,
began to demand gifts and recompences in the countrie which they had not yet conquered,
but were in good hope, to whome hee gaue contentment with many promises.
Passing on, they tryed Logrogno, which place they found strong, and well manned: wherfore
not to lose time, they marched on, and hauing seized vppon Nauarret and Birbiesca,
they came to Burgos, whereas the king D. Pedro was, who made all the hast hee could to
dislodge. The inhabitants seing him parting, besought him not to abandon them, offering
him all the mony that was in the towne, and their-persons with great fidelity; but this king
being terrified, there was no meanes to stay him: and in truth we seldome see valour and
crueltie lodge together: wherefore the inhabitants of Burgos protested to prouide for
the safety and preseruation of the citty the best they could: so as he was forced to quit them
of the oath and homage they ought him, and presently tooke his way to Toledo, where
hauing left a good garrison, he went to Seuile. The inhabitants of Burgos seeing themselues
abandoned by their Prince, opened the gates to Don Henry whom, in the capitulation
they made, they called Earle, promising to title him king, when he should be entred
into the citty.
Don Henry parting from Birbiesca, some eight leagues distant from Burgos, hee made
his entrie into the citty, to the great contentment of many, who hated the violent disposition
of the king D. Pedro: where he caused himselfe to be crowned king of Castile and
Leon, in the royall Monasterie of Huelgas, this yeare 1366; and within fiue and twentie
dayes after his coronation, almost all the townes of Castile and Leon put themselues vnder
his obedience and protection: saying, that according to the example and ancient custome
of the Gods, they might retire themselues from a tyrant king, and chuse another:
without hauing any regard vnto the succession, nor his family whom they should leaue.
Then began D. Henry to distribute townes, castles, offices and dignities, vnto the Noblemen

and Knights which had followed him. He gaue to D. Alphonso Earle of Denia
and Ribagorca, the Marquisate of Villena, the patrimonie of D. Ieanne Manuel his wife:
to Bertrand of Guesclin the Lordship of Molina; D. Tello brother to the new king, was
maintained in the Segneurie of Biscay,Bounty of D. Henry the new King. the inheritance of his deceased wife D. Ieanne of
Lara, and moreouer he gaue him Aquilar del Campo, and to his other brother D. Sancho,
all that which had belonged vnto D. Iohn Alphonso of Albuquerque, adding thereunto
the townes of Haro, Briones, Villorado, Cerezo in Rioja, and the towne of Ledesma. To
other knights hee gaue gifts, and confirmed and augmented the auncient priuiledges of
townes which yeelded willingly vnto him. Thinking himself now to be in sure possession,
he caused his wife D. Ieanne, his son D. Iohn, and D. Leonora his daughter, to come out of
Arragon into Castile: and hauing disposed of the affaires of Burgos, of Castile the old,
and of Leon, he went to Toledo, where he found some opposition, yet in the end he was
receiued and saluted as king: and after the example of this stately citie, many other towns
of that Realme yeelded vnto him. The King D. Pedro seeing himselfe abandoned, put a
great quantitie of money, and other treasure into a gally, and retired into Portugal: but
fearing his cousin D. Fernand, Infant of that Realme, who loued him not, he past in great
doubt vnto S. Iames in Gallicia, where he caused D. Suero of Toledo Archb. of that place,
and D. Pedro Aluarez of Toledo, Deane of the same church, to be slaine, and adding sacriledge
to this murther, he spoiled their houses, and caried away their goods, which was the
chiefe cause why he slue them. Being doubtfull what to do, he resolued in the end to go
by sea to Bayone in France: wherefore parting from the Groine with 22. ships and one
gally, carrying with him his three daughters, Beatrix, Constance, and Izabel, hee came to
S. Subastians in Guipuscoa, where he had some thousands of double ducats, and other riches,
the which he took with him,Flight of the king D. Pedro out of Spaine. and set sayle towards Bayonne. A gally which followed
him, in which was Martin Ianes his Treasurer, with much mony, and other precious things
was stayed by the Inhabitants of Seuile, which cittie beeing greatly affected vnto D. Henry,
put themselues vnder his obedience, soone after the kings departure; and the cittie of
Cordoua did the like. So hatefull was the king D. Pedro, and so pleasing was the mild disposition
of Don Henry, as in a short time hee found himselfe King of a great and mightie
Kingdome, almost without striking stroake, the people striuing who should bee first
receiued.
Don Henry being at Seuile, he confirmed the peace with the Kings of Portugall and
Granado: but he was deceiued in this prosperitie, being too confident of his new subiects,
so as although he knew well that his enemy was retired to the English, with great store
of treasure, and that he might well coniecture, that he would draw succors from thence,
to trouble him in the possession of this Realme newly conquered, yet he dismist his strangers
well satisfied which were all his force, and retayned onely Bertrand of Guesclin, and
Bernard bastard of Foix with some 1500. horse French and English. The country of Gallicia
opposed it selfe most against D. Henry: that being pacified and subdued, he assembled
the Estates at Burgos, the which (besides that they did sweare fidelitie vnto his son D. Iohn
as heire vnto the Crowne) did grant vnto him the tenth peny of all the merchandize they
should sell within the Realme, and so much the more willingly, when as they vnderstood
that the king D. Pedro prepared to returne into Spaine with a great power of English. D.
Henry to gratifie the cittie of Burgos, gaue vnto it in that assembly, the towne of Miranda
of Ebro, the which did belong to the Church of Burgos, it did also serue to recompence
the towne of Birbiesca, belonging to the citie, which he had giuen to D. Pedro Fernandes
of Velasco his great Chamberlaine. To the Church of Burgos in recompence of Miranda,
he gaue a pension of sixtie thousand marauidis, vppon the tenths due from the sea, to
bee employed in the ordinary distributions for the seruice which is done there day and
night.
Don Dominicke was then Bishop of Burgos, the eight and twentith Pastor in number,
who obtayned this Bishoppricke after a manner worthie to be related: for the Chapter
beeing diuided and at controuersie about the election of a new Bishoppe, after the
death of Don Fernand the third who had newly left and abandoned that seate, and not
able to agree and determine vppon two chiefe persons propounded in that assembly,

they concluded to referre the nomination to Dominick, then Chanoine of that Church,
beeing held a man of a good and holy life. This good Chanoine hauing accepted the nomination,
bethought himselfe of a meanes to displease neither party: saying merily vnto
them,Bishop of Burgos chosen by himselfe. that if it were their pleasures hee should name a Bishop, hee was of opinion, that
himselfe should be the man, the which he deliuered with so good a grace, as the Chapter
could not take it ill: wherefore Dominick the Chanoine became presently Bishop, hauing
neuer before once dreamed to aspire to that dignitie: and his election was soon after confirmed
by the Pope. This Bishop was a good seruant To D. Henry. At that time D. Tello
brother to Don Henry married a Gentle-woman which was called Donna Ieanne of Lara,
as his first wife, who was Lady of Biscay: by reason whereof many did beleeue it was
the same that was daughter to Don Iohn Nugnes of Lara, who (they say) had beene slain
by the King Don Pedro: and this perswasion continued among the people of Biscay some
time, being nourished by Don Tello. Donna Ieanne Manuel, wife to Don Henry, was sent
him into Castile by Don Pedro king of Arragon, who would that Donna Leonora, Infanta
of Arragon, future wife to Don Iohn the eldest sonne of D. Henry, should accompanie
her. But before he dismissed them, he caused Donna Ieanne Manuel (who intitled her selfe
Queene of Castile and Leon) to sweare, to do her best to cause Don Henry her husband,
to giue him the citties of Soria and Cuenca, the townes of Molina, and Medina Celi, and
the Realme of Murcia, as they had agreed, and hee had promised before this Conquest.
And moreouer, he demanded rembursement of certaine summes of mony which hee had
lent him: whereunto Don Henry (who had newes of the armie which was preparing by
the English, in fauour of Don Pedro his competitor) made an honest answer: for it was
reasonable, sayd he, to attend the end of this great preparation, which was made against
him.
The King of Nauarre in this first warre had not shewed himselfe a fauourer to either ofNauarre.
these contending Princes: but knowing that the King Don Pedro was retire to Bayone,
dispossessed of his Realme, he came to see him, and was there present at the accord and
promises which past betwixt Edward Prince of Wales and him. The Princes supping together,
held this order: the King Don Pedro was on the right hand, and next to him the
Prince of Wales, and on the other side was the king of Nauar alone: who being returned
into Nauar, he was much sollicited by Don Henry, to be of his partie, but he was already
ingaged by promise to Don Pedro king of Castile, and to the Prince of Wales, to giue
them free passage through his countrie. The k. of Arragon aduertised of all these things,
prest the French king by his ambassadors, to make warre against the English, and also against
the king of Nauarre, promising to ioyne for his part, to diuert the storme which
was comming vppon Don Henry the new king of Castile, whom he ought to haue receiued
into this league: and in the meane time there was continuall war vppon the frontiers
of Arragon and Nauarre. Notwithstanding these things aboue-mentioned, D. Henry did
so labour the king of Nauar, as he made him forget the promises he had made at Bayone,
to D. Pedro king of Castile, and to the English, comming to meet with D. Henry at Santa
Cruz of Campeco, where hee promised and sware to bee of his side, and to do his best to
stop the passage of the English army through Nauarre, which would haue auayled him
much to breake the desseines of the dispossessed king* for in the passage of the Pyrenee
hilles, hee had nothing to fauour him, but the Townes of Saint Sebastian and Guetaria
in Guipuscoa.
At these promises sollemnly made by the king of Nauarre, vnto Don Henry, there assisted
Don Gomes Manrique Arch-bishop of Toledo, D. Lopes Fernandes of Luna, Arch-bishop
of Sarragossa, Don Alphonso of Arragon, Earle of Denia, and Marquis of Villena,
Bertrand of Guesclin, and many other great personages of Castile, France, and Arragon.
And a league was concluded betwixt the kings of Arragon, Nauarre, and Don Henry,
for their common defence against all men. And the king promised to be readie with the
forces of his countrie, and to be in person at the Battaile which they thought would be giuen,
for assurance whereof there was deliuered into the Arch-bishops hands of Sarragossa
the castle of Garde, and that of S. Vincent to Bertrand of Guesclin, and that of Buradon
was giuen in gard to D. Iohn Ramires of Areillan.

In recompence of the good offices which D. Henry expected from King Charles, he promised
to giue him the towne of Logrogno, to him and his for euer. It was likely that D.
Henries affaires should succeed better then those of Don Pedro, and therefore K. Charles
made choice to hold with the stronger, as he thought. The dispossessed king of Castile,
and the Prince of Wales vnderstanding of this league, found it very strange: and the English
being more familiar with the king of Nauarre, he complained much vnto him, and
sought to reduce him to his first promises, the which he did: making him againe, with the
note of great inconstancie, to quit the party of Don Henry, and of the king of Arragon,
in regard that they had promised to giue him, besides Logrogno, the citie of Victoria,
which did yet hold for the king Don Pedro: for the which he bound himselfe by oath, to
giue them passage, and to be in person with his troupes, in the battell, in their fauor: excusing
his lightnesse, for that the Realme of Castile did by right belong vnto the King D.
Pedro: and withall he had a desseine to make vse of the friendship and forces of the English
in the quarrels and pretensions he had with the French King, who did much trouble
his affaires.
The conditions which D. Pedro king of Castile made with the Prince of Wales, were 
these: He gaue him from that time the Segneurie of Biscay, and Castro of Ordiales,Conditions betwixt D. Pedro and the Prince of VVales* and promised
to pay the soldiers which he led into Spaine, leauing his three daughters in hostage
with the English: he promised the citie of Soria to Iohn Chandos, Constable in Guienne
for the English, and to many other Noblemen and knights other places and townes in
Castile. Vpon these accords, being full of good hope, seeing they had the king of Nauar
their friend, they marched with a great and mighty armie in the Spring time 1367.An. 1367. to repossesse
the king D. Pedro in his Realme. King Charles whether troubled in conscience for
the oaths which he had so often broken, or for some other consideration, would not bee
in person at this incounter betwixt the king D. Pedro and D. Henry, as hee had promised,
but vnder colour of going a hunting, he caused himselfe to bee taken prisoner, by a plot
and accord made with Olyuer of Manny or Maulny a Britton Knight, who held the castle
of Berja for Bertrand of Guesclin, who had it by gift from the king of Arragon, in the
which he was shut vp: and for that he would not shew himselfe altogether disloyall, hee
left Don Martin Henriques of Lacarra, the master of his horse, and his Standard-bearer,
at Pampelona with three hundred Lances, commanding him to ioyne with the English
armie, and to fight in it.
The English armie arriued at Cuenca, or Combe of Pampelona,Castile. about the beginning
of March this yeare 1367. from whence it past into Alaua: besides, the Prince of Wales,
and Don Pedro king of Castile, there were in it Iohn Duke of Lancaster, brother to the
Prince; D. Iames of Maiorca, son to the king Don Iames, who had come for refuge to this
English Prince being at Bourdeaux. Iohn Chandos Constable of Guien, Robert Felton
great Seneshall, Richard of Angle, and Stephen of Consentone Marshals of Guien:
moreouer, the Earle of Armaignac and Albert, who offered and brought to this warre a
thousand complet lances of his subiects and friends: but they were reduced (to his great
griefe) to two hundred by the Prince, beeing so aduised by some other, or of his own proper
motion, and for enuy: which vice some write did often blemish the great vertues that
were in him. For euen some affirme, that this voyage whih he vndertooke into Spaine,
was not for charity, nor any loue he bare to the dispossessed king D. Pedro, but for that the
honor and reputation which Bertrand of Guesclin hand gotten, to haue made D. Henry
K. of Castile, would not let him sleepe. Besides, the aboue named, there did accompanie
the Prince of Wales in this expedition, the Earls of Perigort and Cominges, the Vicont
of Carmain, Bernard and Perducas of Albert, Captal of Buch, the Lord of clisson, the Seneshals
of Xaintong, Rochel, Querci, Limosin, Agenois, and Bigorre, with many other
Noblemen, and renowned knights of England, Poitou, Brittaine, Gasconie and other contries,
and among them some which had a litle before serued D. Henry, vnder the command
of Bertrand of Guesclin: which Guesclin did not fayle at need, but came to D. Henries army
with a good number of Knights and souldiers, to ayd him to maintaine his conquest.
Vpon the newes of this mighty army, D. Henry had gathered together all his good subiects:
so as according to the French Authors (it may be exceeding in their computations)

he made accompt to haue 7000. men at arms, 20000. light horse, and 40000. foot, wherof
many were armed with slings, much feared in those dayes: with these forces hee came
to incounter his enemie, and lodged betwixt S. Dominike of Calcada and Bagnares, the
enemy being camped about Saluatierra, who approching towards Logrogno, he came to
Calderan. The Captaines were of opinion, that D. Henry should not fight, but only coast
the enemy, and keepe him in continuall feare, cutting off their victuals and other commodities,
whereby they should be soone forced to breake of themselues: and so had the French
king aduised him to do: but hee (who was a Prince of great spirit, and more resolute in
such actions, then was fit for the head of an Estate, and incouraged by some small aduantage
gotten of the fore-runners of the English, by D. Tello and D. Sancho his breethren,
who had taken Thomas Felton,Prince of VVales writes to D. Henry. a knight, and some others) gouerned himselfe after his own
humor; who raysing his army, came to Nagera, seing the English approch to Nauarre^.
From hence the Prince of Wales did write vnto D. Henry, terming him Earle of Transtamara,
which letter was full of courtesie and good words, perswading him to quit the title
of King, and to yeeld vnto his brother D. Pedro, the lawfull K. of Castile, assuring him hee
would be a meanes that he should haue a good composition: and aboue all, that he shold
auoid to come to a battell, the euent whereof must needs be his ruine, seeing they did
much exceede them in number, their souldiers invalour, and their Captaines in leading.
To the which D. Henry made answer, that he could not hearken to any accord with him,D. Henryes answer.
who had against the law of Nature taken delight to murther so many of the bloud royal,
and other great personages of Castile: who had no respectiue regard of the lawes of the
country, and much lesse of God, falsifying his oath and promises, hauing no other rule in
his actions, but his tyrannous passions: and with his excuses, hee gaue many good words
in regard of the Prince of Wales, protesting that he came with griefe to fight, and that the
would willingly haue auoyded the effusion of Christian bloud, which he prepared to see.
These Princes being thus disposed,D. Henry defeted in battell. the armies presented themselues one before another
betwixt Nagera and Nauarret; where they incountred with such fury about Alecon,
neere to the Bourg of Acofra, as after great effusion of bloud, D. Henries men wee put
to flight, the disorder beginning on D. Tellos side, and many were taken prisoners by the
English, French, and Nauarrois: against some of which the K. D. Pedro being incensed, did
execute his rage, causing them to be murthered in his presence: among others, the first
master of the Knights of S. Bernard, and the last also, being taken in this defeat, had his head
cut off by the kings commandement. It was a military order sprung vp in Biscay, to which
knights should be assigned the lands called Beetries, which lay neere: but it was suddenly
extinct by reason of these wars, and by this excesse of the King D. Pedro. Many were reconciled
by the mediation of the Prince of Wales, of which number was D. Sancho, brother
to the Erle D. Henry: others were streightly imprisoned, among which were Bertrand
of Guesclin, Arnold of Andreghen, and Begue of Villaines. D. Henry escaped from the battell,
and posting towards Nagera, his horse being tyred and out of breath, hee met with a
Squire of the Prouince of Alaua, called Ruy Fernandes of Goana; who knowing him,
mounted him vpon a good Genet, with the which he came into the K. of Arragons countrie,
to whom he would not go, remembring the miseries which follow afflicted Princes
fallen from their fortunes, and the small faith that is in friends in such extremities, euery
one drawing backe, and seeking to excuse himselfe vnto the Victor, to please whom, many
times the vnfortunat is deliuered vp to sacrifice. Wherefore hee past the mountaines,
and retired into France, leauing the townes and Noblemen of Castile, which had followed
his party in great perplexity,D. Pedro of Luna, a knight of Arragon, fut^re Pope. with him there retired that D. Pedro of Luna a Cattelan,
who of a knight as he was then, carrying armes, became a Clergie man, was a Cardinall,
and in the end Pope, during the great Schisme, which did so much trouble the Church of
Rome.
After this great victorie which hapned the third day of April 1367. the king D. Pedro
entred in great pompe into Burgos, from whence D. Ieanne Manuel, called Queen of Castile,
wife to D. Henry, her children, and daughter-in-law, were a little before retired, and
fled in all hast into Arragon, where they were receiued, but not so chearefully as before:
for the king of Arragon studied how he might recouer the fauour of Don Pedro King of

Castile, being therein assisted by the Prince of Wales, and aduised to abandon D. Henry,
who was vanquished. D. Romero Bishop of Lerida, D. Pedro Earle of Vrgel, the Vicont of
Cardona, D. Iohn Fernandes of Heredia, and others, were of this opinion, who were sent
Ambassadors to D. Pedro King of Castile* and Reymond Pegnera, and Iames Elfaro went
to the Prince of Wales.
Some say that the Prince of Wales beginning to descouer the ingratitude of D. Pedro
King of Castile, there was in this Negotiation a plot laied betwixt him and the king of
Arragon to diuide the king of Castile betwixt them, and to giue some part of the booty
to the kings of Nauarre and Portugal and so wholy to reiect the tyrant D. Pedro.
The King of Nauarre hearing of the victory which the King of Castile had obtained,Nauarre.
thought it now time to creepe out of his deene, pressing Oliuer of Maulny to set him at
liberty: but the difficulty was, this knight would be paied for his good seruice, hauing taken
the king prisoner. King Charles gaue him D. Pedro his second sonne in hostage, assuring
him that if he would come to Tudelo, he would giue him all that hee had promised,
and more. This good knight tooke the Infant D. Pedro, and put him into the castle
of Borja, deliuered the king, and soone after, through his great simplicity, followed him
to Tudelo:Oliuer of Maulny deliuers the King of Nauarre, and remaines prisoner himselfe. but he was no sooner arriued, but they layed hold of him, and put him in prison,
vntil hat he had yeelded the hostage. A brother of his should haue beene taken
with him by the kings commandement, but seeking to flie away ouer a house, hee was
slaine by them that pursued him. King Charles did write presently to the king of Arragon,
complayning of the wrong which the Britons (holding the castle of Borja and
Magallon) had done him, and that they detained and with^eld his sonne, whom
hee had beene forced for to giue them in Ostage, hearing that they ment to carry
him into France, the which hee intreated him to preuent, setting good gards vpon the
passages of his country. He sayd moreouer, that he threatned to inuade his country of
Nauarre, relying vpon the support they had of Arragon: wherefore hee intreated him
not to giue them forces, nor any aide in such enterprises, and not take it ill if hee led an
army before Borja, to deliuer his soone from prison. Garci Sanchez Prior of Ronceual,
was sent of this Ambassage into Arragon, who not onely executed his charge, but also
entred into a treaty of marriage betwixt Charles the eldes sonne of Nauarre* and D. Leonora
daughter to the King of Arragon. The King of Arragon who had no need of any
enemies, for that he feared the King of Castile, caused the trouble of Borja to cease, and
commanded the Brittons to deliuer the Infant D. Pedro, who beeing carried to Tudelo,
Oliuer of Maulny was also deliuered. As for the marriage, although the King of Arragon
did much desire it, yet the King of Nauarre, hauing retired his sonne, did not much
care for it, meaning first to see what should become of the broiles of Castile.
21 The King D. Pedro the cruell,Castile. victorious, but insolent and treacherous as of custome,
could not conteine himselfe within the bounds of modesty and reason, neither to
his subiects, nor to strangers, English, French and others, who had seated him in his Kingdome:
There were great controuersies amongst them for prisoners and ransomes,D* Pedro King of Castile discontents the English and other strangers. and
the souldiars pay, yet after much disputing there was some kinde of agreement. D. Pedro
King of Castile sent D. Pedro Fernandes Peres of Ayala, with the Deputies of the Prince
of Wales, to put them in possession of the Lordship of Biscay, and Castro of Ordiales,
according vnto their accords: but the Biscains beeing aduertised that what the King did,
was onely to content the Prince of Wales, and to shew that hee had a will to performe
his promise, but not that he had any meaning to maintaine it: besides that of their owne
dispositions they did abhor the command of strangers, they would neuer receiue these
Deputies, nor consent that they should be put in possession of their country, which was
the cause of great troubles. The King seeming to bee much discontented at these difficulties,
made a sollemne oth in the chiefe Church of Burgos, that hee would put the
Prince of Wales in possession of the Siegneuries of Biscay. D. Pedro seeing himselfe restored
to his Realme, he desired to know what the destynies did promise him, and therefore
he demanded aduice of a councellor to the King of Granado, called Aben-Hatin, a
great and learned Astrologian and Phylosopher, who sent him a letter full of learning,
saying, that hee must looke vnto his owne carriage, and how hee gouerned his subiects,

for thereon depended the continuance of his raigne,Holy aduertisments of a Phylosopher Moore to D. Pedro. either long or short, and the continuance
of the scepter in his family: adding many precepts, the which if hee had duly
obserued, without doubt he had raigned securely in peace: but hee fel into his frenezies
and cruelties, the which did so estrange the hearts of those, which abhorred his forepassed
tyranies, as his fall must needes bee miserable. Hee parted from Burgos, and went to
seeke meanes to content the English, commanding that as soone as he should bee out
of the city, they should put to death Ruy Ponce Palomeque and some others, whom hee
had caused to be put into the castle of Burgos. Being come nere vnto Toledo, he would
haue hostages of the Inhabitants for his assurance, and there hee put to death seuenteene
of the chiefe of the city; then hee went to Cordoua, from which place he sent to Seuile,
that they should put to death Gil Bocanegra, D. Iohn Ponce of Leon Lord of Marchene,
and Alphonso Aluares of Quadros, with an other called Alphonso Fernandes: Hee caused
many to be disparched at Cordoua before hee came to Seuile, where beeing arriued, hee
caused Donna Vrraca Osorio, mother to D. Iohn Alphonso of Guzman, to bee slaine, and
Martin Iames his high treasorer, taking great delight in his murthers, and reuenges vpon
these miserable creatures, for that he had not found them ready to follow his fortune,
or for some other discontentment; forgeting that for such inhumanities and tyranies,
he had beene once cast out of Spaine. He caused D. Martin Lopes of Cordoua, maister
of Calatraua,A Moore more kinde then D. Pedro a Christian King. to be apprehended, and would haue put him to death, but the King of Granado
demanded him in guift, and did so much, as he saued his life. He had done more, if
time and meanes had permitted, but God preuented him, for D. Henry stayed not long to
depriue him both of realme and life.
After the losse of the battaile, D. Henry came into the country of Foix, where beeing
well entertained by the Earle, and furnished with all things befitting such a knight, hee
went to Auignon, whereas Pope Vrbain the fifth did raigne, who did loue, and esteeme
him much, and therefore he receiued him courteously, and delt with Lewis Duke of Aniou,
brother to the French King, and Gouernor of Languedoc, to giue him meanes to
raise a new army, to returne into Spaine, whether many friends recalled him, assuring
him that the cruelties which the King D. Pedro continued, prepared him the way to recouer
his good fortune, and that now there was not any difficulty to settle him firmely;
neither need they feare that D. Pedro should finde fauour or succors with the English,
whom he had defrauded of their pay and recompences promise, and sent home discontented.
D. Iranne wife to D. Henry, and his children, finding themselues not very safe
in Arragon by reason of the friendship that was betwixt the King of Arragon, and the
Prince of Wales, they had past into France, whereas they remained in the castle of Perapertuse,
vnto the end of the warre, such was the diligence of D. Henry, and of his
friends, as hee obtained from the King fiue thousand pounds starling in ready money,
and liberty to leauy souldiars within his Realme.D. Henry bastard of Castile aided againe by the French. Hee had also succors both of money
and men from the Duke of Aniou, from Guy Cardinal of Bologne, and other Noblemen
of France, beeing incensed against the King D. Pedro, the murtherer of Queene
Blanthe of Bourbon his wife: notwithstanding D. Henry found many great difficulties;
an ordinary thing for those that are in aduersity: for the French King feared least the
English should take it ill that he gaue succors vnto their enemy: and to make such a preparation
for warre, as was necessary, he had neede of a great masse of money, which
was the greatest hindrance of his affaires. Some therevpon write that in one day hee
caused all the money to be seized on, that was in Auignon, in marchants, and Banquers
hands, the Pope giuing his consent, and hee promising vpon the faith of a Prince to restore
it. In the end he had meanes to raise a good army, but before he began to march,
he had certaine newes that the Prince of Wales was returned into Guienne much discontented
with the King D. Pedro: and moreouer that all the Prouince of Guipuscoa,
except Saint Sebastien and Guetaria, the townes of Biscay, Segobia, Vailledolit, Palence,
Auila, Guadalajara, Salamanca, Medina del Campo, Toro, Almedo, Areualo, Coca,
Madrigal, Carrion, Sepulueda, Aillon, Atienca, Illescas with many other forts held
his party.
Whilest that D.Arragon. Henry ptopares to passe into Spaine, some of the English and French

souldiars, returning from the seruice of D. Pedro King of Castile, by the pace betwixt Nauarre
and Arragon, spoiling the valleies, they attempted to enter into Iacca. Against
these men the Inhabitants of the country, both Nobles and Commons armed, so as after
diuerse skirmishes, whereas many were slaine of both sides, these strangers beeing
aboue fifteene thousand men, past the Pyrenes, and returned into their countries. The
King of Arragon, before the Prince of Wales his retreat had sought by his meanes to
recouer Sauveterre, and Real of Rueste, which the Nauarrois held since the warre of Castile,
but he could not.
As for the King of Nauarre,Nauarre. hee recouered the places which hee had left in deposito,
when as he made a league with the King of Arragon, and D. Henry, wherein hee was assisted
by D. Pedro King of Castile, and through fauour of the victory, which hee had obtained:
but yet hee could neither get Logrogno from him, nor the towne of victoria,
which he had promised him;Integrity of D. Iohn Ramires of Areillan. neither could hee retire out of the hands of D. Iohn Ramires
of Areillan (a Knight of honour) the place of Buradon, whereof he had beene chosen
Gardien, saying, That hee did not follow the fortune, and passions of princes, but the equity
of the faith, which was promised and sworne. This good Knight had retired himselfe into
Arragon after the battaile lost, when as D. Henry saued himselfe in France, to whose seruice
he returned soone after.
The Prince of VVales before he went out of Spaine,Leagues ful of infidelity of the Princes of those times. had practised a firme league betwixt
the Kings raigning then in Spaine, and himself, but with diuerse deseignes, wherein
he assured himselfe that the King of Nauarre would bee faithfull, and furnish him with a
good number of souldiars. As for him of Arragon, he imbraced the league as it seemed
with great affection, thinking hee could not then doe better, then to ioyne with the
victorious King of Castile, and the English. To conclude this league, a day was appointed
for he Deputies of all these Princes at Tarbes: in the meane time the treachries
of D. Pedro King of Castile, were so hatefull vnto the Prince of VVales, as he returned
to Bourdeaux discontented. The Deputies of the Kings of Nauarre and Arragon,
and of the Prince of VVales, came to Tarbes, at the day appointed, where there also arriued
some from Castile. The dispositions of these Princes were such, as the King of
Arragon would willingly haue ioyned with D. Henry, if hee had durst, but hee followed
fortune: he of Nauarre was more inclyned to the Prince of VVales, but whatsoeuer it
were, euery one sought to make his proffit of these troubles, and to draw some thing
from Castile: the King of Arragon would haue Murcia, and some other townes: hee
of Nauarre demanded the prouinces of Guipuscoa, and Alaua, namely Victoria, Sauueterre,
Treuigno and many townes in Rioja: the Prince of VVales pretended Biscay,
Castro of Ordiales, and many other places, all promising to bandy themselues against
D. Henry, and to stop his passage into Spaine, if these things were performed by D. Pedro:
if not they were as ready to enter into league with D. Henry, if hee made them the
like pormises. Thus the Realme of Castile was set to sale. On the other side King Edward,
father to the Prince of VVales, and the King of Arragon, had their practises apart,
to diuide the realme of Castile and Leon betwixt them, and to giue some part vnto
the King of Nauarre. Thus these Princes laboured to diuide that betwixt them, which
God had appointed for an other, and their propositions and disputes at Tarbes, were
such and of so many things, as not able to conclude any thing, they referred their assembly
to Oleron, where they did lesse.
22 During these Negotiations, D. Henry entred with his French army into Arragon,Nauarre.
which made euery one to thinke of his affaires, with D. Henry was Bernard bastard
to the Earle of Foix, who had beene taken in the battaile of Nagera,Second Entries D. Henry bastard of Castile, into Spaine. and redeemed from
the English: and although that the King of Arragon sought to diuert this passage, yet
D. Henry went his course, and by Nauarre also, finding not any opposition. Hauing
past the riuer of Ebro with his whole army, marching in the country of Castile, hee fell
on his knees, and making a crosse vpon the sand, hee sware, that no toile nor misfortune
should euer make him goe out of Castile. Hee entred into Calaorra without contradiction,
the eight and twentith of September, this yeere of our Lord 1367. whether many
Knights, Squiers and other men, came vnto him, flying the furie of the King D. Pedro.

Being assured of Calaorra, hee came to Logrogno, where hee found great resistance,
wherefore he past on by Rioja and Bureba, and came to Burgos, where the Inhabitants
receiued him with great affection, and although the castle and the Iewes place made
some resistance, yet he brought them to obedience and tooke within the castle D. Iames
of Majorca, who defended it. Hee was sonne to the last King of Majorca, and had escaped
from a hard prison, where hee had beene long detained in the new castle at Barcelona,
since the yeere of our Lord 1362. then beeing come to Naples, hee had the
happe to marrie Queene Ieanne of Naples, whom they called Duke of Calabria, and not
King of Naples.
Many townes yeelded vnto Don Henry in fewes daies, and about the beginning of
the yeere of our Lord 1368. he got the city of Leon: wherefore hauing much blemished
the name and authority of his aduersary in old Castile, hee marched with his army
towards Toledo, which city hee beseeged making a bridge of wood ouer the riuer of
Tayo, to passe and repasse his army, as occasion should serue. The Inhabitants were
desirous to receiue D. Henry, but for that Don Pedro held many of their men in hostage,
fearing least hee should kill them, they durst not declare themselues. At this seege,
the French Kings Ambassadors preuailed so with Don Henry, as hee sware to compromit
the controuersies which hee had with the King of Arragon, hauing that charge
from their maister, who desired to reconcile these two Princes: at this promise there
were present Don Pedro of Arragon, the Kings vncle, the Archbishop of Toledo, Don
Pedro Fernandes of Velasco, Fernand Peres of Ayala, Diego Gomes of Toledo, Goncal-Messie
of Pont, and others. Don Pedro King of Castile hauing fortified and manned
the towne of Carmona, parted thence, to come to Eccia, hauing in his company
Mahumet King of Granado,Army of the King D. Pedro. called the old, with all the forces of his Realme, consisting
of seuen thousand horse, and foure score thousand foot, whereof twelue thousand were
Crosse-bowes, or a some write thirtie thousand, to whom the King Don Pedro did
ioyne fifteene hundreth horse, and sixe thousand foote, of his subiects and partisans
Spaniards; and with this army he came and laied seege to Cordoua which had reuolted:
but not able to take it, after some sallies and incounters, the Moores returned to Granado,
and the King Don Pedro to Seuile. Yet the King of Granado staied not long
before hee returned to Iaen, the which hee tooke and burned, and came againe and
camped before Cordoua, but hee dislodged soone, and went towards Vbeda, where hee
did as hee had done at Iaen, and making his proffit of these reuolts, hee tooke many other
places, did great spoile in Andalusia, and carried away an infinite number of Christians
prisoners.Townes in Castile yeeld to the King of Nauarre. Whilest that Don Henry prest Toledo, the townes of Victoria, Saluatierra,
Alaua, and Logrogno, which held for the King Don Pedro, beeing tired wi^h
the continuall warre which the Guipuscoans, and others of their Neighbours (which
held Don Henries partie) made against them, they yeelded to Charles King of Nauarre.
In this reddition the King of Nauarre was much assisted by Don Tello, who held
Biscay, and was then in bad termes with his brother Don Henry. They say that the
Inhabitants of these townes hauing acquainted the King Don Pedro with their necessities,
intreating him that hee would not take it ill, if they put themselues into the hands
of the King of Nauarre, who was his friend and allie, hee willed them to hold out as
long as they could, and when as they should bee no more able to defend themselues
they should rather yeeld to Don Henry his brother, without diuiding themselues
from the crowne of Castile, then vnto the King of Nauarre, who would dismember
them from that body: moreouer that hee had no reason to gratifie him, for hee had not
receiued any assured succors from him. But it fell out otherwise, and the King of Nauarre
was seized thereon, who to make money at that time, sold many preuiledges to the
townes of Nauarre, and among others to the towne of Viana hee sold the duty called
Fousadera, and sold them moreouer the place called Agoncillo, and the Borroughs of
Vrllicilla, and Lacagurria, with their appurtenances, for a certaine sum of money, by
letters granted at Olite, the seuenth of August, this yeere 1368.
In the meane time D. Henry continued his seege to Toledo, the losse whereof D. Pedro

fearing, he resolued to come and succour it and to raise the seege. Hauing therefore
left D. Sancho and D. Diego, his base sonnes in Carmone, with great store of money
and precious stones, and a good garrison, hee marched against the beseegers. Being
vpon his march, hee receiued letters from Aben-H^tin the Moore, who foretold him of
his approching death: yet for all this he staied not,The King D. Pedro foretold his death. leading in his army three thousand
horse, whereof fifteene hundred were Moores, which the King of Granado had sent him.
Being come to Montiel, and there making some stay, hee was abandoned by many of his
men; whereof D. Henry being aduertised, hee thought it time to come to his last tryall,
which of them two should raigne in Castile: wherefore ^e left at the seege of Toledo
D. Gomes M^^riques, Archbishop of that city, with most of his forces, and he with three
thousand horse went to incounter the King D. Pedro, being resolued to giue him battaile.
He was ouertaken vpon the way in the towne of Orgaz, by Bertrand of Guesclin, who
being newly redeemed from the English, fortenne thousand pounds starling, which the
French King had paied, came to serue him in this conquest with sixe hundred launces.
Being fortified with this troupe, D. Henry marched with all speed, and came to Montiel,
whereof the King D. Pedro (who had no good spies) did not dreame,Defeat of the King D. Pedros men. where as his men
making a shew of fighting, beeing in tumult and confusion, (as men surprized) they
were by the councell of Bertrand of Gueselin, sodainely charged with such fury, as
they were all put to flight, abandoning their King, who seeing himselfe reduced to that
extremity, shut himselfe into the castle of Montiel, which stands vpon the side of a hill,
aboue the towne.
Martin Lopes of Cordoua, captaine of the men which were within Carmone, was vpon
the way to come and succor the King D. Pedro; but hearing of the defeat of those that
were with him, and that he was shut vp into the castle of Montiel, he returned. The
Earle D. Henry did presently cast a ditch about the towne and castle of Montiel, that his
prey might not escape; but D. Pedro being beseeged, and in want of all things sought
to corrupt Bertrand of Guesclin, by the meanes of Men Rodrigues of Sanubria, promising
him the townes of Soria, Almacan, Atienca, Montagu, Beca and Seron, and
moreouer two hundred thousand doublons of gold, if hee would vndertake to set him in
a place of safety: where vnto Bertrand seeming to consent, he aduertised D. Henry; then
hauing giuen an houre and place to Men Rodrigues (who was borne at Transtamara)
to bring forth the King, he came out of the castle in the night, hauing in his company
D. Fernand of Castro, and D. Diego Goncales of Ouiedo, and went all armed towards the
lodging of Bertrand of Guesclin, who came to meet him, and said vnto him, that it was
time to spur; but as he was ready to goe to horse,Bertrand of Guesclin be traies the King D. Pedro. hee was staied by some that followed
Bertrand, and forced to come into his tent, where hee found D. Henry his brother, armed,
who at the first sight did not know him; and beeing aduertised by them that were about
him, that it was the King D. Pedro, his enemy, yet was hee in doubt, for hee had not seene
him in many yeeres. The King D. Pedro seeing himselfe betraied, transported with fury,
began to cry out aloude, I am, I am in deed D. Pedro. Then D. Henry drawing out his
dagger stabbed him in the face, the King graspled with him, and they both fell to the
ground, but D. Henry vnderneath; who being helpt by Bertrand of Guesclin, and others,
freed himselfe, and got the King D. Pedro vnder him, whom he slue with his dagger. Thus
D. Pedro King of Castile ended his daies miserably, for his excesse and tyranies;D. Henry bastard of Castile kils the King D. Pedro. fulfilling
the prediction of the Monke of St. Dominike of Calcada, whom he caused to burned,
and of the Philosopher Aben-Hatin. His death was in the yeere 1368. the two and thirtith
of March, for the which many blame Bertrand of Guesclin, as hauing falsified his
faith and pormise to set him in a place of safety: others discharge him, saying, that the
King D. Pedro despayring, came and put himselfe rashly into his enemies hands. His
body was interred in the Monastery of Saint Dominike the Roial at Madrid. Hee had
raigned nineteene yeers, and died beginning the fiue and thirtith of his age.



D. Fernand alone of that name, ninth King
of Portugal.
23 DVring the warres of the two Princes of Castile brethren,Portugal we doe not read that D.
Pedro king of Portugal tooke part with either of them. He died in the yeere 1367.
the seuen and forty of his a^^, hauing raigned almost eleuen yeere. To which Realme
succeeded D. Fernand his sonne, being at his coronation sixe and twentie yeere old, and
some monthes, in whom the direct and lawfull line of D. Henry of Besancon, or of Lorraine,
failed, as shal appeere. He was present in the towne of Estremos, when as his father
died, and was there acknowledged, and proclaimed King, taking an oth from such of his
subiects as were then present.
D. Pedro King of Arragon,Arragon. hearing the successe of. Henries victory, began to feare
him, sending Francis of Perillos and Iames Elfaro Ambassadors into France, who procured
an offenciue and defenciue league, the French King promising to aide him of Arragon,
in his warres of Sardyina, yea and against D. Henry, if hee did not referre vnto him
the question for the realme of Murcia, and other lands promised, as hee had informed
him. And for that the warres betwixt the French and English were reuiued, Francis of
Perillos being held the best captaine at sea in his time, was granted vnto the French king,
who entertained him, notwithstanding that the King of Arragon his maister, had great
need of him, for the warres of Sardynia, the which was continually entertained, by Marian
Iudge of Arborea, who this yeere had taken many places from the Arragonois, and
defeated in a sallie which he made, being deseeged in the castle of Oristagno, the army of
Arragon, commanded by D. Pedro of Luna and his sonne, the which did so disquiet the
King, as he resolued to go thether in person: but new affaires hindred him, for he was inuaded
from the county of Rossillon by some Frenchmen, who notwithstanding were but
vagabond troupes, running vp and downe the country without warrant: and he was also
kept backe by the controuersies which he had with the new King of Castille: wherefore
he sent D. Berenger of Carrozo, Earle of Quirra, thether with an army, yet giuing it still
out that he should goe thether himselfe, keeping the Standard royal displaied on the top
of the castle of Barcelona, after the accustomed manner, in signe that the King would
goe to the warre: the which kept these seditious people somewhat in awe. Hee caused
an Edict to bee published, by the which hee granted respight to all that were indebted,
and repeale for banished men that were of Sardynia. Being come to valence, he made
his sonne D. Martin Seneshall of Cattelogne, who commanded ouer all armes, vniting
vnto that dignity that of the Constable of the realme, as well on this side, as beyond the
seas: and then it was decreed, that from that time the children of the Kings of Princes of
Arragon should be called to that degree.
The end of the fifteenth Booke.




SEMPER EADEMTHE SIXTEENTH BOOKE
of the Generall History of Spaine.

The Contents.
1 DOn Henry the second of that name the 15. King of Castile, and 36. of Leon. The continuation
of his conquest of the Realme of Castile, and the contentions betwixt the
Castillans, Portugals, Nauarrois and Moores.
2 Peace betwixt Castile and Portugal.
3 Parliament at Toro, and the lawes made there.
4 Contention betwixt the Kings of Castile and Nauarre, their agreement. Bad offices of
Charles King of Nauarre, to the King of Castile, in fauour of the English against the
French, and the constancy and fidelity of D. Henry the new King.
5 Vnfitting and vnlawful marriage of D. Fernand King of Portugal, with D. Leonora Telles
of Meneses, and the tumults which ensued.
6 Warre renued betwixt Castile and Portugal.
7 Order of Monkes of Saint Ierosme in Spaine.
8 Preparatiues for warre made by Iohn duke of Lancaster, pretending the Realme of Castile
against D. Henry.
9 Treaty of peace betwixt Castile and Arragon.
10 Affaires of Nauarre: death of D. Roderigo of Vrriz.
11 Cession of the rights of Rossillon and Cerdagne, to the house of Aniou.
12 Trauels of the King of Nauarre: detention of the Prince his sonne in France. Rash enterprises
of the King of Nauarre against him of Castile, warre betwixt these potentats.
13 Schisme in the Church of Rome.
14 Death of D. Henry King of Castile, and some testamentary lawes made by him.
15 D. Iohn first of that name, the 16. King of Castile and 37. of Leon.
16 Treaties of marriages ill mannaged, and donations betwixt the Kings of Castile and Portugall.
17 Practises of D. Leonora Telles of Meneses Queene of Portugal against the Nobility, and
the troubles and calamities which followed.
18 The King of Castile acknowledgeth, in the Schisme of the Romaine Church, the Pope of
Auignon.
19 Warre betwixt Castile and Portugal, procured by the Earle of Oren pacified, a marriage
betwixt D. Iohn King of Castile, and D. Beatrix Infanta of Portugal.
20 Rebellion of the Earle of Gijon.
21 Regency of D. Leonora Telles of Meneses in Portugal, pursute of Don Iohn King

of Castile, of the Realme of Portugal, in the hereditary right of D. Beatrix his wife. D. Iohn
Maister of A^iz, called to the Gouernment, and the exploits of warre betwixt the Castillans,
and Portugals.
22 Bad deseignes of Charles King of Nauarre, to free his sonne, beeing prisoner in France:
his liberty by the bounty of the princes of France.
23 Continuance of the war of Portugal* Election of D. Iohn Maister of Auiz to the crowne
of Portugal* battaile of Aljubarote, and defeat of the Castillans.

In this sixteenth Booke mention is made
of the Kings.

15 D. Henry of Castile,
16 D. Iohn his sonne,
36 of Leon, second of that name.
37 of Leon, first of that name.


D. Henry, called de la Merced the fifteenth King
of Castile, and sixe and thirty of Leon.
AFter the death of the King D. Pedro, the Realmes of Castile and
Leon,Castile. remained to D. Henry, without any great difficulty. He got
by his virtue and mildnesse, what his brother had lost by his pride
and cruelty. Hee was a friend to the vertuous, nobly minded,
bountifull,D. Henry surnamed the Gratious. valiant, and strong of his person, although he were but
of a small stature: He was surnamed the liberall, or gratious, by
reason of the bounty he shewed to them that had serued him. The
greatnesse and good fortune of this King was suspected vnto the
Kings of Nauarre and Arragon, who made a league this yeere,
restoring one vnto an other certaine townes and castles, that is, Arragon deliuered to
Nauarre, Herrera of Moncayo: and Nauarre to Arragon Saluaterra and Real, they
pacefied the controuersies which were betwixt them of Sanguessa and Real, by a definitiue
sentence of Merins and Gouernors of Tudelo and Saragossa: Queene Ieanne gouerning
the realme of Nauarre, and dealing in all these affaires, in the absence of King
Charles her husband, who was gone into France, vpon the reuiuing of the warre betwixt
the French and English, that same yeere. Nauarre and Arragon, began then to make many
practises with the Kings of Portugal and England to dispossesse the King D. Henry of
his new conquest, in the which Carmona in Andalusia, Zamore and Ciudad Roderigo
in Castile, with a good part of Galicia, refused to obey him, al the rest acknowledging
him for King. For Toledo, as soone as D. Pedros death was knowne yeelded: Seuile opened
her gates, the castle of Montiel was deliuered him, where and in other places, hee
fou^d great store of treasure, iewels, silks, tapstries and other rich mouables of the deceased
king. The townes of Logrogno, Victoria, Saluatierra of Alua, and St. Cruz of Campeco,
were yeelded to the king of Nauar* and he of Arragon had seized on Molina, Cagnet and
Requegna, hauing corrupted Garcia of Vera, and Aluar Ruis of Espejo, captaines of these
places. D. Henry sought to make some accord with the^ of Carmona, demanding fride^ship

and offring a truce to the King of Granado,Truce offred by the King D. Henry, and refused by him. the which the King of Castile had neuer
done, but he could nto effect it. Mahumet the Old, King of Granado, answered, that hee
would be a friend to the King D. Pedro dead, as hee had beene in his life time: wherefore
the King leauing good order vpon that frontier, and appointing D. Goncalo Mexia, maister
of the knights of Saint Iames, Gouernor thereof, with other Noblemen and Captaines,
he parted from Seuile, to come to Toledo. Then he caused a certaine coine to bee
made, called croysez, of the value of a marauedis, and an other kinde called rials,Money currant in Castile. of the
value of foure marauidis. Euery marauidis in those times being worth ten of the lesser at
this daie.
The first that began to quarrel with him for the succession of the realme,Portugal. was D. Fernand
King of Portugal, who pretended to be lawful heire, as Grandchild to D. Beatrix of
Castile, daughter to D. Sancho the Braue: he was animated, in this ambition, by the Inhabitants
of Zamore and Ciudad Roderigo, frontier townes of Portugal,Zamore and Ciudad Roderigo contrary to the King D. Henry. who would not
acknowledge D. Henry, but called in D. Fernand to raigne ouer them, as it seemed all the
country of Galicia had the like intent, the towne of Corunna (commonly called the
Groine) hauing voluntarily subiected it selfe to the king of Portugal. To preuent which
inconueniences, the king D. Henry marched with a great army towards Zamore, to beseege
it, but finding it strong and wel manned, he past on into Galicia; D. Fernand finding
himselfe inferior, both in number of men, in valour, and in experience of warre, vnto
D. Henry, would not attend him, but imbarked, and returned into his country by sea, leauing
a good garrison in the Groine.(...) The King D. Henry, accompanied by Bertrand of
Guesclin, entred into Portugal, betwixt the riuers of Duero and Minio, where he tooke
Braga and Braganca, and ouerrun al that country, in view of the enemies, who durst not
present themselues in battaile, and had done worse, if he had not beene called backe, by
the newes which he receiued of the Moores attempts, and of the taking of Algezire, by
the King of Granado, who hauing intelligence with the King of Portugal, had beseeged,
taken and razed this place, euen vnto the ground, in hattred of the great losses, which the
Moores his predecessors and their confederats had receiued by reason thereof.Moores take Algezire. At that
time there raigned at Fez, in Affrike, and in Algarue, or the plaines of Affrike, a prince of
the race of the Merins, called Abayfer Abdelaziz, to whom the Kings of Arragon and
Granado (hauing conspired against D. Henry) sent their Ambassadors,An. 1370. in the yeere 1370.
to treat a peace, and league with him, the which they did for fiue yeeres: and in the mean
time the King of Granado ceased no to annoy the contry of Andalusia, and to doe all
the spoile he could, giuing it out that it was in fauor and aide of D. Pedros children, who
were in Carmona well manned and fortefied.
The King D. Henry went to field against this Moore,Castille. who in passing attempted Ciudad
Roderigo, but he could not take it. Being come to Medina del Campo, where the Estates
were assembled, he was assisted with great summes of money, wherewith hee contented
strangers which had serued him: and withal hee receiued for the ransome of D. Iames of
Majorca, who had beene taken in the castle of Burgos, 70000. ducats, paied by Queene
Ieanne of Naples his wife. They hold, that Bertrand of Guesclin and others receiued
there aboue sixe score thousand doublons, besides the townes and places which hee
gaue them; as to Guesclin the townes of Soria, Almacan, Arienca, Montague
and Seron, and moreouer the Siegneury of Molina, which the King of Arragon
held, that hee might breed a iarre betwixt them. There Bertrand of Guesclin
tooke his leaue, and returned into France, where he was made Constable, and managed
the warre against the English. The King D. Henry being come into Andalusia, hee was
to arme himselfe against the Moores, against them of Carmona, and against the gallies of
Portugal, who did trouble that coast, stoping the mouth to the riuer of Guadalquibir, so
as the towne of Seuile was much anoied. The King was nothing well prouided of gallies
and ships of warre, yet he gaue such order, as in a short time he had a good army made
ready in Biscay and Guipuscoa, whereby the sea was assured; the Generall of this
armie, was called Pero Goncales of Aguero. During these actions, D. Tello the Kings
brother, beeing reconciled, and left by him in Galicia, to make head against the Portugals,
died, and was buried at Saint Francis of Palencia, the Siegneuries of Biscay

and Lara held by him, were afterwards giuen by the King vnto his sonne D. Iohn, who being
come vnto the crowne, did incorporat them vnto it for euer.
In the yeere 1371.An. 1371. Carmona was straightly beseeged, and after many assaults, yeelded
by D. Martin Lopes of Cordoua, maister of Calatraua, vpon certaine conditions. During
the seege there was so furious a sally made, as they came vnto the Kings tent,Carmone yeelded to the King D Henry. where
he was in great danger, wherewith being incensed, and at many other bad offices of this
maister, he caused him to be slaine afterwards at Seuile: passion surmounting the religion
of othes and promises. There was great store of the deceased D. Pedros treasure,
found by the King. And at the time of this seege D. Pedro Fernandes of Velasco, great
Chamberlaine to the King, tooke Zamora; and in Galicia many rebels were subdued, by
D. Pedro Manriques, gouernor general of Castile, and D. Pedro Ruis Sarmiento gouernor
of Galicia.
2 This good successe made the King of Portugal yeeld to the will of God,Portugal who shewed
plainely that D. Henry must raigne: wherefore these Princes made a peace at Alcantin,
treating a marriage betwixt D. Fernand King of Portugal, and D. Leonora of Castile,
daughter to the King D. Henry: although it tooke no effect, no more then two others,
which D. Fernand had contracted two yeeres before, with the house of Arragon: when
as this King of Portugal, with those of Arragon, Nauarre and Granado (iealous of the
greatnesse of the new King of Castile) had made a league together. For confirmation of
this league, the King of Arragon had sent D. Iohn of Villaragur, and Bernard of Miragle
Ambassadors to these Princes, who being in the court of Portugal, propounded a marriage
betwixt the Infant D. Iohn of Arragon, Duke of Girone, and D. Maria sister to the
King of Portugal, the which was so pleasing vnto the King D. Fernand, as for a final conclusion
thereof, he sent D. Iohn Alphonso Tello, Earle of Barcellos, his greatest fauorit, into
Arragon, with a good number of gallies, and many Iewels and rich presents.
The Earle treating with the King about this marriage of the Infants, he entred also into
speech to marry the King D. Fernand his maister, with D. Leonora of Arragon, his
daughter: wherevnto the King D. Pedro gaue eare, and vpon this hope, their league against
D. Henry King of Castile was the more confirmed: as these marriages were for
some considerations delaied, in the end, they were by this peace betwixt Castile and Portugal
quite broken: and in like sort that which was concluded at Alcantin, betwixt the
King D. Fernand, and D. Leonora of Castile, was disapointed by the disordred passions,
wherevnto the King D. Fernand did abandon himselfe, to enioy D. Leonora Telles of Meneses,
his owne subiect, wife to D. Laurence Vasco of Acugna, a knight of Portugal, taking
her from her husband, and kept her to himselfe, like vnto Ocatuius Caesar, who tooke Liuia,
the wife of Tiberius Nero, with whom he was in loue.
3 By the peace made betwixt Castile and Portugal, the King D. Henry recouered all
the townes of Castile and Galicia,Castile. which had beene held by the Portugal faction. The Estates
were then assembled at Toro,Estates at Toro. where they were about to make many lawes in this
new raigne. Among others, the Iewes and Moores inhabiting in the townes of Castile,
were enioyned to weare a marke vpon their garments, to distinguish them from others.Orders for Iewes apparel^*
About that time, D. Philip of Castro, being of the bloud royal of Arragon, was slaine by
his owne subiects, striuing to get the possession of the Siegneury of Paredes, belonging
to his wife D. Iean sister to the King D. Henry,Murther of D. Philip of Castro. daughter to D. Leonora of Guzman. D. Philip
left one only daughter for his heire.
Vpon the good agreement which was at the time betwixt the French Kingt and him of
Arragon,Arragon. there was a marriage concluded betwixt. D. Iohn duke of Girona, and D. Iean
of France, daughter to King Philip of Valois, whom he had in his latter daies by Queene
Blanch his second wife, daughter to Philip of Eureux King of Nauarre. At that time there
was a confederacy made in Cattelogno: al the Nobility of that Prouince taking armes, against
the Earles of Vrgel and Ampurias, and the Viconts of Cardoua and Castlebon;
who pretended to be the chiefe and Lords of the Nobility in Cattelogno, and maintainned
that all the rest of the Nobility were their subiects: but the King taking the quarrell
in hand, said, that the Nobility did not acknowledge any superior but himselfe, and supprest
their deseignes.

The Arragonois affaires in Sardinia,VVarre in Sardynia. being almost ruined, were somewhat repaired by
Bienvenu Graphie, a captaine of some Sicilian gallies, who passing vpon occasion along
that shoare, releeued Cailleri and Alguer, and gaue meanes to the Earle of Quirra, Gouernor
for the King of Arragon, to victual Ioyeusegarde, Aquafredda, Saint Michel and
Quirra. Then was Brancaleaon of Oria brought vnder the King of Arragons obedience,
and opposed to Marian Iudge of Arborea, who notwithstanding was so fortunate, as
had he beene any thing assisted by the Geneuois, hee had quite chased the Arragonois
out of the Island, but that state hauing made a peace with the King of Arragon, they
maintained it faithfully, Dominike of Campofregoso, being Duke of Genoua.
D. Pedro King of Arragon, thinking his honour much interresssed if he did not punish
this Iudge Marian, who troubled him so much, entertained a great number of English,
and other strangers, both horse and foote, to send into Sardynia: for the payment
of which troupes and other necessary charges of this warre, he imposed great tributs vpon
his subiects of Arragon,Complaint of the Arragonois. Valence, and Cattelogne, by a decree of the Estates, wherewith
the people found themselues greuously oppressed, by reason whereof there were
complaints and murmuring throughout the whole realme: What a miserable thing,
say they, was the guift of this cursed island to our Kings, of this barren and now vnmanured
soile, bearing no fruite, full of woods and marishes, vnder a pestilent and vnholesome
aire, inhabited by sauage people, treacherous, and full of vanity, which hath
consumed and swallowed vp so many braue and valiant men of Arragon, and wasted so
much treasure? let the King leaue it with a mischiefe to the Geneuois for a perpetuall
subiect of quarrels and warre, both among themselues, and with their neighbours, and
so hee shall take a large reuenge for the Realme of Arragon, both of them, and of the
Sardyniens. Notwithstanding these discontentments of the people, the King D. Pedro
did what he could to keepe the Island.
As for the affaires betwixt Castile and Nauarre, the new King D. Henry found many
difficulties,Nauarre. by the absence of the King of Nauarre, Queene Ieanne his wife, who gouerned
the country, refusing to conclude any thing touching the restitution of the townes
of Logrogno, Saluaterra, Alaua, Victoria, and Santa Cruz of Campeco, vsurped from
the crowne of Castile, for the King D. Charles, knowing since the yeere 1370. that the
English and French would fall againe to armes, thinking it a fit occasion to recouer
the lands and rights which hee pretended to bee of his ancient patrimony, and held by
the French King, he past the mountaines, and went to Cherbourg in Normandy, not
once approching neere the court of France, hauing no confidence in his brother in
law King Charles the fifth. At his departure hee had left Queene Ieanne his wife Gouernesse
of his Realme, and for councell hee had giuen her D. Bernard Foucault Bishop
of Pampelone, and D. Iohn Crusat Deane of Tudele. The townes of Saluaterra and
Real, were restored by the Queene Gouernesse to the King of Arragon, and a league
treated with this King, hauing sent Doctor Iohn Cruzat, with others to Tortose.
Their accords tended to the preiudice of Don Henry King of Castile, with whom
afterwards the Kings of Portugall and Granado ioyned, as wee haue sayd, all which
things were ratefied and confirmed by the King Don Charles, who was in France:
who beeing some-what peacefied by the French King, made a peace with him, which
continued about fiue yeeres: by reason whereof hee prepared himselfe to returne into
Nauarre, in the end of the yeere of our Lord 1372.An. 1372.
Attending whose returne, the Queene his wife beeing sollicited for the townes of
Victoria, Saluaterra of Alaua and others, which had yeelded themselues to the King
of Nauarre, could finde no better expedient to content the King Don Henry,
then to consent that Pope Gregorie the eleuenth, who had newly succeeded Vrbaine
the fifth, should bee Iudge of this difference, and that vntill hee had sent a Cardinall
with sufficient authority to determine, the townes should remaine in the hands of D.
Iohn Ramires of Areilan, a Knight of great vertue and esteeme, who should keepe them
in deposito, in the Popes name.
This the Queene yeelded vnto, to the end the Realme might be in quiet at her husbands
returne: but notwithstanding this accord the King Don Henry sought to get

these places by force: so as Saluaterra of Alaua and Saint Croix were reduced vnder
his obedience: but Victoria and Logrogno remained in the custody of D. Iohn Ramires
of Areillan. King Charles complained to Pope Gregory the eleuenth, at Auignon, of this
excesse done by the King D. Henry, then he came with all speed into his Realme of Nauarre,
to defend it against the army of the King D. Henry, who threatned to enter into
his country, if hee did not restore him the townes of Logrogno and Victoria. King
Charles gaue him to vnderstand, that seeing it had beene agreed to put their controuersies
to compromise to the Pope, who had sent a Legat into Spaine, which was Cardinal
Guy of Bologno, Bishop of Portuense, that (for his part) hee was well content hee
should determine thereof, the which the King D. Henry did also yeeld vnto: wherefore
the Legat being come to Saint Dominike, and hauing beene made acquainted with the
rights and pretensions of both Kings, hee made a peace betwixt them, vpon these conditions:(...).
That the the townes of Logrogno and Victoria, should be restored to the King of
Castille: That the Infant D. Charles, eldest sonne to the King of Nauarre, should take
to wife Donna Leonora Infanta of Castille, daughter to D. Henry, with a dowry of
a hundred thousand doublons at the celebration of the marriage: and moreouer besides
the said summe, King Henry should pay at the same time, twenty thousand doublons
to the King of Nauarre, for his charges during the time he had held the sayd places:
That for assurance of the accomplishment of this marriage, the Infant D. Pedro, the
younger sonne of Nauarre, should remaine in hostage in Castile, in the hands of the
Queene D. Ieanne, vntill that the Infant D. Charles should bee of sufficient age. These
things thus determined, the two Kings met at Briona, where they did confirme what had
beene formerly concluded; being come into Nauarre, hee presently sent his sonne D.
Charles to bee made sure to the Infanta D. Leonora, who came to Briona, well accompanied
by the chiefest Noblemen of Nauarre, where this ceremony was done with
great pompe: the townes of Victoria and Logrogno, were restored, and after the returne
of the Infant D. Charles, D. Pedro his brother was sent vnto the Queene of Castile,
to remaine there in hostage, according to the accord.
The King of Nauarre hauing giuen order for this businesse, hee examined their actions,
which had gouerned his Realme during his absence; and hauing found that some
faults had beene committed by the Bishop of Pampelone, and the Deane of Tudelo,
who^ he had left for councellors to the Queene his wife, they fearing to bee punished,
absented themselues. The Bishop tooke his way to Rome, where hee arriued safely, and
there ended the remainder of his daies; but as for the Deane, who sought to saue himself
in Castile, he was pursued, and taken nere vnto Logrogno, and there slaine by the Kings
commandment. Soone after Queen Iean returned into France, where she liued not long.
4 About the end of this yeere 1373. the King D. Charles and his eldest sonne, came to
Madrid to see the King D. Henry, whom the King of Nauarre let vnderstand, that to auoide
a great trouble in his affaires,The King of Nauar seekes to draw the King of Ca^tile from the frien^ship of France to ioyne with the English. which might grow by the meanes of Edward King
of England, and Edward Prince of Wales his sonne, he should imbrace their friendship,
the which he had charge to offer him, vpon conditio^ he should breake the league he had
with the French king, their enemy, in regard whereof they promised to giue no aide vnto
the daughters of the deceased King D. Pedro, who were in England, making great sute vnto
King Edward, and to the Prince of Wales, to restore them to their father Inheritance:
and moreouer that Iohn Duke of Lancaster had married D. Constance the one
of them, by reason whereof he pretended the Realme of Castile to belong vnto him, as
holding the place of the eldest, being declared lawful, and receiued in that quality by the
Estates of the realme, her sister, D. Beatrix being dead. Al which pretensions should bee
relinquished by the English, if he left the alliance of France, and paied a certaine sum of
money vnto the Prince of Wales, the which the D. Pedro his brother did owe him. The
King of Nauarre propounded these things, as hauing charge from the English Princes,
who were enemies to France, whose party he had alwaies held, for the wrongs which hee
pretended had beene done him by the French King his brother in law: giuing many
reasons, to induce the King D. Henry to incline to this party; but hee (who held not the
crowne of Castile of any other after God, but of the French) would not shew himselfe

vnthankfull, but answered resolutely, that he would neuer quit the friendship of France:
but if the question were to disburse money to content the English, tha^ he was well content
to do it:Don Henry K. of Castile persists in the amity of France. the which the King of Nauarre fayd was not sufficient, and that he must of
necessitie breake the League he had with France; but if he held it not fit to do, hee intreated
him not to take in ill part what he had sayd vnto him, seeing he had it in charge from
the King of England, to whom he was bound to do all good offices. The king Don Henry
thanked him for the paines he had taken, to come so farre into Castile, saying, that he
could not take that ill which he had spoken, but (for his part) he wold persist in his first resolution:
so as the King of Nauarre returned into his Realme, and the king Don Henry
into Andalusia.
The king of Nauarre aduertised the English Princes of the answer he had receiued, the
which did much discontent them: for the king of Castile did much ballance their affaires,
by the succours he gaue by sea vnto the French, hauing sent a good number of ships of
warre, vnder the command of Ambrose Becanegra a Genouois, his Admirall, who stopped
the passage in such sort betwixt France and England, as besides many small prizes which
he had taken, he defeated a fleet of English, about that time, and tooke sixe and thirty of
their vessels neere vnto Rochel; by which victorie Rochel came vnder the obedience of
the French king,Rochel yeelded to the French. and the greatest part of the prey and prisoners were carried into Spaine;
among the which was the Earle of Pembrooke Generall of the army. Besides which succours,
the king Don Henry being come from Burgos to Saint Ander, he sent Don Ruy
Diaz of Rojas into the Prouince of Guipuscoa, to make ready a new army of 40. ships,
the which he sent soone after vnder the command of the same Ruy Diaz to the French K.
who came to Rochel, and hauing ioyned with a French Captaine called Iohn Calais, who
had about twenty Barkes, all together came and set vpon another fleet of English, whom
they likewise put to rout, and then Don Ruy Diaz returned a victor into Spaine: so as the
English had reason to seeke to diuide the king of Castile, from him of France, and to draw
him vnto their partie. Pope Gregorie the eleuenth presumed to interpose his authoritie in
these Princes quarrels, the which did not please them. Hauing made an accord betwixt
the Kings of Castile and Nauarre, he would also reconcile the controuersies that were
betwixt Castile and Arragon, and to this end hee sent the Cardinall of Cominges into
Spaine, who prest the two Kings to send their Deputies to debate their cause before him.
Don Henry named for his part the bishop of Burgos, and Don Aluar Garcia of Albornoz
Lord Steward of his house: the king of Arragon deputed the bishop of Lerida, and Don
R^^mond Alam^n Ceruillon, who agreed that th^ Colledge of Cardinals should determine
this controuersie. But these Princes beeing better aduised, that it was not fit their quarels
should be decided by the Court of Rome, they tooke a better course to agree betwixt
themselues. The towne of Tuy which had for many m^^eths refused to obey D. Henry,
now submitted about this peace of Arragon.
But the warre was renewed betwixt Castile and Portugal, by reason of many prizes taken
in the port of Lisbone,Portugal. and at sea, of ships and merchants of Biscay, Guipuscoa and
Asturia: and also for that the King Don Fernand gaue a retreat vnto the banished men of
Castile, concerning matters of State; and also that hee had contemned the marriage concluded
betwixt him and Donna Leonora of Castile, to marrie Donna Leonora Telles of
Meneses, Neece to the Earle of Barcelos, a Lady of great beautie, but much inferiour in
qualitie to the Infanta Donna Leonora of Castile, and Donna Leonora of Arragon, whom 
he might haue had with great profit to his Realme, and to himselfe honour. Hee contemned
these marriages,Marriage vnlawful of the king of Po^tugal, taking away his subiects wise. which had beene very beneficiall to himselfe, and to his Realme of
Portugall, to marrie this Ladie, offending God and all good lawes: for he tooke her violently
from her husband Laurence Vasques of Acugna, forcing him to flie into Castile,
where he past the remainder of his dayes in exile, carrying commonly hornes of siluer on
his hat, to witnesse the lust and infamy of his Prince; yet some, to excuse this fact, write,
that the king caused this marriage to be dissolued by the Popes authoritie, as vnlawfull,
by reason of the neerenesse of consanguinitie: of the which (notwithstanding) there was
issued one sonne, called Aluaro of Acugna. The king was made sure vnto her in the presence
of the Earle of Barcelos, and a ^^ster of hers, called Don Mary, who had mannaged

this marriage, and to whom the king had imparted his loues. When this marriage was
published in Lisbone, the inhabitants incensed (that the king had left so profitable and
honorable a marriage,Tumult at Lisbon for the kings mariage. as that of Castile) began to mutine, and hauing taken Fernand
Vasques of Acugna for their Captaine, they sent 300. armed men about the kings pallace,
and gaue the king to vnderstand in the behalfe of the citty, that hee should leaue this woman,
else they would take her, and do vnto her as their Predecessors had done to the king
D. Sancho Capello in the like case. The king fearing the furie of this multitude, answered
them mildly, that in what they did, they were good subiects, being iealous of his honour,
and thanked them for their good will: but he let them vnderstand, that D. Leonora Telles
was not his married wife, and intreated them to retire vntill the next day, when he would
talke to them more amply of that businesse, in the Monasterie of S. Dominicke. This blast
being blowne ouer, the king parted by night out of Lisbone, and carried D. Leonora Telles
with him into the countrie betwixt Duero and Minio: and retiring towards Porto, he
lodged neere vnto it in the Monasterie of Leza, where he married this Lady publikely, not
caring how his subiects tooke it. He commanded that all men should acknowledge her,
and call her Queene, and gaue her the townes of Almadra, Sintra, Torresuedras, Atognia,
Ouiedos, Alanguer, Abrantes, Villa viciosa, and many other places. All in the end
yeelded to it without murmuring, seing it was the kings pleasure, and D. Leonora had the
title of Queene giuen her by all men, but by D. Denis the kings brother, who would neuer
kisse her hand, saying, That it was her duty to kisse his: whereat the King D. Fernand was
so incensed, as if Don Denis had not retired presently by the meanes of those that were
then present, he had stab'd him with his dagger: for this cause the Infant retired himselfe
for euer after into Castile. When as D. Leonora Telles saw her selfe installed Queene, shee
made a diligent search who had bin the chiefe motiues of the mutiny at Lisbon, and vnderstanding
that they were of the family of Vasques of Acugna, she ceased not to pursue
them with a deadly hatred, vntill she had forced many of them to flie into Castile.
Of this marriage betwixt the king D. Fernand and D. Leonora Telles issued D. Beatrix,Genealogie of Portugal.
who was married to D. Iohn the first King of Castile, borne at Coimbra, and afterwards
a son and a daughter who died yong: some Authors hold, that they were borne in adulterie,
committed by the Queene with D. Iohn Fernandes of Andeiro, a knight of Gallicia,
borne at Corunua. Moreouer the king before this marriage, had a daughter called D. Izabel.
The king D. Henry hauing these causes of discontent against the king of Portugall,
he gaue him to vnderstand by his ambassadors, that he could not take it in good part, that
he had retired his rebellious subiects, of which he demanded some: and moreouer, that he
should deliuer the ships and merchants of Asturia, Biscay, and Guipuscoa with their goods,
which he had taken and stayed: whereof the K. D. Fernand made no accompt, wherefore
the king of Castile prepared to armes. Diego Lope Pacheco a knight of Portugal, was then
in Castile, who was retired thither, by reason of the death of D. Agnes of Castro, flying
the fury of the king D. Pedro: and had bin so fauored by the king D. Henry, as he had got
great reuenues and honors. This Knight had left many friends in Portugal, by whose means
he was aduertised of all that was done in D. Fernands Court: and as he was a most affectionat
seruant to the king of Castile, so he sought to draw vnto him all those that were valiant
in Portugall: and if any one were persecuted, he perswaded him to come into Castile,
declaring vnto them the bountie of the king D. Henry. He had had intelligence of all that
had past touching the marriage of D. Leonora Telles, and of the discontent betwixt the K.
and his brother D. Denis, and them of the house of Acugna, and the city of Lisbon: wherfore
imbracing these occasions fit for the war, which was like to grow betwixt these two
kings, Diego Lope Pacheco wrought so, as he drew D. Denis to come and put himselfe vnder
the protection of the king D. Henry, and entertayned by all means such Gentlemen as were
ill affected to their King, to be reuenged of the wrongs he had done them. Matters beeing
thus prepared, and the ambassador being returned, who had bin sent to summon the king
D. Fernand to deliuer the banished men which he had in his Realm, and to make restitution
of the prizes which had bin taken by him, the king D. Henry entred into Portugal with an
army,VVar betwixt ^^tile and ^^^ugal. and hauing sent D. Alphonso his son to Coimbra (a castle in Gallicia where the banished
men had fortified themselues) the place was taken.

The king on his side seized of Almorda, Panel, Cillonico and Linares, and there Don
Denis ioyned with him, with other Noblemen of Portugal, who were liberally intreated,
and much honoured. Pope Gregorie the eleuenth residing in Auignon, hearing of the trobles
betwixt these two kings, was carefull (like a good pastor) to send a Legat, which was
Cardinall Guy of Bologno, with full authoritie to reconcile them. But before that hee
could draw the parties to any friendly composition, the king Don Henry made a new entrie,
tooke Viseo, and ranne vp the countrie as farre as S. Iren, finding no resistance: for
Don Fernand was not so able to maintain a quarrell, as he was ready to breed one: wherfore
keeping himselfe within Saint Iren, the king Don Henry had the passage free and open
to go vnto Lisbone, where he spoyled and burnt the lower part of the towne,Lisbon spoiled and burnt by the King of Castile. as the
new street, and some other places, for that he neither found walles, nor any resistance: the
quarter called Sus, held good, being walled in, and well manned; for all the inhabitants
were retired thither: during the which, the sea-armie of Castile entred into the mouth of
the riuer, which is large and spacious, where they did not onely recouer the ships of Biscay,
and others which had beene taken; but many vesselles of all sorts, which were fit for
seruice, were carried away by the Castillans, and the rest burnt. In the meane time the Legate
laboured what he could to end these miseries, wherein he preuailed so much, as hee
reduced the two kings to a peace, the which was concluded to the great aduantage of the
king of Castile;Peace betwixt Castile and Portugal. after which the kings met neere vnto Saint Iren, either of them in a barke
vppon the riuer of Tayo, where they finished their accord and capitulations: among the
which there was a marriage concluded betwixt Donna Beatrix, sister to the king D. Fernand,
and Don Sancho Earle of Albuquerque, brother to the king of Castile, and of Donna
Izabella base daughter to the king Don Fernand, and Don Alphonso Earle of Gijon,
base sonne to the king Don Henry. The mariage betwixt Don Sancho and Donna Beatrix
was celebrated; the places taken were restored, the peace was proclaimed, and the king
of Castile returned into his countrie, leading his daughter-in-law Donna Izabella with
him, being but eight yeares old, who was afterwards married to the Earle of Gijon, to his
great griefe.
The quarrels betwixt Castile and Arragon,Arragon. being not well ended, they were forced to
come to a new compromise, wherein the Duke of Anjou brother to the French king was
a dealer, but with so bad successe, as he became enemie to the K. of Arragon. At that time
were celebrated the mariages of D. Iohn D. of Girone, the heire of Arragon, and Martha
daughter to the Earle of Armaignac, who had fifteene thousand pounds starling in
dowrie: and of Don Martin of Arragon, the kings youngest sonne, with Donna Mary,
daughter to Don Lopes Earle of Luna, and Lord of Segorbe. The same yeare 1372. Don
Pedro king of Arragon finding too late, how easie he had beene to beleeue false reports,
and repenting himselfe of the vnworthie death of Bernand of Cabrera, hee restored his
Grand-child Bernardin, sonne to Bernardin of Cabrera, to all his goods, except the Earldome
of Vic, which he kept to himselfe. The father of this young Nobleman dyed in Castile,
in the seruice of the king Don Henry, notwithstanding, that hee had sought his fathers
death. There were this yeare seene in Arragon horrible Earthquakes, with the ruins
of mountaines about Ribagorca, where as many villages were ouerthrowne, and great
multitudes of people perished.
In Castile the king Don Henry was prest by Donna Maria of Lara,Castile. Countesse of Alencon,
to do her right tfor the Lordships of Biscay and Lara: she had many sons which were
all aduanced in France: the first was Earle of Alencon,Biscay belongs to the house of Alenson. the second of Estampes, the third
of Perch, and two of the Church. The king Don Henry made answer, that she should send
him two of her sonnes to remaine in Spaine, and that he would giue the Lordship of Biscay
to the one, and that of Lara to the other. He presumed that she could not do it: all her
children being so well aduanced in France, and for some other reasons.
Edward king of England, and his sonne Iohn Duke of Lancaster, (who intitled himselfe
King of Castile and Leon, in the right of his wife Donna Constance, daughter to the king
Don Pedro the Cruel) sent Ambassadors to the king of Arragon,1373. Pretensi^ns of Iohn Duke of Lancaster to Castile. in the yeare 1373. to
treat a League with him: beeing resolued to send a great army into Castile, to conquer
that Realme, wherof the Duke of Lancaster should be Generall, as belonging to his wife:

offering great conditions to the king of Arragon, if he would adhere to their partie. The
king of Arragon demanded the Realme of Murcia, the townes of Requegna, Otiel, Moya,
Cagnete, the citty of Cuenca, and the Segneurie of Molina, with other places vppon the
frontier of Castile, whereof he held some: but hoping he should haue a better composition
with the king D. Henry, he kept himselfe betwixt both, being doubtfull what to do,
so as nothing was concluded for that time with the ambassadors of England.
During these reuolutions in Spaine in temporall affaires, religion was managed by diuers
fects of Monkes, especially by the begging Friars of Saint Dominick and Saint Francis,
who this yeare incensed the people against a new Order which had risen in Spaine in
the time of the king Don Pedro, through the deuout ignorance of certaine Italians of
Sienna, religious Hermits, who had heard one of their companions, called Friar Thomas,
 say dying, by a Propheticall spirit,Order of Saint Ierom in Spain sayd they, that within few dayes the holy Ghost
should come into Spaine, and that he had this by reuelation: wherfore all these religious
men thinking that the holy Ghost did not frequent much in Italy in those times, and that
it was something which they must seeke farre off in a strange countrie: they left Italy, and
came into the countrie of Toledo, hoping to get the grace of the holy Ghost, and therby
saue their soules.
The fame of these men being spred ouer Spaine, a bishop of Iaen called D. Alphonso
Pecha, and Don Pero Fernand Pecha his brother, Chamberlaine to the king Don Pedro,
Hernando Ianes Chanoine of Toledo, and chiefe Chaplaine of the chappell of the auncient
Kings, with many other Christians, commending the resolution of these Friars, and
their ignorance, being desirous to liue in that contemplation, ioyned with them, leauing
Bishoprickes, Chanonries, Benefices and Estates, and chusing their aboads in caues and
woods farre from the societie of men, where they began to liue a wonderfull austere life,
saying, that it was according to the rule of Saint Paul, that they must suffer many discommodities,
to liue like Christians, and that it was the meanes to gaine Paradice. This sect
beeing in great esteeme, the begging Friars began to blame the people for following of
these men, who had no setled Order nor discipline among them, and (which did more import)
had no approbation from the Pope. For these reasons the inconstant multitude began
to retire themselues, and to abate much of their deuotion, which these good Hermits
finding, to their great griefe, they tooke councell among themselues to send vnto
the Pope, to get authoritie from him for a name, rule, profession, order, and aboade. The
messengers were Friar Peter Fernandez of Guadajara, and Friar Peter Romaine of their
company: who beeing come before the Pope, exposed their deuotion vnto him, their
maner of life,Approbation of the Order of S. Ierome by the Pope. exercises in religion, their means and merits, beseeching him that he would
bee pleased to approoue their Order and profession, giuing them for Patron the great
Doctor Saint Ierome, to whome all were most addicted.
The Pope made no difficultie to allow of them, hauing had some former information
of that which they had sayd, appointing them to liue vnder the rule of S. Augustine, hee
prescribed what manner of garment they should weare, and sent backe these Deputies into
Spaine, with Buls, in October, 1373. By this approbation from the Pope, these Monkes
crept into credit, and did build their first conuent in a place called Lupiana, in the Archbishoppricke
of Toledo, two leagues from Guadalajara, dedicating it to Saint Bartholomew,
the which was since the chiefe of the Order: the Prior of which Monasterie is Generall
of the Order for three yeares, and is bound to reside in that Monasterie during his
charge. Since by the bountie of the Princes of Spaine, these Hermits haue built many
Conuents, and haue greatly inlarged their possessions. Their exercise is more in singing
then studying, the which they do neglect expresly, to the end they might not be diuerted
from their simple contemplation, notwithstanding there haue beene some great Preachers
found among them, and men of vnderstanding in great affaires of State.
Returning to politicke worldly affaires, the king D. Henry beeing aduertised of the
practises betwixt the English and the king of Arragon, he sought to entertain the hope
of compromise propounded by the Cardinall Guy of Bologne, who by the Popes commandement,
was a mediator to make this peace. In the meane time hee had intelligence
with Lewis Duke of Aniou, Gouernor of Languedoc; and concluded, that hee should

presse the English towards Bayone, and the duke of Aniou vppon the limits of his gouernment,
and then hauing ioyned their forces together, they shold annoy them all they
could in Guienne: for he had intelligence that Iohn Duke of Lancaster had imparted his
enterprises, and ioyned his forces with those of Iohn of Montfort Duke of Brittaine, making
preparation to enter into Castile:(...) against D Henry of Castile. the which he thought fit to preuent, and to assaile 
him in Guienne, whilest that Philip the Hardy, Duke of Bourgongne, and brother to the
French king, made warre against the English in Artois and Vermandois: and to this effect
the king D. Henry gaue order to rayse an armie in Rioja. Whilest that the troupes were
leuying, the Court being at Burgos, there fell a quarrell betwixt the seruants of D. Sancho
Earle of Albuquerque, the kings brother, and them of D. Pedro Goncales of Mendoca
for their lodgings, whether the Earle running to pacifie this broyle, (whereof neither hee,
nor D. Pedro were guilty) he was thrust through with a lance and slaine, by one that knew
him not. The king parting from Burgos, came to Rioja, where hauing mustred his army,
he found 6200. horse, whereof 1200. were Genets, with the which he past to Bayone, being
assured by the Duke of Aniou, that he would come and ioyne with him. And to keepe
the king of Arragon in awe, Don Iames Infant of Majorca, husband to Ieanne Queene of
Naples, was come to Narbone with good troupes threatning to enter into Cattelogne.
The K. D. Henry passing by Alaua and Guipuscoa, entred into the territorie of Bayone,D. Henry of Castile (...) Gui^nn^ wi^h an army against the English,
where he found no great resistance, for the armie of English, which had beene hotly pursued
by the Duke of Bourgongne, beeing come to Bourdeaux, was much dminished.
There he stayed some dayes for the Duke of Aniou, hauing sent Pero Fernandes of Velasco,
his Lord Chamberlaine, and Don Iohn Ramires of Areillan, to hasten him: but
they found him busied in taking of townes and castels from the English, some by force,
some by composition, so as the king Don Henry returned with his army into Spaine, hauing
done no great exploite.
Passing through Guipuscoa, Don Bertrand of Gueuara, Lord of Ognate, who had
done him great seruice, made sute vnto him to giue him the towne of Mondragon,
whereof the Inhabitants beeing aduertised, they sent their Deputies to informe the king
what wrong he should do himselfe, if hee should alienate such a place from the Crown,
the which (besides the great commerce, by reason of the forges of Iron and steele,
which were continually set a worke thereabouts) was a fort of great consequence, vppon
the which there might be many desseines made: for the castell (which was then entire)
was impregnable: beseeching him to be an eye witnesse, and to passe by the place, remembring
that the Inhabitants of Mondragon had beene alwaies faithfull vnto him, and that
during the warres betwixt him, and the King Don Pedro, they had alwayes followed his
partie. The king promised to passe by their towne, wherefore the Inhabitants thereof,
and of the countrie thereabouts beganne to make the lower way, which goes from that
towne to Ognate, whereas before they wer forced to passe the mountaine called Bacue,
to the end the King should not be tyred with passing ouer it. This passage is at this day
called Euripide, a corrupted word, in sted of Erreguevide, the which in that countrie language
signifies a way for the king.
The King Don Henry hauing viewed the situation of the towne and fort, with the commodities
thereof; and considered of the Inhabitants reasons, he would not yeeld vnto the
petition of Don Bertrand of Gueuara, but he gaue him in recompence the valley of Leniz,
with all iurisdiction, both ciuill and criminall. This valley was wont to depend vppon
Mondragon, but then it was taken from it, and the sayd Bertrand, and his successors haue
enioyed it for the space of an hundred, fourescore, and two yeares, or there-abouts, vnto
the yeare 1556. when it was vnited vnto the Crowne, by a decree of the Kings Councell
of Castile. The king parting from Mondragon, returned to Burgos, from whence he past
to Leon, and then to Seuile.
Whilest that the king of Arragon was attentiue to the warre against the English, the
Infant Don Iames of Majorca,Arragon. husband to the Queene of Naples, entred into Cattelogne
with fifteene hundred lances, beeing assisted by the Kings of France and Castile, and
by the Duke of Aniou, where he did much harme. On the other side Bernard bastard of

Foix, first Duke of Medina Celi, and Geoffrey Rechon, a Knight of Brittanie, Lord of Aguilar
del campo, allyed, and friends to the Infant of Majorca, spoyled the countrie of
Arragon, by Medina Celi, the which did wonderfully trouble the King of Arragon, and
made him studie how hee might speedily end the controuersies which he had with the
king Don Henry.
The Infant Don Iames of Majorca hauing spoyled Cattelogne, past into Arragon, to
do the like: but he was forced to retire for want of victuals, leading his armie into Castile,
where he fell sicke and dyed in Almacan, in the beginning of the yeare 1375. His
troupes returned into Gasconie, with Iohn of Malestit, their chiefe leader. In this armie
was Ieanne of Majorca, Marquesse of Montferrat, sister to the deceased Don Iames, who
past also into Gasconie.
Some were of opinion, that this attempt of the Infant of Majorca, was not without
the intelligence of some great men of Arragon, who had drawne him into the countrie,
whereof the king made diligent informations. At that time there was so great a dearth in
Arragon, as they were forced to begge a passage for corne out of Affricke and Mauritania,
the which did warrant the country from this inuasion, more then any resistance that
the king D. Pedro could make.
This yeare 1374. the King of Castile redeemed from Bertrand of Guesclin, Constable
of France,An. 1374. Castille. the towne of Soria, and the rights of Molina, which he had giuen him, paying
him 240000. doublons, and moreouer he gaue him the Earle of Pembrooke, an English
man, who was a prisoner, and set at 10000. pounds sterling for his ransome, and the Lord
of Piene for 3400. pounds, with many other knights and Captains English, or their partisans,
as well for this redemption, as for the remainder which was due to him and his troups.
And holding alwaies good correspondencie with the French K. during the war against
the English, he sent him a good armie by sea, whereof D. Fernand Sanches of Touar was
Admirall, the which beeing ioyned vnto the French, did much annoy the English
coasts.
The practises of a peace betwixt Castile and Arragon being continued, the ambassadors
of both kings met at Almacan, whether came to Queene of Castile, and her sonne
D. Iohn. There were for Castile, the Bishops of Plaisance and Palence, and D. Pedro Goncales
Of Mendoca Lord Steward to the Infant of Castile, with his brother D. Iohn Hurtado
of Mendoca Standard bearer also to the Infant, and Pedro Fernandes of Velasco, Chamberlaine
to the king. For the king of Arragon came the Archb. of Sarragossa, and D.
Raymond Alaman Ceruillon, who treated of the differences betwixt the two kings, with
great eagernesse, in the presence of the Queene of Castile. The king D. Henry demanded,
that the Infanta D. Leonora, daughter to D. Pedro king of Arragon, should bee deliuered
to the Infant D. Iohn his Son, to whom she was made sure. The king of Arragon answered,
that the king of Castile must performe that which he had promised and sworne, when
he came first out of France into Castile, by Arragon, which was to giue him the lands often
before mentioned: whereunto he of Castile replyed, that he was no more bound, for
that the king of Arragon had beene since in League with the Prince of Wales his enemie,
and had had many treaties with other Princes to his preiudice: Moreouer, that returning
the second time out of France he had not giuen him free passage through Arragon.
Besides these maine articles, there were others of lesse consequence, all which were
reconciled by these Deputies.
 The accord was made the twelfth of Aprill 1374.Accord betwixt D. Henry King of Castile and D. Pedro king of Arragon. in the Monasterie of Saint Francis
of Almacan, as followeth: That the Infanta Donna Leonora of Arragon should bee giuen
to the Infant Don Iohn of Castile, as his lawfull wife, with a dowrie of two hundred thousand
Florens of the coyne of Arragon, which summe the king Don Henry should hold
for receiued, for the charges which the king of Arragon might haue beene at in the first
passage which hee made through Arragon into Castile. The King of Arragon should
restore Molina, Almacan, and other places which he had gotten during the troubles
of Spaine: and to auoyde all future controuersies betwixt the parties, Don Henry king
of Castile should pay vnto him of Arragon an hundred and eighty thousand Florens, at
dayes appointed.

For assurance whereof the forts of Requegna, Otiel and Moya should be left in deposit^
in the hands of the Arch-bishop of Sarragossa, and of Don Raymond Alaman of Ceruillon.
These things thus concluded, the King D. Henry came to Soria, with the Queene his
wife and children, whither the Infanta D. Leonora of Arragon was sent: thither also came
Don Charles Infant of Nauarre, so as there were two marriages celebrated in that cittie,
betwixt Don Iohn of Castile, and D. Leonora of Arragon, and betwixt Don Charles of
Nauarre, and D. Leonora of Castile, but there was a moneths respite betwixt the one and
the other. Spaine being at peace within it selfe, by these accords and allyances made betwixt
Castile, Arragon, Nauarre, Portugal, and Granado, it were fit to treat of the employments
of the Princes and people of those countries, touching arts, sciences, lawes,
and ciuill gouernement, but the records of such things are very defectiue. Wee reade
briefly, that the king Don Henry appointed companies, which they call Hermandades,
which are assemblies of Commonalties in the Prouince of Guipuscoa, where they treat
of affaires and negotiations concerning their Princes seruice, and the preseruation of the
countrie.
As for the King of Nauarre,Nauarre. who was turbulent and an enemie to rest, hee forged and
inuented a new quarrell against the King Don Henry, vppon the payment of an hundred
and fiftie thousand Doublons which hee had promised for the marriage of his daughter
Donna Leonora: for the King of Nauarre refused an hundred and fiftie thousand Reals of
siluer, which was part of this payment, saying, that the king of Castile was bound to pay
him the summe in gold. These Reals remayned long in the towne of Logrogno, and in
the end were lost for the king of Nauarre, by reason of the quarrels and tumults which
ensued.
The Infant Don Pedro, the second sonne of Nauar, who had beene in hostage, was deliuered.
At that time the king of Nauarre was aduertised, that Don Rodrigo of Vrris, a
knight which had done him great seruice in all his affaires both in France and Spaine,
had secret intelligence with Don Henry, king of Castile, who had a desire to seaze on Tudele
vppon Ebro, and vppon Caparoce, notwithstanding the accords and allyances contracted
with him. Of which places Don Rodrigo was Gouernor,Treason of D. Rodrigo of Vrris discouered and punished by the king of Nauarre. who beeing sollicited to 
this end, had a promise from the king Don Henry of a great recompence in Castile, and
to giue him his owne Neece to wife, beeing daughter to one of his breethren, with other
great aduancements: an vsuall thing in Princes, when they seeke to draw any one vnto
their seruice. King Charles informed hereof, was much grieued, for hee loued Don Rodrigo:
who to diuert him from this trecherous practise, ill befitting a knight of honour, he
let him vnderstand, that he had intelligence of the marriage which hee treated in Castile,
aduising him not to giue eare to it in any sort, without the consent of his Councel: this
message was deliuered vnto him by Martin of Vrris his brother, and Iohn Renaud Captaine
of Tudele, and by Don Sancho of Vrris, one of the kings Councell.
Don Rodrigo thinking that the king was ignorant of his other practises, but had only
some intelligence of his marriage, neglected what they had sayd vnto him, and went on
his way, as it were, to be married: beeing come to Pampelona, hee was stayed by the
kings commandement; where beeing examined vppon the treason, and not able to disprooue
what was auerred against him, hee was condemned to loose his head, the which
was executed, yet secretly, to preserue the honour and estimation of his family and kinsfolkes,
to whome the bodie was deliuered, and interred by them in the Monasterie of
Saint Augustine at Pampelona.
Many other knights of Nauarre were so terrified with this death, to whom the carriage
and behauiour of king Charles was neither pleasing nor profitable, as they left their
Countrie, and retired themselues, some into Castile, some into other places, where they
were well receiued and entertayned. Such were the effects of the peace and concord betwixt
the Princes of Spaine then raigning. This happened in the yeare 1376. when as D.
Bernard Foucault Bishop of Pampelona, dying in Italy there succeeded him D. Martin of
Salua, a great Doctor in the ciuill and canon Lawes, equalled in that knowledge, yea preferred
by the Spaniards to Baldus, who liued in his time. This bishop was a defender of the
ecclesiasticall rights, and did much good to his church, retiring the lands belonging therto,

out of the hands of many lay-men which had vsurped them: namely, those of Villa Toro,
Villa Major and Montreal, with other tythes. This yeare the townes of Pampelona, Puente
la Reyna, Gatde, S. Vincent, Arcos, and Saint Iohn of Pie de port, allowed of the
marriage betwixt the Infant Don Charles, and D. Leonora of Castile, with the oaths and
ceremonies vsed in those times, acknowledging for their Prince, and heire to the Crown,
the first borne son of that marriage, the which king Charles did procure, that he might the
better confirme the future succession.
 The affaires passing after this manner in Spaine, the king of Arragon, who thought
himselfe freed from all troubles by the peace made with Castile,Arragon. and the decease of the Infant
D. Iames of Majorca, found himselfe intangled in new crosses, and of greater consequence
then any of the precedent: for D. Ieanne Marquesse of Montferrat, sister and heire
to the Infant of Majorca, beeing past into France, after the decease of her brother, had
made cession vnto Lewis Duke of Anjou, the French kings brother, of all the rights which
she pretended to the Realme of Majorca,Cession of the rights of Rossi^^on, Cerdagne, etc. to the house of Aniou. Countie of Rossillon and Cerdagne, Colibre
and Valisper, which Segneuries the duke pretended to recouer by armes, seeing that the
king Don Pedro would not come to any friendly composition: so as he stayed onely for
the conclusion of a peace, which was treated with the English, before he entred in hostile
manner into Cattelogne, with the forces which hee had vnder his charge and iurisdiction,
which were foure thousand Lances: wherewith the King of Arragon beeing much
troubled, he called a generall Assembly of the Estates of Arragon, Valence, Cattelogne,
Majorca, and his other Dominions and territories, at Moncon, to preuent this warre,
which did threaten him.
The Estates made answer vnto the King,Iewes and Moores of Spaine bare the extraordinary charges of the warre. who demanded money, that the subiect could
not contribute any more, beeing ruined by the great charges which they had borne some
yeares before: and that the ancient custome was, that the Iewes and Moores which were
subiects to the Kings of Arragon, should beare the extraordinarie charges of the warre,
if need required: wherefore he should addresse himselfe vnto those men. At the assembly
the Vicount of Cardona tooke the title of Earle, by a decree of the Estates. The affaires of
Sardinia did augment the king of Arragons cares, for all went from bad to worse, so as
the Gouernor of Cailleri was driuen to that despaire, as hee was readie to set fire of the
towne, and to flie away by sea, being vnable to resist Hugh the sonne of Marian, the new
Iudge of Arborea, his father being lately deceased: who shewed himselfe a more violent
enemie against the Arragonois, then his father had beene: the which was the more to
bee feared, for that the Geneuois hauing broken the peace made and confirmed by Iohn
Marquesse of Montferrat, with the king of Arragon, had entred into the Iland of Sardynia,
and ioyning their forces with them of the Iudge, had attempted Pole neere to Cailleri,
and done many other acts of hostility.
This yeare 1377.An. 1377. Philip the Hardy, Duke of Bougongne, went in pilgrimage to Saint
Iames of Galicia, passing, he visited the king Don Henry at Segobia, who receiued him
honorably, and gaue him many rich presents. About the same time D. Gomes Manrique
Arch-bishop of Toledo being dead, this great and rich liuing was affected by many, by
reason whereof the Court of Castile was diuided into factions, euery one fauouring his
kinsman or friend, that aspired to this dignitie, not to be Ministers of the word of God,
and to instruct the people in Christian Religion, but to be worldly great, rich and mighty,
companions to Kings, and commanders ouer armies, according to the custome of that
age. The King Don Henry did much fauour D. Iohn Garcia Manrique Bishop of Siguenca,
whose sister D. Iohn Ramires of Areillan had married. Vpon this election, where there
were so many pretendants, D. Iohn Ramires thinking he had need of the Popes fauor and
authoritie, went to Auignon well accompanied with Noblemen, his friends and kinsmen,
but he did not obtaine that which he pretended: for Pope Gregorie the eleuenth then raigning,
declared Don Pedro Tenorio Bishop of Coimbra, Arch-bishop of Toledo. Thus
these Pretendants lost this rich bootie which they expected: much vnlike vnto Don Martin
Martines of Calaorra, Arch-deacon of Calatraua, in the church of Toledo, who
beeing chosen some yeares before by the Chapter, and a generall consent, to bee Bishop
of Calaorra, hee excused himselfe, and would not accept of this dignitie, which

is one of the richest, and of greatest iurisdiction in Spaine, next to Toledo. Don Iohn
Ramires of Areillan returning by Cattelogne, hee was desirous to kisse the king of Arragons
hands, beeing at Barcelona, whither came the Vicount of Rueda, who in the kings
presence accused Don Iohn Ramires of certaine crimes, offering him the combate if hee
should deny it: Don Iohn Ramires regarding his honour, accepted of this challenge: for
the performance whereof, the King of Arragon assigned ninetie dayes, at which time
Don Iohn should present himselfe to the combate, or else they would proceede against
him, according to the lawes and orders of combats.
Don Iohn Ramires returned in the meane time into Castile, and made relation vnto the
King Don Henry how he had beene challenged, and that he must present himselfe in Arragon
at the day appointed, wheeras his enemie was much fauoured by the king Don
Pedro: the which the king of Castile hauing well considered, and fearing that Don Iohn
Ramires (whome he loued dea^ely for his integritie and vertues) should receiue some indignitie,
in a countrie where he was not beloued, he resolued to send a gentleman to the
King of Arragon, to let him vnderstand, that no man liuing was better acquainted then
himselfe, with the qualities and conditions of Don Iohn Ramires of Areillan, and how
that he had carried himselfe like a Knight of honour in all his actions, euen when hee was
Chamberlaine to the same king of Arragon, and employed by him in the warre against
Don Pedro king of Castile: wherefore he intreated him to cause this appeale made by the
Vicount to cease: whereof the King seeking to excuse himselfe, the Ambassador replyed:
Sir,Ambassadors speech to the King of Arragon. seeing it is your pleasure that this combate shall be fought, vnderstand, that the King of
Castile my Lord is resolued to send at the time you haue appointed three thousand Lances, to
accompanie Don Iohn Ramires, to the end that hee may be no way inferiour, neither for the
safetie of his person, nor for support, vnto his aduersarie, seeing that the quarrell must be decided
in a strange Countrie, where as the Prince shewes himselfe partiall. The King Don
Pedro taking these words in ill part, fell into a great dispute with this Gentleman, who
made him a discreet answer: wherefore fearing that this might kindle a new fire betwixt
Castile and Arragon, after much consultation, hee commanded the Vicount to desist
from his challenge, declaring that Don Iohn Ramires was a good Knight. Thus past the
affaires betwixt Castile and Arragon in the yeare 1376.
At which time Don Charles Infant of Nauarre,Nauarre. beeing desirous to visite the
Court of France, did so importune the King his father, as hee got leaue, from the which 
hee was much disswaded by the King of Castile his father-in-law,Detenti^n of the Prince of Nauarre. who assuredly knew
what reasons the French King had to hate the King of Nauarre. For besides, that hee had
perswaded him to leaue and abandon the league of France, and to adhere vnto the English,
as wee haue before shewed, hee had since ingaged and deliuered vnto them the
Towne of Cherbourg in Normandy, and entertained many practises, to the preiudice
and discommoditie of France, whereof the French King was particularly aduertised.
Notwithstanding all this, the Infant Don Charles went on his intended and determined
iourney* presuming that hee had not offended any way the King his Vncle, and that
he would not make any question vnto him, concerning the controuersies and oppositions
which were betwixt him and his father: and that whatsoeuer should happen beyond
his expectation, hee would retire himselfe to those places which the king his father
had in the confines of Normandie, and not approch neere the Court, without promise
of assurance.
With this resolution hee left Nauarre, very well attended on with a companie of gentlemen,
and men of councell, among the which were Baldwin Belloferant, Captaine of
many places in Normandy belonging to the king of Nauarre, the which he held by homage:
Iames of Rue, a knight, and Chamberlaine to the king, the Seigneur of Ortubia,
Captaine of the Infants Guard, a Basque by nation, within two leagues of Fontaraby:
Peter of Estampes, a Doctor of Diuinity, and Councellour to the king, with diuers
others. The French king beeing aduertised before-hand of this voyage, as soone as they
were entred into France, he caused Iames of Rue to be taken, who was found seazed of
certaine papers and instructions, which did much augment the iealousie of the French:
being put to the racke, he confest that the king his master had plotted with the English,

and that he had charge to say vnto the King of England, that if he wold promise the duchy
of Guienne to the king of Nauar, and entertaine him 2000. lances, he would make warre
against the French, and employ all his forces of Nauarre, and of his lands in Normandie
and other places: whereupon he was put into safe-keeping. The Infant beeing much discontented
at the taking of this knight, not knowing what he had confessed, came to the
king at Senl^s, hauing a safe conduct, and besought him to deliuer this prisoner: to whom
the king answered, that he wold not deliuer him, but would cause his processe to be made
and his fathers also, meaning to confiscate all the lands he had within his kingdome: and
moreouer, he commanded him not to depart from Court without leaue. He also called
Baldwin Belloferant before him,The Infant of Nauarre staid. and inioyned him to deliuer into his hands, or of his captaines,
all the places and forts which he held for the king of Nauarre: the which Baldwin,
not able to auoid, promised to do, and tooke an oath: notwithstanding the king gaue
him a guard, vntill he had performed what he had promised, Fernand of Ayanes, a knight
of Nauarre, and Gouernor for the king of Nauar of his lands in Normandie, was also
apprehended, with many others, who were sent to Paris, with Iames of Rue, and Peter of
Es^ampes. Thereupon the king did write vnto all Princes and Potentates strangers, touching
these imprisonments, making great complaints of the king of Nauar his brother-in-law:
and soone after he began sharpe war against the Nauarrois in Normandie: whereof
Philip the Hardy, duke of Bourgongne, the kings brother, Lewis duke of Bourbon, and the
Constable Bertrand of Guesclin were the chiefe Commanders, who in a short space tooke
most of the townes and forts which the king of Nauarre held in that countrie, there
remaining nothing in a manner but Cherbourg; the which beeing held by the English,
maintained the seege 7. moneths, and yet the French could not take it. In the mean time
the king caused D. Pedro the second son of Nauarre, and his daughter Mary to bee taken at
Breteuil, whom notwithstanding he kept in a free prison, and very honorably. At the same
time there was a Secretary of the king of Nauars, called Peter of Tertre, taken in the castle
of Bernay, of whom by tortures they discouered many practises of the king his masters.
He with Iames of Rue were condemned to die, and their bodies being quartered, were hanged
in diuers places entring into the citie of Paris.
These newes heard in Nauarre, the king D. Charles was wonderfully troubled, as well
for the imprisonment of his children, as for the losse of his countrie, and the Infanta D.
Leonora his daughter-in-law, was no lesse afflicted: and that which did most disquiet him,
was, that the king to iustifie the imprisonment of his children, had informed all Christian
Princes of his actions, and had incensed them against him, especially D. Henry king of Castile,
against whom he had caried himselfe disdainfully in all his actions, notwithstanding
the alliances and accords made newly betwixt them. And as he was of a harsh disposition,
rash, and without gouernement, he beganne to contriue many bad d^sseines, to preuent
such as he feared: and now he repented the death of Don Rodrigo of Vrris, from whome
hee had drawne so many good seruices, and the banishment of many other knights, of
whom he had then great need: but he hoped the English would bee a good support for
him at all euents: and vpon this ground he resolued to surprize the towne of Logrogno,
which was the Rampier of Castile against Nauarre, presuming that he should amaze the
king Don Henry by this exploite,Desperate disposi^ion of Charles king of Nauarre. if it succeeded, or hinder him greatly, and let others
vnderstand that he was not altogether daunted: but seeing that the place was well manned,
and carefully guarded by Don Pedro Manriques, Gouernor of that frontier, hee
sought to corrupt him with promises of great aduancement in Nauarre, and twentie
thousand doublons in hand. Don Pedro who was a faithfull seruant to the king of Castile
his master, and withall a Knight of honour, aduertised the king Don Henry, who was then
at Seuile, of all this practise: which newes the king receiued at the instant when as the
French kings ambassadours came to Seuile, to presse him to make warre against the king
of Nauarre: which made the king Don Henry more tractable to yeeld to that which they
demanded: writing to Don Pedro, that he should entertaine this bargaine with the king
of Nauarre, and that hee should seeke to take him in Logrogno, and there to keepe him
prisoner.
Don Pedro hauing receiued this answer, made all possible demonstrations, that he desired

to satisfie the king of Nauarre, and appointed him a conuenient time to deliuer him
the towne, receiuing part of the double Ducats. In the meane time he drew secretly into
Logrogno a good supply of soldiers: and the better to assure the execution of this enterprize,
without hazard, the king D. Henry caused Don Pedro Goncales of Mendoca, to enter
into Nauarret with sixe hundred Lances, who gaue it out, that he had a quarrell with
Don Pedro Manriques.
Matters being thus disposed, there remained nothing but for the King of Nauarre to
shew his indiscretion, and to enter into Logrogno: the which he was resolued to do, so
blind he was in his desire, notwithstanding that all his Councell had disswaded him, assuring
him that Don Pedro was not a Knight that would commit such a trecherie against his
King and Lord: and that of necessitie he must beleeue he meant to deceiue him; yea they
did wholly oppose themselues against this enterprise, shewing him the mischiefe which
would ensue by his breach of peace with the king of Castile. Notwithstanding all this
good aduice, King Charles failed not to come at the time appointed to the bridge of Logrogno
with foure hundred lances, Martin Henriques carrying the Standard royall. Don
Pedro Manriques came foorth to meet him, and drew the kings men into the Town, without
any brute, where their lodgings were alreadie made, and expecting to bring in the
king, he inuited him very courteously: but suddenly bethinking himselfe of the mis^hiefe
whereinto he runne, and repenting that he had drawne so many men into danger, he retired
from the bridge towards Viane, telling D. Pedro that he wold not enter for that time
in person, but it should be the next day, and that there were ynough to execute that which
they had concluded. This was a happy inspiration, for if hee had entred, he had neuer returned
with libertie nor Crowne. Don Pedro Manriques seing that the prey was escaped,
caused all the Nauarrois that were entred,The Naua^rois spo^led in Log^ogno. to be stript, whereof some were slaine, and others
prisoners; yet many escaped, leaping ouer the wals and rampiers by the riuer, and
other passages which they found: yea Martin Henriques, who carried the Standard, seing
the alarme, and how they were circumuented, keeping his Standard fast, hee recouered
the bridge, where he was enuironed round about by the enemie, but he desended himself
very valiantly. In the end seeing he had no meanes to make his passage, he threw himselfe
off the bridge into the riuer, with his Standard, and so escaped by swimming, as the Lord
of Oloagui had also done, who came vnto the king their Lord, and related the entertaynment
they had found at Logrogno: whereat he did not maruaile, as hauing fore-seene,
though too late, what would succeed: notwithstanding he was much discontented, for he
had lost many good men. By this attempt the peace betwixt Castile and Nauarre was
plainely broken.
The king Don Henry being at Seuile,VVar be^wixt Castile and Nauarre. was aduertised of all that had past, and dispatched
his sonne Don Iohn, a Prince in the flower of his age, desirous of honour and fame, who
raysed an armie, to enter suddenly into Nauarre. King Charles beeing aduertised of these
preparations, hauing consulted with his Estates, he passed to Bourdeaux, to craue ayde
of the English,The King of Nauar ^ath recourse vnto the English. who had then some suspension of armes with the French. Richard the 2. being
newly come to the Crowne, (the which fell out happily for him) who returned with
600. lances English and Gascons, vnder the command of Thomas Tre^et an Englishman,
and the Seigneur of Berbecin a Gascon, to employ them in the war against Castile,An. 1378. the
which was very violent that yeare 1378. The king of Nauar had placed garrisons in all the
fronter townes, the English at Tudele, with their Captain: the Gascons at Estella: the Segneur
of Seres a Nauarrois at S. Vincent: he put other good Captaines into Viane, Arcos,
Lerin, Sanguessa, and other places: the charges of which war were so great, as hee wasted
all his treasure, so as his sonne Charles coming to raigne, he found not one ducat in his fathers
coffers. Thomas Treuet the English Captaine, was slaine in the towne of Puente la
Reyna, by the inhabitants, by reason of some insolencies. D. Iohn Infant of Castile, hauing
drawne together about 4000. lances, and a number of foot out of Biscay and Guipuscoa,
entred in arms into Nauar, being accompanied by D. Alphonso of Arragon, Marquis of
Villena, and earle of Denia, D. A^phonso of Vruegna, D. Pedro Earle of Transtamara, Princes
of the bloud of Castile, D. Ruy Diaz of Rojas, Gouernor of Guipuscoa, with other Noblemen
and Captaines of note.

They made a shew to beseege Saint Vincent, but the place being strong both by nature
and art,Exp^oites of D^ Io^n and the Castillan a^my in Nauar and well manned, they returned to make a muster at Logrogno, where as Don
Pedro Henriques ioyned with them, and then all together entred into Nauar, where they
found not any one in field to make resistance: for king Charles was retired on this side the
mountaines, and attended the successe of the warre at Saint Iohn de Pie de port, standing
onely vpon his defence: wherefore the Castillans burnt Larraga, Artaxona, with many
other places, euen vnto the ports of Pampelona, before which cittie the Castillan armie
stayed a whole moneth, D. Iohn beeing lodged in the village of Gorraiz: during which
abode the castle of Thiebes was yeelded vnto Don Pedro Manriques, who burnt it: It was
a castle built by king Thibaud the first, as in a place of strength and great safetie, they had
kept the titles and records of the Realme, all which were now burnt, to the great preiudice
of the Common-wealth.Records of Nauarre burnt at Theb^s. Wherefore is no wonder if many of the antiquities of
this Realme be at this day vnknowne. Those which yeelded this fort, were a knight called
Berrio, Ruy Diaz of Torres, and Solomon Prouoch, Captaines to King Charles. The Castillans
finding that they had not forces sufficient to take Pampelona, they dislodged and beseeged
Viane; which place they tooke by composition, after many incounters, vpon condition
the defendants should haue their liues and goods saued: Guarde was also
taken.
Thus the Castillans hauing done all the spoyle they could in the countrie, Don Iohn resolued
to retire with his armie into Castile, before that winter (which approched) should incommodate
him. In a certaine incounter which they had with the Gascons, Ruy Diaz of
Royas was slaine, which was the greatest losse the Castillans had in this expedition. Don
Iohn went to the King Don Henry his father, beeing at Toledo, to whom hee gaue an accompt
of that which he had done, and then they came together to Burgos, where there
was order giuen for a new army, to returne into Nauarre in the Spring. We find by some
remembrances of those times, that the king of Nauar, complained much of many knights
which had not shewed themselues faithfull in this war, yea hauing bin called home by him
from banishment, graced and restored to their honours and charges: among the which
is named Don Ramir Sanches of Asiayn, and Don Iohn Ramir of Areillan the younger:
these with some more retired themselues one after another to the king of Castile, where
they found a kind and gracious reception, in stead of the harshnesse and rigour of King
Charles: so as in those dayes the Nobility of Nauarre was much decayed, and in a maner
extinct. King Charles beeing on this side the mountaines, his Realme was gouerned by
Iohn of Presnay, a knight of France, and his Chamberlaine, who aduertised him of this
new preparation of warre which was made in Castile: whereon hauing duly considered,
finding himselfe weake, and without money, and ill serued by his owne subiects, he resolued
to pacifie the king Don Henry, sending an Ambassadour vnto him to Burgos, to
mooue him to some accord, the which he did not refuse, but answered, that if he sent him
his Ambassadors and Deputies with sufficient authoritie to treate a peace, that he should
not find him vntractable to yeeld to any thing that should bee held reasonable. Wherefore
the king of Nauarre did againe employ D. Ramir Sanches of Asiayn, and sent him to
Burgos, with the Prior of Ronceuaux, men of learning and authority. These Ambassadours
were heard by the king Don Henry, and entertayned with great courtesie: where
hauing discoursed, and somewhat debated vppon the articles of the peace, in the end it
was concluded, That there should bee a perpetuall amitie sworne betwixt the kings and
Realmes of Castile and Nauarre, without binding him of Castile to alienate himselfe in
any sort from the league which he had with the French King.Peace betwixt Castile and Nauarre. That the strangers, Gascons,
and English, should be sent out of Nauarre: That the townes taken by the King of Castile
from him of Nauarre, should bee restored; That the king of Castile should presently
lend twenty thousand ducats vnto the King of Nauarre, to pay the souldiers which
were to bee dismissed: for assurance whereof, the King Don Henry should keepe the
towne of Guarde in pawne: That the king of Nauarre for assurance of the entertainement
of these Articles of peace, and that he should not breake it in any sort, should leaue
twentie seuerall places of his Realme of Nauarre in pawne, in the custodie and conseruance
of Don Iohn Ramires of the towne of Areillan, namely, the Castle of Estella,

the garrison whereof should be paied by the King of Nauarre, and that Tudelo should
receiue a garrison of Castillans: that Larraga, Miranda and Saint Vincent should bee of
the number of those twenty places; the which should bee thus held for tenne yeeres,
and that expired, without any breach, all should be restored to the King of Nauarre, or
his successor. These Articles being concluded, and sworne, the warre ceased, to the general
good of both Kingdomes.
During the warre betwixt these two Princes, there grew troubles in the Church,
to the scandale of all Christendome,Schisme in the Church. Pope Gregory the eleuenth, had restored the papall
seate to Rome, in the yeere 1376. seuenty two yeeres after it had beene distracted by
Pope Clement the fifth, who had beene crowned at Lions. About two yeeres and foure
monthes after this returne, Gregory dying at Rome, hee left the consistory of Cardinals
in great combustion, as well among themselues, as with the people of Rome, who would
haue a Romaine, or at the least an Italian chosen Pope, whereof there followed a most
dangerous Schisme, for all the Estates of Christendome for many yeeres, were transported
with passion, and not with any zeale of religion: for euen then, and before, there
was such corruption, as in the gouernment of Clergy matters, there was nothing but
ambition, couetousnesse, and deseignes for temporall commodities: Princes che^ishing
Popes, and Popes being hirelings to Princes, to draw fauour, authority and support one
from an other, in their affections. After much contention, Vrbain the sixth came out
of the Conclaue, chosen by sixteene Cardinals, being before Archbishop of Bari, brone
at Naples, his name was Bartlemew Prignan: whose election hauing beene much contradicted
by the French Cardinals, then allowed, and soone after reiected, in the end
fifteene of them (not able to agree well with the Pope) being retired to Naples, through
fauor of Queene Ieanne, they entred into the Conclaue, and did choose an other Pope,
whom they named Clement the seuenth, called before Robert Cardinal of Geneua, or as
some write of Cambray, of the title of the twelue Apostles, who retired to Auignon,
and there held his seat, as Vrbain did at Rome.
As Princes in acknowledging of these Popes,Castile. were diuided and carried away with
their priuat passions, Vrbain the sixth seeing that his competitor was supported by the
French King, sent Ambassadors to D. Henry King of Castile, to seeke his fauor, who
finding him at Cordoua, deliuered vnto him the reasons iustifying the election of Vrbain,
and condemning that of Clement, intreating him to beleeue that Vrbaine was
the true and lawfull Pastor, a friend to peace, and desirous of the good of all Christendome.
To these words, they added a present of three peeces of fine scarlet,
one for the King, an other for the Queene, and the third for the Infant D. Iohn, giuing
presents also, in the Popes name, vnto many noblemen of the court, promising the
King not to conferre the benefices of Spaine to any other prelats, then to such as were
borne in the country. In the end they intreat him to disclaime the Antipope Clement.
The King D. Henry hauing conferred with his councel, Doctors, Diuines, and other
chiefe men of his Realme, vpon the pretensions of Vrbain; hee made answere vnto the
Ambassadors, that he would let them vnderstand his minde at Toledo, whether he was
then going, where being arriued, there came Ambassadors from the French Kidg, who
being heard before he had made answere to them of Pope Vrbain, they crost all: for hauing
giuen the King of Castile to vnderstand, that the election of Vrbain was forced, by
the importunity of the Romains and the partiality of the Cardinals, and that Clement
had beene chosen with the better title as they pretended.Castile acknowledgeth no Pope. King Henry resolued not to
acknowledge any of them for Pope, sending Doctors into France, to informe themselues
of the matter, and to report vnto him what they should finde, being wonderfully
perplexed in minde, not knowing how he should gouerne himselfe, with a good conscience,
in this Schisme: but he was somewhat pacefied, vpon the determination which
should be made by a General councel,Profits of the court of Rome staied in Spaine. and in the meane time he commaunded that all
the money due for Annates, or other proffits, belonging, or accustomed to be receiued
by the Apostolike sea of Rome, in Spaine, should be laied in Deposito, vntill it were declared
by the Catholike church, who was lawfull Pope, with this answere the Ambassadors
of either part returned: The like resolution was taken in Arragon, touching this

Schisme. From Tolledo the King of Castile came to Burgos, where a peace with Nauarre
was concluded, as we haue said: after which the King of Nauarre came to Alfaro,
to visit the Infant D. Iohn of Castile, and there he accomplished some part of the capitulation.
The King of Castile being come from Burgos to Saint Dominike of Calcada,
he was also visited by Charles King of Nauarre, with great shewes of loue, of either
side, and there they finished that which remained of their accord, the which was very
preiudicial for the King of Nauarre, reaping the fruits of his turbulent spirit, as he had
done in France. The King D. Henry neuer parted from Saint Dominike, for he was
poisoned by the treachery of Mahumet the old, King of Granado. This Moore seeing
that the King of Castile was at peace with all other Kings his neighbours, and knowing
him to be warlike, and a great vndertaker, hee was in feare least he should inuade his
country of Granado: wherefore he sent a captaine to his court, saying that he was banished.
This Moore seeming to flie his Princes wrath, came and presented his seruice
 vnto the King D. Henry, and offred him in guift many pearles and precious stones, with
other goodly presents,D^ath of the King D. Henry by poison. amongst the which there was a paire of rich buskins, infected with
poison, the which were so pleasing vnto the King, as he would presently put them on:
but soone after he beganne to finde himselfe ill, and within few daies died. He commanded
his sonne to entertaine the amity of France, whilest he liued, and to follow the
French in that which concerned the Schisme of the church. He was interred in the
same chappell which he himselfe had caused to be built, it the great church of Toledo,
the which since hath been augmented with reuenues, by the Archbishop D. Alphonso of
Fonseca, in the time of our fathers, and they cal it the chappel of the last Kings. It is worthy
obseruation, that this King hauing alienated from the crowne, many townes and other
places, to recompence the seruices which he had receiued from Noblemen and
Knights of Castile, and others, in the conquest of the Realme, he put a clause in his will,
which did afterwards breed many complaints and controuersies in Castile: which was,
that such donations made by him should goe vnto the eldest,Clause in the King D. Henries will touching fees, which they call Maio^azgos. the which is called in
Spaine Majorazgos, the which they haue interpreted, as if no collateral heire might inherit
them: according to the which in such controuersies many decrees haue beene
made in the Chancery, and the Kings councell, anexing such lands vnto the crowne. D.
Alphonso bishop of Carthagena, saith, that this King died of the goute, making no mention
of any poison, whereof it may be this author was ignorant. Being neere his end, he
desired to be attired in the habit of Saint Dominike, and to die in it. He raigned tenne
yeeres and two monthes, and was six and forty yeeres old.
If this King of Granado practised his death,Granado. he did not long enioy this content, for the
same yeere 1379. the same Mahumet called the old, and old in effect, died the nine and
twentith yeere of his raigne, and 762. of the Arabians.


D. Iohn first of that name, the sixteenth King of Castile,
and seuen and thirtith of Leon.
THe happinesse which did accompany the King D. Henry the second, father to Don
Iohn,An. 1379. Castile. did not continue in his posterity: for God, to let men vnderstand that it is hee
which doth raise and pul downe at his pleasure, hauing from nothing aduanced D. Henry
to the Scepter of Leon and Castile, and confounded the forces of that Realme, allied
to the English and Moores; he did in a manner ouerthrow this greatnesse in his sonnes
time, by the forces of the petty Estate of Portugal, to the which he aduanced a bastard,
without any humaine support; notwithstanding that the armes of France were ioyned
with the forces of Castile, as shall appeere by the discourse of the History. By such
examples the mighty are admonished not to trust in their forces, and the weake not to
despaire, especially if he be vniustly pursued.
D. Iohn who succeeded his father D. Henry, descended by the mothers side, from the
 Infant D.Genealogie of Castile. Fernand de la Cerde, eldest sonne to Don Alphonso the Philosopher: for of

Don Fernand came D. Alphonso and D. Fernand: Of the younger D. Fernand, and of D.
Ieanne of Lara, his wife, issued D. Bl^noh, who was married to D. Iohn Manuel (who had
had to his first wife a Countesse of Sauoy) sonne to D. Manuel, brother to D. Alphonso
the Philosopher, of which marriage was borne D. Ieanne Manuel, Queene of Castile,
wife to the King D. Henry, and mother to this King D. Iohn, the first of that name, who
was two and twenty yeeres old, or there abouts,Disposition of Kign Iohn. when he began to raigne: a Prince of
a good disposition, and religious, according to the time, but vnfound of his body, and
vnfortunate in warre.
He was clowned after the example of his Predecessors, in Burgos, in the Monastery
of Saincta Maria de las Huelgas, where to solemnize his coronation, did arme aboue a
hundred Knights, which were of Noble families, and gaue many guifts and preuiledges
to commonalties, and to priuat persons, to make his first entrance more remarkable and
pleasing: He gaue vnto the city of Burgos the towne of Pancoruo in Bureua: he caused
Villa-Real of Saint Nicholas of Orio in Guipusdoa to bee walled in, giuing in the preuiledges
of Saint Sebastian; with many others. When he was Infant, beeing in possession
of the Siegneury of Biscay, hee vnited it for euer vnto the crowne, at his comming
to it.
He remembred his fathers charge, to entertaine a strict league of friendship with the
house and crowne of France, the which hee sent to confirme by his Ambassadors: And
hauing sent his gallies this yeere of our Lord 1379. in fauour of the French; commanded
by D. Fernand Sanches of Touar, they tooke from Iohn of Montfort duke of Brittan,
the castle of Roche Gaze at Cap de Late, for that hee held the English party, by a decree
of the court of parliament at Paris, and his Dutchy with all his goods declared forfeited
to the King, vntill that time the Iewes dwelling in Spaine, had the preuiledge to
take knowledge of crimes committed by them of their sect: but this yeere a lew, called
Ioseph Pich, dwelling at Seuile, hauing beene slaine in the Iewes place at Burgos, being
a man of great reputation, for his wealth, and the seruices which hee had done vnto the
deceased King D. Henry, as treasurer generall, the new King tooke from them this prerogatiue,
and forbad them to deale in any crime, where there was murther, cutting off any
Limbe, or effusion of bloud. In the beginning of his raigne, God gaue him a sonne, by
his wife D. Leonora of Arragon, who succeeded him.
As soone as the Infant was borne, D. Fernand King of Portugal, who had in the yeere 
1378. made his daughter D. Beatrix, sure vnto D. Frederike duke of Benauent,Portugal. base sonne
to the deceased King Henry of Castile, by D. Leonora Ponce, repented himselfe, and sent
vnto the King D. Iohn, intreating him to consent vnto a marriage betwixt his sonne
newly borne, and his daughter D. Beatrix, with certaine conditions which did nothing
displease King Iohn, so as this other marriage was accorded betwixt them, which proued
the fire-band of future warre betwixt Castile and Portugal: for among other conditions,
these two princes made a mutuall donation of their Realmes vnto the suruiuor, in
case they died without lawfull heires of their bodies, the which was concluded and
sworne in the yeere of our Lord 1380. but it was not executed,An. 1380. for God had otherwise
decreed. This Infanta D. Beatrix, was daughter to D. Leonora Telles of Meneses, of
whose vnsortable marriage, we haue before treated, and whose proceedings were as vnreasonable:
for this woman being exceeding faire, and prouided of armes fit to sway a 
disposition that was faint and weake,Art of D. Leonora Telles of Meneses. could make such vse of her alurements, as she kept
the King her husband alwaies subiect, and a slaue to her affections: so as hee refused nto
any thing that was pleasing vnto her, forgetting often his ranke and royall dignity. All
which had disliked of her marriage, or had in any sort displeased her, were by her practises
pursued, chased away, or vtterly ruined: her friends and kinsmen were aduanced to the
greatest honours and dignities of the Realme: and as she was cunning in all her actions,
so she could finde meanes to reconcile vnto her, those who through their greatnesse,
wealth, or alliance within the Realme, seemed hard to ruine; binding them vnto her by
her bounty and fauours, making them of enemies to become her friends. Shee gaue
the gouernment of the castle of Lisbon, to her vncle D. Iohn Alphonso Tello, Earle of
Barcelos, Lord Steward of the Kings house. She also aduanced a brother of his called

Don Iohn Alphonso Telles, to be Admirall of the Realme: an other brother called D.
Goncalo Telles, was at her request made Earle of Neyua. To the Earle of Barcelos son,
she procured the suruiuance of his fathers Estate, in the same county or gouernm the of
Barcelos: a brother of hers was made Earle or Gouernor of Viane, and D. Henry her
brother in law, Earle of Seaa. To D. Lope Diaz de Soze her Nephew, sonne to Donna
Maria Telles her sister, and to Aluar Diaz de Soza, she caused to bee giuen the dignity of
great maister of Christ.
Don Henry of Albuquerque, whose sisters were married to the brethren of this
Queene D. Leonora Telles, was by her fauor maister of Saint Iames. She caused D. Ieanne
Telles of Meneses her bastard sister, who was commanderesse of Sanctos, to be married
to D. Iohn Alphonso Piment^l, and Braganca to be giuen vnto him: She married D. Agnes
Botello, one of her gentlewomen, and her kinswoman, being of a Noble family to Pero
Rodriguez of Fonseca giuing him the castle of Oliuencia: She also concluded the marriages
of D. Mencia Vasquoz Coutina, with M^rtin Goncales of Tuy; and of D. Theresa of
Meyra, with Fernand Goncales of Soca, giuing vnto the last the castle of Chaues, and to
the other that of Portel: She made D. Atuar Peyre of Castro, Castellan, Earle or Goueruor
of Aroyolos, and procured many fauours and graces for D. Fernand de Castro his
elder brother.
They say, that by her meanes the King on a time sent a present to Iohn Alphonso
of Muxica, beeing in the towne of Ebora, of thirty horse, thirty armors complete,
thirty mulets, thirty pounds of gold, a hundred and thirty markes of siluer, and
foure mulets laden with tapistry, and other rich furniture, adding therevnto, as an hereditarie
guift, the towne of Torresuedras. Such also was the fauour shee bare vnto Don
Fernand of Andeiro a Knight of Galicia, who was come to serue the King her husband,
in his last warres against Castile, as besides that hee was made an Earle, hee had
the neerest place next to her selfe, in the Kings fauour: so as by his meanes many
Gentlemen were gratefied and aduanced in Portugal: and moreouer hee liued in such
familiarity, as hee lodged in the same lodging with the King and Queene, and did often
remaine alone with her a long time, whereat many murmured, and grew iealous:
saying that their conuersation ws not honest, and the Portugois did beleeue, that the
children which shee bare, were not the King D. Fernands (a Prince which was vnsound,
and of a weake complexion (but begotten by stealth by this Earle of Oren. Finally
she wrought so, as all the dignities, honours and forts of Portugal, were in the hands of
her kinsmen, friends and allies.
But to what fury doth the desire of commaund thrust a woman vnto? The Portugal
authors write, that the Infant Don Iohn, the Kings brother, beeing in loue with
Donna Maria Telles of Meneses, the Queenes sister, who had managed the loue betwixt
the King and her, a widow woman, and mother to Don Lope Diaz Soca, but
faire, and pleasing, hee serued her and sought her loue, the which shee could not refuse,
Don Iohn beeing a Knight in the floure of his age, goodly also and full of grace: yet
shee was thus farre discreet, that before shee would yeeld to that which hee desired,
hee promised to marrie her secretly, the which beeing afterwards made knowne vnto
the Queene, shee was much discontented: it may bee desiring that Don Iohn
(who was much beloued of the Portugalls) should marrie Donna Beatrix her daughter:
fearing that if the King her husband should die, hee should bee chosen King, and
her daughter reiected, or that shee her selfe did beare him some good will, and seeing
her husband ill disposed, had an intent to marry him, if her husband died, that shee
mought reigne still:Policy cruell and detestable of the Queene D. Leonora Telles. wherefore being transported with these passions, she began to practise
the death (by a notable cruelty and detestable stratagemme) of her who had raised
her vp, conspiring with Don Iohn Alphonso Telles her brother, Admirall of Portugall,
to perswade the Infant Don Iohn, that Donna Maria Telles, who said shee was his
wife, abandoned her selfe to other men, to his great dishonour, in whom they
wrought such an impression, as this simple and ill aduised Knight, transported with
extreame iealousie, came in a morning to Coimbra, where this Lady did remaine, where
entring furiously into the house after that hee had forced her chamber doore, finding

not any signes of that which had beene told him, he slue his miserable wife most barbarously,
who called to God for aide, but in vaine, holding vp her hands to her inraged
husband.
This was the reward which Donna Maria Telles of Meneses had, hauing beene the
broker of that vnfortunate marriage, and as it were the Gardien of the Queene Donna
Leonoras loues, who not content therewith came to complaine vnto the King of Don
Iohn, for the death of her sister, and preuailed so, as he was forced to absent himselfe from
court, and to keepe himselfe secret in places of hard accesse, for his safety, yet finding not
himselfe well secured, he retired into Castile: for Goncal Telles, brother to the deceased,
and her sonne D. Lope Diaz de Sosa, the Earle of Barcellos, and his brother the Earle
of Viana, with other of her kinsfolkes, sought to kill him, to reuenge the death of Donna
Maria. Besides these excesses,Treachery of the Queene D. Leonora against the maister of Auiz. the Queene Donna Leonora attempted the death of
D. Iohn maister of Auiz, the King her husbands base brother, a Knight of great valour,
who had neuer offended her: but only in conceit, that he onely did crosse her deseignes.
To effect her wicked intent, shee caused letters to bee counterfetted in the name
of the maister, and of a gentleman called Gancalo Vasques of Azebedo, his cousin
and very familiar, beeing of the Kings councell, whom shee would also draw into this
danger These letters were directed to the King of Castile and did treat of matters against
the seruice of the King D. Fernand, whom she did aduertise that they had beene surprized
vpon the frontiers.
The King giuing credit to her malice, that he had taken councell of his wife, and
of D. Iohn Fernandes of Andeyro,Imprisonment of the maister of Auiz and of D. Goncal Vasques. he commanded that the maister of Auiz and Goncal
Vasques should be apprehended, and put into the tower of the castle of Ebora, where
they were kept rigorously in chaines, the maister being ignorant of the cause of this his
misery. As for D. Goncal Vasques, he remembred that hee had giuen eare vnto his wife,
telling him that on a time D. Goncal Telles the Queenes brother, and D. Iohn Fernand of
Andeyro her mignon, entring into her chamber all sweating, shee gaue them a kerchife
she had vpon her, to wipe themselues withall; and that D. Iohn Fernandes approching
neere vnto her spake certaine lasciuious words, which being heard by the wife of Don
Goncal Vasques, and reported by her vnto her husband, hee was so indiscreet as to tell
the Queene thereof, aduertising the Queene of the Earles smal respect vnto her, and of
his impudency, whereof she, who wished him well, did not seeme to care: wherefore D.
Goncal doubted that this was the cause of his imprisonment, and that the Queene would
dispatch him before the King should be aduertised thereof.
Being thus imprisoned, the Queene did counterfet letters from the King, vnto Vasco
Martines of Merlo, captaine of the castle of Ebora, by the which he was commanded to
murther these two personages: but being a discreet man, and considering the quality of
the prisoners, thinking that he must not proceed so lightly to the execution thereof, hee
forba^e, vntill he had spoken with the King, to whom he went the day after this charge,
to know if it were his pleasure, that the maister of Auiz and Goncal Vasques should bee
put to death. The King answered that he knew not of it, commanding him not to touch
them, and so he sent him backe, enioyning him to kepe it secret, and soone after he went
from Ebora, whereas the Queene remained; who seeing that her deseignes did not succeed,
she tooke a milder course, and sought to bee reconciled to these two personages,
who were freed from their irons, and within few daies after set at liberty. Some time after,
the Queene being at masse, she caused them to come vnto her, shewing them the
best countenance they could desire, and inuited them to dinner, the which they did vnwillingly
accept, fearing she would cause them to be poisoned:Impudency of the Queene D. Leonora. yet they did eate in the
Queenes lodging, in the company of the Earle of Oren, to whom after dinner, discoursing
of her rings and iewels, she gaue (in their presence) a Ring, set with a rich ruby, pressing
him to take it, although he excused himselfe, to the end she might not forget any
thing to be held very impudent.
Amidest these tumults, D. Isabella the Kings bastard daughter, who had beene made
sure by the last treaty of peace, to D. Alphonso of Castile, Earle of Gijon, base sonne to
King Henry, was married at Burgos, whereat the Earle was much greeued: an vnfortunat

marriage, of which there was one sonne borne, who was called D. Henry. But the marriage
which was made betwixt D. Beatrix sister to the King D. Fernand, and D. Sancho
Earle of Albuquerque, was blessed of God: so as a daughter which they had, called D.
Leonora, the sole heire of her fathers great Estates, was married to D. Fernand Infant
of Castile Lord of Lara, and Duke of Pennafiel, sonne to the King D. Iohn the first, then
raigning, which D. Fernand came afterwards to be King of Arragon and Sicile. Shee
was Queene of these realmes, and mother of fiue children, renowned by the Histories of
Castile and Arragon, of whom we shall heereafter make mention. This King Fernand
of Portugal being in good peace with his neighbours, considering what had happened
in the city of Lisbone,Bu^ldings made by D. Fernand King of Portugal. in the last warre of Castile, for want of good walles, he caused it
to be fortified and walled about from Saint Catherins gate vnto Saint Vincents. And
as hee was carefull of this publike worke so hee did gratefie the Franciscan Friars of
Saint Iren, causing the quier of their church to be built, with other workes of deuotion.
This is all we finde in Histories of the affaires of Portugall, vnto the yeere of our Lord
1380.An. 1380. that the aboue mentioned marriage betwixt Don Henry sonne to King Iohn
the first of Castile, and Donna Beatrix the daughter of Portugal, was concluded with the
aboue named conditions, for the succession of the two Realmes, by the suruiuance of the
two Kings.
About the end of this yeere,Castile. Donna Leonora Queene of Castile was brought in bed, at
Medina del Campo, of her sonne D. Fernand aboue named, who came to be King of Arragon,
as we will shew.
 At that time Spaine was a Neuter, in regard of the obedience which the two
Popes pretended,The King of Castile acknowledgeth the Pope at Auignon. and did affect in the Christian common weale, continuing some time
in this Neutrality, by reason of the disagreement of the Prelats, who were assembled for
that cause onely, at the instance of the Ambassadors of the two Popes, Clement and Vibain:
but soone after it was declared by a sentence giuen by the King of Castile, and his
councell, that his countries should acknowledge Clement the seuenth, for Pope, and
Christs Vicar, he being resident at Auignon, the King D. Iohn inclyning therein, as in other
things to the French. The deuotion of men in Spaine, and other places, in those
daies was contrarie to that of more ancient times: for whereas before they thought
they could not giue sufficient to the Clergy, to augment their houses and reuenues,
now euery one sought to spoile them, and to vsurpe their lands and reuenues: whereof
the Abbots and Conuents of the Order of Saint Benet in Spaine, hauing complained,
they had a notable sentence by Iudges deputed by the King for that businesse, against
many Noblemen and Knights which detained their goods: yet they still incroched vpon
them all they could.
In the yeere of our Lord 1381. died D. Ieanne Queene of Castile,An. 1381. mother to the King
D. Iohn, who through great deuotion had in a manner all her life time carried the habit
of Saint Claire, and died in it, and appointed she should be buried in it: A great argument
of the religion of that time. She lies at Toledo, in the Chappell of the last Kings.
 The peace betwixt the Kings D. Iohn of Castile, and D. Fernand of Portugal, was broken,Portugal.
by the bad councell of a Knight, who had beene accustomed to bee often shut vp
with the Queene of Portugall, and was her fauorite, hee was Earle of Oren. To giue
some collour and beginning to this warre, the King D. Fernand sent to Iohn Duke of
Lancaster, perswading him, that as husband to D. Constance, daughter to the deceased
King D. Pedro of Castile and Leon,Mignon of Queene Leonoras puts Castile and Portugal in war. hee should pursue his right which hee pretended to
those Realmes. The English Prince relying vpon the fauour of Portugal, with the
consent and aide of King Richard his Nephew, raised a thousand men at armes, or Launces,
and a good number of foote, whereof he gaue the charge to his brother Edmond of
Langley, Earle of Cambridge, who led them into Spaine, for that the Duke could not
goe in person to this warre. The English army arriued vpon the coast of Portugal,
whereas the warre was already violent; for the King of Castile beeing aduertised of this
practise, had let his army into the country, and taken the towne of Almoyda: And at
sea, euen vpon the arriuall of the English army, Fernand Sanches of Tour Admirall of
Castile had taken twenty gallies of Portugal, with their Admirall D. Alphonso Telles,

Earle of Barcellos the Queenes brother, the which fell out vnhappily for the King Don
Fernand, who beeing sodainely transported with batred against Castile, receiued this
Prince Edmond, with al shewes of loue and royall pompe: and the more to gratefie him,
he made a promise of a future marriage,King of Portugal makes and breakes his daughters, marriage at his pleasure. betwixt Donna Beatrix his daughter (who had
beene twice before contracted) and Edward his son, a young child, which hee had had of
Donna Isabella his wife, the third daughter of the deceased King Don Pedro of Castile,
there present; yea he made them to marry and lie together, and to confirme this marriage,
they performed al accustomed ceremonies, except the consummation, which could
not bee, by reason of the tender age of both parties, the Bridegroome beeing not full
sixe yeeres old. During their stay, the English (before they were led to the warre)
spared not the Portugals, but made spoile of their goods, as if they had beene in the
country of Castile: So as the Protugals in steed of one warre, found themselues ingaged
betwixt two enemies, hauing the Castillans abroad, and the English within their
houses.
In the yeere of our Lord 1382. the King D. Fernand went to field,An. 1382. with the Earle of
Cambridge, and came and lodged his army at Yelbes: On the other side the army of
Castile camped at Badajos, whereas hauing continued some daies without any exploite
of armes, a peace was concluded, and Donna Beatrix Infanta of Portugall was the
fourth time promised to Don Fernand the younger sonne of Don Iohn King of Castile,
the King of Portugall beeing glad this marriage should take place, to the end his
Realme should not bee vnited to the crowne of Castile.
In the meane time Doona Leonora Queene of Castile died, in the towne of Cuellar,Castile.
beeing brought in bed of a daughter, which died also. The Queenes bodie was carried
to Toledo, and interred in the chappell of the last Kings. This Princesse is honoured
for her vpright and good conscience aboue all the Ladies of her time, whereof
some authors bring this example: Certaine Iewes deputed from the Sinagogues
of them of their sect, dwelling vpon the Queenes Lands, beeing come for some affaires
vnto the court,Integrity of the Queene D. Leonora. beeing mooued with good will vnto their Ladie, by reason of
her vertues, and good behauiour, came vnto her Confessor beeing an Arragonois,
a verie religious man, of a good life, and tould him, that they vnderstood the Queene
had occasion for to vse a certaine summe of money, and knowing how much the Iewes,
dwelling in her countrie, did honour her, they intreated him to let her vnderstand
that shee should demaunde what money shee pleased of their Sinagogues, beeing assured
it should bee verie willingly furnished; and that withall hee should certefie her,
that the Iewes desired to doe her this seruice, for that since the time shee had beene
their Ladie shee had neuer imployed them. The Confessor thinking to bring
pleasing newes vnto the Queene, made report of the Iewes speech, and perswaded
her by all meanes for to make vse of their kinde offer, assuring her that shee might
take with a good conscience that which they did willingly present vnto her. But the
Queene answered him, that shee would neuer doe any such thing, and that God
forbidde that shee should exact money, or any other thing of any person, for the which
the King, she or their children might be cursed: And notwithstanding any reply the religious
man could make shee would not yeeld vnto it, but willed him for to thanke the
Iewes.
Don Fernand King of Portugal,Portugal. hearing of the death of Donna Leonora Queene
of Castille, hee beganne to practise a fifth marriage for his daughter Donna Beatrix,
with the King Don Iohn himselfe; sending sodainely vnto him, beeing then at Pinto,
three Leagues from Madrid, to know his minde therein. The King Don Iohn
made no delaie, but (with the aduice of his good seruants) entred presently into capitulation
with the Ambassadours of Portugal, who were therein duelie instructed: Amongst
other Articles it was agreed that the children issuing of this marriage, should
bee Kings of Portugal.
And some daies after hee married Donna Beatrix Infanta of Portugall,D. Iohn King of Castile marries the Infanta of Portugal. hauing escaped
many other parties of lesse preferment. The marriage was celebrated, at
Badajos, or at Yelbes, according vnto some, in the yeere of the Incarnation 1383.

the Queene Donna Leonara Telles de Meneses her mother being present, the King Don
Fernand remayning at Lisbon very sicke,Deatho^ D. Fernand King of Portugal. where within few daies after hee died, hauing
raigned but ill sixteene yeeres and nine monthes, the three and fortith yeere of his age.
His body was buried at Saint Iren, in the Franciscans church, where as D. Constance Manuel
his mother is also interred.
 After the marriage betwixt Don Alphonso Earle of Gijon, and Donna Isabella of
Portugal,Castile. against the liking of Don Alphonso, hee did neuer loue the King his brother,
some times hee rebelled, and caused reuolts, and then was reconciled, but it lasted not
long. At this second marriage of the King Don Iohn, hee was in the Asturiaes, where
hee put all into combustion, against whom the King sent some companies of men at
armes.
This yeere of our Lord 1383. Rebellion of D Alphonso Earl of Gijon* was held a generall assembly of the Estates at Segobia.
And for that vnto that time they had accounted the yeeres according vnto the Aera of
Caesar,Aera of Caesar what it was. which differed eight and thirty yeeres from the accounts which was then in vse
in other Christian Kingdomes, it was ordained that the Castillans should take the beginning
of their yeeres from the natiuity of Christ: the which was more fit for Christians,
then to retaine this memory of Caesar Augustus. This manner of accounting
by the Aera had beene long before left in Nauarre and Arragon, but was retained
for some time in Portugal. The cause of this name of Aera is diuersly related, but the
most probable is, that the ancients hauing accustomed to write these wordes. Annus
erat Augusti centes. or some other number, by abreuiation thus, A. E R. A. C.
the vulgar people ioyning these letters together pronounced Aera. C. the which
was afterwards vsed vnto that time. They say that the last letters which were dispatched
in the court of Castile, where the Aera of Caesar was obserued, were two preuiledges
granted by the King Don Iohn, the one to the towne of Santa Cruz of Cestone; the
other to Villa Real of Vrrechua, which was in the yeere of our Lord 1421. of the Aera,
answering to that of our Lord 1383. from the birth of Christ.
 The King Don Iohn, before his departure from Segobia, did celebrat the funerals of
his father in law,Portugal. in which Realme, by an Article made in the treaty of marriage of the
Infanta Don Beatrix, Queene of Castile, and heire proprietarie thereof, the Queene
Donna Leonora Telles her mother should remaine Regent. The chiefe of the Nobilitie
of Portugal were of diuerse humours touching the succession of the Realme: for
some (amongst which was the maister of the Knights of Auiz, base brother to the deceased
King) would maintaine the right of Donna Beatrix, and called Don Iohn
King of Castile her husband,Disposition of the Noblemen of Portugal. to come and take possession of the Realme, which did belong
vnto him: others did abhorre the Castillans commaund, and could not endure
that Portugal should bee vnited to Castile. The King Don Iohn sollicited by many
letters and messages to come into Portugall tooke aduice of his councell, whether hee
should enter in hostile manner, or peaceably. The worst councell was followed by
him, which was, force: Wherefore he speedily gathered together al the forces hee could,
and first of all hee staied Don Iohn of Portugall, one of the brethren of the deceased King
Don Fernand, who hauing retired himselfe out of Portugal, by reason of the murther
of Donna Maria Telles of Meneses, and the mallice of the Queene Donna Leonora, had
serued the crowne of Castile faithfully. But fearing least hee should cause some troubles
in Portugal, hee caused him to bee put prisoner in the castle of Toledo, from
whence hee was afterwardes remooued to Almonacid, three leagues from the citie.
Hee also caused Don Alphonso Earle of Gijon to bee imprisoned,King of Castile caters arme^ (...) P^^tugal, is not (...) wel (...). who stirred vppe seditions
in Castile: and then with those small forces which hee had, hee marched to La
Garde, where hee was receiued by the Bishop of that place; but the captaine of the fort
would not acknowledge him, knowing the diuerse dispositions of the Nobilitie,
and vnderstanding all the troubles which had happened at Lisbone since the Kings
death.
The Queene widowe did reside in this chiefe Cittie of the Realme, beeing assisted by
don Henry Manuel, Earle of Sintra, Vncle to the deceased King by the mothers side;
by Don Iohn Maister of Auiz, and others which did fauour the Queene Donna Beatrix,

and had set vp the armes of Castile and Portugal quartered, as the Don Iohn had taken
them: but the iealousie which was bred in the hearts of the Noblemen, and people, by
the too great familiarity which was betwixt the widow Queene and Don Iohn Fernandes
of Andeyro Earle of Oren, mooued the maister of Auiz (who remembred still his
imprisonment) to enter into quarrell with him,Earle of O^en the Queene of Portugals Mignon slaine. the which proceeded so farre, as the
Earle was slaine in the Queenes lodging, which was at a place called Limonero: and
instantly (as if it had beene a thing premeditated) the people of the city fell in such a
mutiny, as not any one durst burie of the Earle Don Fernandes body, in the day time,
but they were forced to staie till night, to put him secretly in the ground at Saint Martins,
Queene Leonora beeing so amazed,Mutiny at Lisbon. as shee sought all meanes to flie out of Lisbon:
And the rage of this multitude was so violent, as they fell vpon Don Martin
their Bishop, who blaming them for their insolencies and rebellion against the
Queene, they chased him into a tower of his church, into the which this poore prelate
had fled to saue himselfe from the rage of the people, where they beseeged him,
and entring into the tower, cast him downe head-long pouring forth a thousand iniurious
words against the Queene Donna Leonora,Bishop of Lisbon slaine by the mutines. the Earle and the Bishop: whose
bodie beeing stript, they drag'd it by the heeles to the place of Rusio, where this
miserable spectacle laie all that day, and the next night following, and then they buried
it in the market; the furious multitude not suffering in to haue Christian buriall.
In the meane time the Queene Donna Leonora got away, and leauing this mutinous
city, retired to Alanquer, and from thence to saint Iren, where as shee vnderstoode
that many other townes, especially Ebora had done the like, taking armes tumultuously
against her and her faction. At Ebora the heads of the multitude were Vincent
Ianes a Taylor, and one called Gonc all Ianes, who committed strange insolencies, as
it is the custome of a mutinous multitude. Amongst others, knowing that the Abbesse
of Saint Benet was allied to the Queene Donna Leonora, they entred into her
Church and pulled her from the Altar, holding that which keepes the Hoste in her
armes, imploring in vaine the aide thereof, and the mercie of the commons, and so
drew her into the market-place, where they murthered her most cruelly.
The Portugall authors write, that in that cittie, a little femall Infant beeing in the
cradell, in the house of one Stephen Ianes, did rise three times out of her swadling clothes,
and stretching out the armes,Prodigie at Ebora. cried, Portugal, Portugal, for the King Don Iohn; the
which was then ambiguous, but afterwardes (by reason of the euent) was applied to
the maister of Auiz, who was also called Don Iohn. The King of Castile beeing aduertised
of all these disorders, went to Saint Iren, to his mother in law, about the beginning
of the yeere of our Lord 1384. where to free her selfe from trouble and daunger,
and to gratefie the King her sonne in law,An. 1384. shee yeelded vnto him all the right shee had
to the Gouernment of the Realme. Hether came many Noblemen and Gentlemen
holding the partie of the King Don Iohn, to doe him homage: who by this good beginning
conceiued great hope that all would succeed well and wishfully, and that hee
should restore his mother in law to her dignity. Don Iohn of Portugall maister of
Auiz, a young Prince, but vertuous, hauing beene prouoked by the dishonest conuersation
of the Queene Donna Leonora,D. Iohn maister of Auiz alpires to the gouernment of Portugal. with the Earle of Oren, to the armes, knowing the
nature of this woman, by former experience, with the hazard of his life; hee would
no more fall into her power, but aspired to the regencie of the Realme, and wholy to
depriue both her and the King D. Iohn her sonne in law of all gouernment.
In this deseigne hee found such fauour and support of the Nobility and townes,
who had long detested the manners of the Queene, and the deceased King her husband,
as hee had meanes to resist the attempts of the king of Castile, and to make
himselfe a way to the crowne.Act of the maister of Auiz to make the Castillant odious. And to make the name of Castile more ordious to them
who desired not the vnion of these two Realmes, he caused a standard to be made, in the
which was painted D. Iohn of Portugall his brother, a prisoner, standing at a grate in the
Castle of Toledo, causing it to bee displaied in the city of Lisbone, in view of all the
people, who were alreadie mutined, which made them to arme with great resolution
against the forces of Castile, who soone after came and presented themselues before

the city, in which army there were one thousand launces complete, and great store of
foote led by D. Pedro Fernandes Cap de Vache maister of Saint Iames, Don Pero Fernandes
de Valasco,Lisbone besieged by the Castillans. Chamberlaine to the King, and D. Iohn Pero Ruis Sarmiento Gouernor
of Galicia, and soone after the King came thether in person: where they laied seege,
and planted their batteries, but without any great effect, for the beseeged made no
^allies.
In the meane time they of Ebora, who were of this rebellious faction, receiued into
their towne Don Nugno Aluares Pereira, a valiant captaine, being but foure and twenty
yeeres old,Castillans defeated by them of Ebora. vnder whose conduct they came and affronted D. Iohn Alphonso of Guznian,
Earle of Niebla, D. Diego Gomes maister of Alcantara, and D. Fernand Sanches of
Touar high Admirall of Castile, beeing sent by the King D. Iohn with great troupes against
them, but they put them to rout, and slue the maister of Alcantara, and many
men of marke. The King bearing of these newes, sent supplies with D. Iohn Pero Ruis
Sarmiento, Gouernor of Galicia, to whom they of Ebora, with their captaine D. Nugno
Aluarez, presented battaile againe courragiously, but they retired themselues, fearing
the like should happen vnto them as had done to their companions, and came vnto the
King, who thinking that hee might seize vpon Coimbra without any contradiction,
in the castle whereof was Goncal Telles, Earle of Neyua the Queenes brother, and
Goncal Mendez of Vasconcello, her vncle, hee marched thether, leading with him D.
Beatrix his wife, and the Queene Donna Leonora: but the Castillans name was so hatefull
vnto the Portugals, with the behauiour of the widow Queene, as they were not only
kept out of the towne, but also they of the castle shot at them, whereas the King and
Queenes were in great daunger of their liues.
The King Don Iohn beeing discontented with the Queene Donna Leonora,King Iohn and the Queenes of Castile and Portugal repulst from Coimbra. for that
her neerest kinsmen holding the fort of Coimbra, had so shamefully repulsed him, hee
great iealous that shee had sone intelligence with them: wherefore hee caused
her to bee taken, and sent into Castile to the castle of Tordesillas, from whence shee
neuer returned more into Portugall, yet shee by commaundement from him was serued
and honoured there as a Queene' and dying was buried at Vailedolit, in the Monastery
of the religious of the Order of the Merced. The King beeing returned to
the campe before Lisbone, hee prest it all hee could, both by water and land, but
by reason of the infection which crept into his campe, and the comming of the sea armie
of Portugal, which approched neere vnto the city, together with the resolution
of the beseeged, who then made many sallies vpon the Castillans, hee aduanced
little. There were some propositions of as accord made; but Don Iohn maister of the
Auiz beeing resolute to haue the sole gouernment of the Realme of Portugal, and
Agarbe, vntill that the King of Castile had children by Donna Beatrix his wife, there was
nothing concluded.
The Infant Don Charles, heire of Nauarre, came to the King Don Iohn at this seege,
to aide and fortesie the King his brother in law: but the plague continuing with great
losse of the Nobility, which died miserably at this seege, the King Don Iohn was constrained
to rise and to returne into Castile, hauing put good garrisons into those places
which had receiued him. The losse of his men in this voiage was very great, and therefore
hee had reason to giue some rest vnto the remainders, and prepare for the raising of
a great army for the next yeere.
 Before wee returne into Portugall, it is expedient to make mention of the affaires
of Nauarre,Nauarre. and shew how the Infant Don Charles (who came newly to the campe
before Lisbone) was deliuered, whom wee had left prisoner in France. During the
life of Charles the fifth, the French King, there was no meanes of reconciliation betwixt
him, and his brother in law Charles King of Nauarre, wherefore his sonne
Charles continued prisoner vnto the Kings death, which happened in the yeere of
our Lord 1380. leauing his sonne Charles the sixth of that name, successor to the
Realme, beeing young and vnder the gouernment of Iohn duke of Berry, and Philip
duke of Bourgondie his vncles, who shewed themselues so opposite to the King of
Nauarres poursutes, for his reconciliation and the deliuery of his sonne, which made

them resolue to poison them both, wherefore hauing found an Englishman, fit for
his intent,Detestable enterprise of King Charles the bad. they sent him to the French court with poison, to kill these princes, promising
him many great rewardes, if hee did effect it giuing him also good store of gold in
present.
This English man did what hee could, to execute his charge, but his often comming
and going into the dukes kitchins, beeing also an Englishman, made him to bee
suspected: so as beeing taken with his poulder, and hauing confessed that hee was sent
to kill the dukes of Berry and Bourgongne, for that they opposed themselues agaisnt
the deliuerie of the Infant of Nauarre, hee was beheaded. This errour did very much
displease Charles King of Nauarre not knowing by what meanes to recouer his sonne.
During the Kings discontent, there fell out a quarrell betwixt fillot of Gramont,
Lord of Gramont, on this sides the mountaines, and Don Ramir Sanches of Asiayn,(...) Sanches of Asiayn.
for matters concerning their Princes seruice: Don Ramir was accused by the Lord of
Gramont, to haue attempted against the Kings owne person: so as comming to the
triall of armes, by the order of Iudges, deputed by the King, and these Knights appering
to fight at the day appointed, the importunity of the kinsmen and friends of either
side was such, as the combate was staied, and they both remained at the Kings
pleasure, who caused them to bee put in prison, the Lord of Gramont in the castle
of Saint Iohn of Pie de Port, and the other in Tafalla. The Lord of Asiayn hauing
beene some space prisoner in this towne, beeing garded by certaine souldiars Picards,
hee found meanes to corrupt them, so as hee seized vpon the captaine of the castle,
and the place it selfe.
This accident beeing bruted through the towne, the Inhabitants went presentlie
to armes and beseeged the castle, the which by the reason of one of those souldiars
which had betraied the captaine and the place, was recouered, with Don Ramir
Sanches of Asiayn, and his confederates, whose head the king, as well for this, as
for many other former offences, caused to bee cut off, and forfeited his goods, and the
souldiars were euery one executed that had assisted him to seize vpon the sort, or castle
of Tafalla. As for Fillot of gramont hee continued three yeeres in prison, and then
was deliuered.
In the meane time the King Don Charles beeing in great care for the detention of
his sonne in France, hee caused Don Iohn King of Castile to bee sollicited by Donna
Leonora his daughter in law, who was retired into Castile to the King her brother,
who was strictly allied and a friend to the French,Deliuery of Prince Charls in sauor of the King of Castile. to bee a meadiator for the deliuery
of the Infant Don Charles. The King of Castile desirous to gratefie his sister, imployed
his best meanes to the young French King and his Gouernors, and did so importune
them by messages, letters and Ambassages, as they set the Infant Don Charles of
Nauarre at libertie. As for Don Pedro his younger brother, and Donna Maria his
sister, they had beene released before. Don Charles soone after his deliuery hee
went into Nauarre, to the great content of all the Nauarrois. It was a great hatred
and mallice in the King Don Charles the Father, for to attempt such a wickednesse against
the princes of France, who shewed their generositie, in consenting to the deliuerie
of the Infant, who was not guilty of his fathers offence, who in all his actions
was of so sower a disposition,Disposition of D. Charles King of Nauarre. as hee could not pursue his rights, nor treat of any
affaires with other princes, but in choller, and disdaine: and whereas he could not obtaine
and bring to passe what hee pretended, hee had recourse to synister and vnlawfull
practises, desiring to reuenge himselfe of those that did him any iniury, by what
meanes soeuer.
Hee had one sister called Donna Agnes, married vnto Gaston Earle of Foix, called
Phebus, who for the wrongs hee had done vnto her husband, was verie ill intreated by
him, so as shee was forced to leaue his companie, and to retire into Nauarre, who
was soone after followed by a sonne shee had by him, called Gaston, where both beeing
receiued, and honoured by King Charles, conferring often with his sister of her
husbands bad vsage, hee conceiued such a hatred against the Earle Gaston, as hee

drew young Gaston their sonne to poison his father and gaue him a venimous poulder
to that end, telling him that it was a remedy to make him change the hatred hee bare him
and his mother, into loue. This young Nobleman beeing simple and ill aduised beleeuing
what the King his vncle had said vnto him, he returned into Foix, to his father,
with an intent to season him some meate with this poulder,Mis^rable death of young Gaston of Foix. but hee could not so play
his part, but casting the poulder into the meate, it was perceiued by the cookes, or otherwise
discouered: wherefore the Earle commanded his sonne and onely heire to bee
taken, causing him to die miserably in prison, so as after him hee left none but bastards,
which did not succeed in the Earledome of Foix: one of them was Bernard, who serued
Henry the second King of Castile, in the conquest of the realme against the King D. Pedro,
and was rewarded by him, and endowed with lands and Estates in Castile, from
whom descended the dukes of Medina Celi, or Zelim, who by the mothers side belong to
the bloud of Castile, according to the order which followeth.
D. Fernand de la Cerde,Begin^ing of the house of Celi or Zelim. eldest sonne to D. Alphonso the Wise, or the Philosopher, left two
sons, D. Alphonso and D. Fernand: of D. Alphonso, married into France, came D. Lewis
Earle of Clermont, and D. Charles, or Iohn, according vnto some, Constable of france,
and Earle of Angoulesme. D. Lewis Earle of Clermont married in Andalusia, Don
Leonora of Guzman, daughter to D. Alphonso Peres of Guzman, and was Lord of Hulua,
and of Port Sancta Maria, and other lands in the right of his wife: of which marriage
issued Don Lewis, Don Iohn, and Donna Isabella de la Cerde. This Donna Isabella was by
the King Don Henry the second, being setled in the realme of Castile, married to Bernard
bastard of Foix, and had in dowry Medina Celi, with the title of an Earle; of them
came D. Gaston, surnamed de la Cerde, leauing the name of the house of Foix, and Bern.
Hee was the second Earle of Medina Celi, and married Donna Mencia of Mendoca,
daughter to Don Pedro Concales of Mendoca, a great Nobleman in Alaua: by her hee
had one sonne called Don Lewis, who was the third Earle of Medina Celi, and married
with Donna Iean Sarmiento, daughter to Diego Peres Sarmiento, from whom came Don
Gaston de la Cerde the second, and forth Earle of Medina Celi, who married Donna Leonora
of Mendoca, daughter to Don I^igo Lopes of Mendoca, Marquis of Sentillana,
from whom descended Don Lewis which succeeded him in the Earldome, in whose time
it was made a Dutchy, D. Lewis married Donna Anna of Nauarre and Arragon, base
daughter to D. Charles, Infant of Nauarre and Arragon. This is the Genealogy of the
house of the dukes of Medina Celi.
Such, as wee haue sayd, were the actions of Charles King of Nauarre, whom in the
end God strooke with a Leaprosie,King Charles a Leape^. which made him to leaue all care of the affaires
of this world, and to giue himselfe to workes of piety, according to the manner of
those times, which was to build chappels, to ordaine Masses and Anniuersaries for his
deceased parents, and to adde rents and giue entertainement to Clergy men and
Priests which did the seruice: but aboue all hee labored to liue in peace with Christian
Princes.
The Infant Charles beeing come into Nauarre about the beginning of the warre betwixt
Castile and Portugal, the King Don Iohn demaunded some supplies of souldiars
out of Nauarre, to lead with him, wherevnto the King of Nauarre consented willingly,
remembring the good Offices hee had done with the French for his sonnes liberty,
whom hee sent well accompanied to this warre, beeing vnable to goe in person, by
reason of his indisposition. The Infant made some stay with his wife Donna Leonora,
who was in Castile, and then passing on, hee came to the King beeing incamped before
Lisbone, where hee staied not long, the King Don Iohn beeing forced to raise the seege
by reason of the plague which ruined his armie, and returne into Castile, as wee haue
said, dismissing the Infant his brother in law, with all loue and content.
 The yeere 1385. beeing come,Portugal. Affaires of the King of Castile succeed well in Portugal. the King D. Iohn preparing to returne into Portugall,
hauing alreadie sent some ships and gallies against Lisbone, hee had newes that the
souldiars which hee had left in Saint Iren, had defeated some troupes of Portugal, whose
leaders were the maister of the Knights of Christus, and the Prior of Saint Iohn, by
reason of which victorie, many places within the Realme had planted the Standard of

Castile: werefore he made all the hast he could to enter into Portugall, beeing loth to
let slip this occasion. Before his departure, he propounded in councell to put his brother
the Earle of Gijon to death: but he was perswaded by many graue reasons and examples
to forbeare.


Don Iohn Master of Auiz, a bastard, the first of
that name, and tenth in number, chosen
King of Portugal.
IN Portugal his aduersaries lost no time, but prouided for all that was necessarie for a
future warre:Assembly in Portugal for the election of a king. for the better managing whereof, they were of aduise to choose one, who
should haue soueraigne authoritie among the rest: for the effecting whereof, the Noblemen
and Knights of the Realme, who reiected the gouernement of Castile (among the
which the most eminent were, Don Iohn Master of Auiz, and Don Nugno Aluarez Pereira)
assembled in the cittie of Coimbra, and there held a king of Parliament, whither also
came the Deputies of the townes of their partie: there it was debated whether they
should choose a Regent or a King. Many were of opinion they should choose a king, and
gaue their voices, some to Don Iohn Master of Auiz, base sonne to the king Don Pedro:
others sayd, it was more reasonable to make Don Iohn lawfull sonne to the king don Pedro,
king, who was prisoner in Castile.
Many considering the wrong they did therein to the Queene D. Beatrix, were of opinion,
that it was better to seeke some good accord with Don Iohn king of Castile her
husband: whereunto some did oppose, saying, that the Queene D. Leonora Telles De Meneses
could not be lawfull wife to king Fernand, hauing taken her by force from her husband
Laurence Vasques of Acugna: and therefore D. Beatrix was no more legitimate then
the Master of Auiz, and that being both base, it were better to acknowledge him for king,
then her: that as for the Infant D. Iohn a lawfull son, to whom the crowne of Portugal did
rightly belong, that his deliuerie was vncertaine, and therefore they must not stand vpon
it, the Portugals hauing then need of a free king, to oppose himselfe against the attempts
of Castile who sought to oppresse them.D. Iohn master of Auiz chosen king of Portugal. This opinion preuailed, and they all consented
to choose D. Iohn Master of Auiz, for king of Portugal, and so he was proclaimed eighteene
moneths after the interregne, in the Monasterie of Saint Francis of Coimbra,
in Aprill, this yeare 1385. the people crying out, that it was that king which was prophecied
by the Infant at Ebora, whereof mention was made.
This king is called by the Portugals (of happie memorie) for that he freed the country
from the Castillans, whose gouernement was exceeding hatefull vnto them: he was also
surnamed the Bastard, for that the king D. Pedro begat him out of marriage. He shewed a
great courage and generositie in the reception of this great charge, to defend a Realme
diuided, against the power of the king of Castile, being allyed to France and Nauarre: but
a Royaltie, and the liberty of his country, did sufficiently requi^e the perill and danger
which he did vndergo. The king D. Iohn being aduertised of that which the Portugals had
done at the Estates at Coimbra, he sent D. Pedro Tenorio Archbishop of Toledo, a Portugal
borne, with some troupes, to retaine in their fidelitie such as followed his party in
Portugall. This Prelate entring the countrie by Viseo, made a miserable spoile where hee
past,Castillans defeated at Troncoso. for which he smarted soone after, beeing incountred and defeated by the Portugals
nere to Troncoco. On the other side, the inhabitants of Algarbe, following the new kings
partie, had seazed vpon the towne of Mertola, and as they bettered the castle, they were
suddenly charged by them of Seuile, and put to flight: the leader was D. Aluar Perez of
Guzman, Gouernor of that city, a yong Nobleman of 18. years of age: and in a manner
at the same instant the Castillans tooke a great quantitie of victuals and munition, which
they of Yelbes and Estremos kept in Ronchez. The king of Castile resoluing to beseege
Lisbon againe, had prepared many vessels both for war, and to carrie victuals, the which

came neere vnto Lisbon, and kept the mouth of the riuer, so as no man could go in, or
come out from Lisbone.Exploits of the new king of Portugal. All this did not daunt the new king of Portugal, but hauing
speedily assembled his forces, he went to assaile Guimaranes, the which was valiantly defended
by Arias Gomes of Silua a Portugal, who was affected to the king of Castile, yet
it was yeelded vppon a good composition: after which he tooke the cittie of Braga, pont
de Liuan, with other places and forts.
Whilest these things past in Portugal, the king of Castile, burning with desire to see
himselfe king of this other Realme, made great preparations, and notwithstanding that
his Councellors vppon his returne into Portugal were of diuers opinions, yet he yeelded
to those that perswaded him to enter: wherefore leauing Donna Beatrix his wife at Auila,
he marched towards Portugall, and layed seege to Cillorico de la vera, where during
his stay, considering the doubtfull euents of warre, especially against Rebels, the vsurpers
of Realmes, who shew themselues alwaies violent, hee made his will, and sent it to the
Arch-bishop of Toledo to keepe, by the which hee ordayned many things, the which
shall be specified in the life of his sonne and successour Don Henry, which bred much troble
within the Realme, for that hee gaue out, whilest he liued, and after the making of
this will, that he meant to alter many things, and yet he made no other will, whereof the
chiefe witnesses were Don Pedro of Arragon, sonne to D. Alphonso the first Constable of
Castile, and Marquis of Villena, D. Iohn cap de Vaca Bishop of Coimbra, Peter Goncales of
Mendoca, Lord Steward of the kings house, Diego Gomes Manrique great Gouernour of
Castile, Pedro Lopes of Ayala, Standard-bearer of the Order of the Band, with Tello Goncales
Palomeque, and other men of marke. The Castle of Cillorico was taken, from whence
the armie marched towards Coimbra, burning all the villages thereabouts, and so passing
on by Leyra, they came and camped at Soria, whereas a messenger sent by Don Nugno
Aluarez Pereira newly created Constable of Portugal, came vnto the king, intreating him
in his masters name, to auoyd the battell, which should besoone presented vnto him, and
that it might be there would be meanes to come to some good accord, if it were earnestly
sought.
This was but the Constables pollicie, to stay the king of Castile, for that the king of
Portugalls armies was not strong enough to encounter their enemies: whereunto the king
made a gracious answer. The new king of Portugal was in Arbantes very pensiue, seeing
himselfe much inferiour to his enemie, who besides the Castillans, which were in great
numbers, had many Noblemen of Portugal in his armie, the which beeing within a
league and a halfe of that of Portugal, there were many things propounded, to end their
quarrels without a battell, but they were all without effect: for the king of Castile finding
himselfe strong, had a desire to fight, promising vnto himselfe all aduantages, and yet his
captaines were of another opinion; and among others, Monsieur de Rie, Chamberlaine to
the French king, and his ambassador with the King of Castile, a Gentleman 70. yeares old,
and a captaine of great experience, saying, that his men were wearie, and it was late, and
that the Portugall army, in the which were 2200. men at armes, and 10000. foote, were
camped in a place of strength from whence, if he would haue patience, hee should see
them soone dislodg for want of victuals, beeing aduertised that they had not any meate,
but for that night: that vppon their dislodging he should haue better oportunitie to fight
with them: and if they went to affront them in the place where they were, it was likely they
should reape more shame then honor. But notwithstanding all these reasons, hee would
needes fight:Battel of Aliubarot and the Castillans defeated. wherefore the Castillans hauing put their armies in battell, they were receiued
couragiously by the Portugals, along the mountaines of Maos, in the fields nere vnto
the village of Aljubarot, where at the first charge, notwithstanding all the indeauour
of the Portugall fore-ward, they gaue ground to the Castillans: but the new king of Portugal
flying thither with his squadron, not onely fortified his men, but also charging the
enemie with great courage (who thought they had won all, and fought without order, and
carelesly) he brake them, and put them to a shamefull flight with great slaughter, the king
of Castile himself being in danger, who fled 11. leagues that night vnto S. Iren, where he
arriued at the breake of day in great perplexity, and then recouering the sea-shoare, hee
caused himselfe to be carryed to Seuile.
Polydore Virgil in his Historie of England, failes in the discourse of his battell, saying,
that Edmond Earle of Cambridge was there with good troupes of English for the new
king of Portugal against him of Castile, and giues the honour of the battell to the English:
but it appeares by all the Spanish Writers, (more credible in matters of Spaine
then strangers) that the comming of the Earle of Cambridge into Portugall was not at
that time, but in the life of g Fernand. Neither were there any French troupes for the
king of Castile, as some Authors make mention. Vpon the place of battell there was an
Hermitage built to S. George, who is held to be the patron and protector of Portugal, as
also of Arragon, as S. Iames is of Castile: and this victorie is more celebrated by the Portugals,
then any they euer had: for that by reason thereof they were freed from the subiection
of Castile:Noblemen of Castile slaine in the battell. it is called the battel of Aljubarote, or of S. George. In this battell there
dyed many Noblemen of Castile; and among others Don Pedro of Arragon, sonne to the
Constable of Castile. D. Iohn of Castile, Lord of Aguilar del campo, son to D. Tello, L.
of Biscay, D. Fernand of Castile, a yong Prince, son to D. Sancho, Earle of Albuquerque,
Peter Dias Damas Prior of S. Iohn, D. Diego Manrique, Gouernor generall of the fronter
of Castile, D. Pedro of Mendoca, a Lord Steward of the king of Castiles house, Don Iohn
Fernandes of Touar high Admiral, D. Diego Gomes Sarmiento Gouernor of Galicia, Pedro
Carillo Marshall of Castile, D. Aluar Goncalis of Sandoual, and his brother Fernand Goncales,
D. Iohn Ramir of Areillan, Iohn Ortiz of Cueua, Goncalo of Cerbantes, Ruy Braue, and Fernand Carillo: and of the Portugals following the partie of Castile, D. Iohn Alphonso
Sello,Portugals slain of the Castillans side. Admirall of Portugall, brother to the Queene D. Leonora, D. Pero Aluarez Pereira,
Master of the Order of Calatraua, and his brother D. Diego Aluarez Pereira, brothers to
D. Nugno Aluarez Constable of Portual, Goncal Vasques of Azeuedo, with Aluar Goncales
his sonne, and others. There dyed also in this defeate Monsieur de Rie Ambassador for
the French king, and his Chamberlaine. Great was the spoile of the Castillans campe, and
many prisoners caryed away by the Portugals, who hung vp their ensignes and other spoils
for trophees in the Monasterie of Alcouaca, and in the chiefe church at Braga, and at the
carmes at Lisbon, the which were afterwards founded by the Constable D. Nugno Aluarez
Pereira, and among others the royal Standard of Castile was taken. As for those which
escaped the battell, some gathered themselues together in S. Iren, and some of them
recouered Castile, as well as they could. They of S. Iren hauing past the riuer of Tayo,
with D. Goncal Nugnes of Guzman, Master of Alcantara, (who was since made Master of
the Calatraua) they ioyned with the forces of Nauarre and France, which the Infant Don
Charles of Nauarre brought to the king of Castile his brother-in-law, but too late: wherfore
they returned all together into Castile, hauing made all the spoile they could in the
Realme of Portugal: the which by this battel of Aljubarote remained assured for the king
Don Iohn the tenth in number, and the first of that name, hauing attained to that royall
dignitie, to the which in the beginning he did not aspire, and that with the consent of the
Nobilitie and States of the countrie.
The end of the sixteenth Booke.




SEMPER EADEMTHE SEVENTEENTH BOOK
of the Generall History of Spaine.

The Contens.
1 DOn Iohn Master of the Knights of Auiz, chosen king of Portugall, the tenth in number,
and the first of that name.
2 Continuation of the warre betwixt Castile and Portugal, in the which the English assisted
the one, and the French the other.
3 Whence the title of a Prince in Spaine growes.
4 D. Charles the third of that name, and 31. king of Nauarre.
5 Marriage of Prince Henry of Castile, and Katherine of Lancaster.
6 Exploits of D. Iohn King of Portugal in Castile, and a truce betwixt the two Realmes.
7 Tyrannous priuiledges of the Nobility of Arragon. Troubles in Sardynia, Estates at Moncon:
policie of Sybile Queene of Arragon: authoritie of the Iustice Maior.
8 Contention betwixt the Arragonois and Angeuins for the rights of Majorca Adoption of
Lewis of Anjou by Queene Ione the first of Naples, who sold Auignon to the Pope, and what
followed.
9 D. Iohn the first of that name, and 14. King of Arragon, his acknowledgement to the Pope
in Auignon, during the Schisme, Estates in Arragon.
10 Marriage of Don Martin of Arragon, sonne to the Infant Don Martin, with the heire
of Sicily.
11 Lisbon made an Arch-bishopricke.
12 Estates of Castile at Guadalajara. Orders concerning souldiers and iustice. Erections of
Dukedomes and other Decrees.
13 The stay of D. Leonora Queene of Nauarre, wife to D. Charles the third in Castile, disliked:
and the causes thereof: her excuses, and the Kings instance to haue her returne.
14 Institution of the Order of the holy Ghost in Castile.
15 Farfanes, a race of Christian Affricans, and the death of the king D. Iohn.
16 Coronation of D. Charles king of Nauarre, and the ceremonies thereunto accustomed.
17 D. Henry the third of that name, 17. king of Castile, and 38. of Leon Carriage of D. Pedro
Tenorio Arch-bishop of Toledo.
18 Marriage concluded betwixt D. Fernand brother to the king of Castile, and the heire of
Albuquerque.
19 A testamentarie Decree made by the deceased king D. Iohn, and the resolutions taken by
the Noblemen of Castile, for the quiet of the Realme.
20 Troubles among the Lords of the Councell, procured by the Arch-bishop of Toledo.
21 Seditious Preachers, incensing the people against the Iewes.
22 Continuance of troubles in Castile, and meanes made by the Pope to pacifie them.

23 Persecutions, thefts, and murthers committed vpon the Iewes, by the instigation of Preachers.
24. Confusions in Castile, entertayned by great men, for priuate respects.
25 Troubles in Guipuscoa against Collectors. Assembly in that prouince, and Articles of their
vnion, and preseruation of their priuiledges.
26 Meanes to reconcile the disordered passions of the Noblemen of Castile, but of small effect.
27 Treaties betwixt Portugal and Castile, and the practises of Don Frederic Duke of Beneuent
28 Mutinie at Zamora.
29 Treatie of peace betwixt Portugal and Castile: practises to pacifie D. Frederic. Factions,
partialities, etc.
30 Truce for 15. yeares betwixt Castile and Portugal.
31 Troubles continued in Castile by the Archbishop of Toledo, and a peace mediated by the
P rinces allies.
32 D. Henry the third is declared of full age at 14. yeares.
33 Discouerie of the Ilands of the Canaries.
34 Estates of Castile at Madrid. Marriage of the Infant D. Fernand. Discontent of D. Frederic
Duke of Beneuent.
35 Meanes to make D. Leonora Queene of Nauarre returne to her husband. Her practises
with the Noblemen rebelled, Contemners of the Kings young yeares.
36 A foolish triall of the truth of Religion by armes, and what succeeded.
37 Meanes held by the king D. Henry to draw the Princes and Noblemen rebelled, to their
duties. The Queene of Nauarre subdued. Warre against the Earle of Gijon, and accord betwixt
the king and him.
38 D. Pedro de Luna chosen Pope at Auignon, who by his obstinacie continued the Schisme.
39 The Queene of Nauarre sent to the king her husband.
40 Ieanne Countesse of Foix, wife to Mathew of Castelbon, reiected by the Arragonois from
the succession of the Realme of Arragon.

Kings ruling in Spaine mentioned in this
seuenteenth Booke.

Portugal.
10 D. Iohn Master
of Auiz. 1. 31


Nauarre.
D. Charles 3. 14


Arragon.
D. Iohn 1. 17


Castile and Leon.
D. Henry 3. 83.

SVCH as are to rule ouer Nations, and especially where there is great
store of Nobility, must be carefull how to gouerne their affections, left
by their too great libertie they force their subiects, either in regard of
their honours, or for their iust defence to haue recourse to armes. For it
is often seene when a warre is kindled, and that they which are tearmed
Rebels, haue gotten any aduantage, they do no longer containe themselues
within the bounds which at the first they had propounded, but
they proceed, and seeke a totall change of the Estate, thinking they cannot be otherwise

assured: or that the superior whom they would make their equall (which is the true effect
of armes) can euer be a true and perfect friend. Such are chiefly possessed with this iealousie
and distrust, as are to contend with men that are giuen to reuenge, and of base dispositions,
as women and effeminate persons, who seeke to maintaine their excesse by the
name and credit of a Soueraigne degree wherin they are placed, thinking that this greatnesse
doth purchase them a priuiledge in any thing they do, and giue authoritie to their
cruelties and impieties, wherin they please themseules, although they be many times deceiued.
It is most certaine, and verified by infinit examples, that neither force, nor greatnesse
can auayle a Prince, whose bad life makes him hatefull to his subiects. And on the
other side, there is no such guard, as the loue of subiects, the which is conceiued by the
opinion of vertue. Opinion followes the effects: and therefore a Prince should be alwaies
carefull what opinion men should haue of him, and remember still the precept of the
wise: That a man must be alwaies such as he would be esteemed. If he be giuen to iniustice
and voluptuousnesse, with the oppression and ruine of his subiects, let him assure
himselfe, that good men wil hate and detest him and his actions, and estrange themselues
from him: so as he shall remaine ingaged among flatterers, where many times he is smothered,
but at the least he is for euer infamous. The name of Rebell is iustly detested, but
the common people iudge by the euents, and the wife and well-aduised according to the
causes.
And there is nothing more certaine, whatsoeuer the flatteres of Court say, that
neuer any Conspiracie against a soueraigne Magistrate was durable, or could take roote,
if the hearts of the subiects were not formerly distracted by the Princes owne guilt and
excesse. But if it pleaseth God to strirre vp some noble courage, who imbraceth the publike
cause, then shall a tyrant hardly auoid his due punishment, whereof Spaine affoords
vs assured proofes in Don Pedro King of Castile, and D. Leonora Telles of Meneses, widow
to king Fernand, and Regent of Portugall, who by her vnchastnesse and tyrannie, as we
haue formerly related, ruined her selfe, and did frustrate Donna Beatrix her daughter of
that Crowne, setting it vppon the head of Don Iohn the Bastard, Master of the Order
of the Knights of Auiz her enemie, who had no lawfull right, and (it may bee) neither
thought nor hoped to attayne vnto it, but when hee saw himselfe armed and followed.
 This King notwithstanding his victorie, was alwayes called the Master of Auiz, by the
Castillans,Portugal. who would not aduow him for king, to the preiudice of their Queene Donna
Beatrix and the king D. Iohn his aduersarie intitled himselfe king of Castile, Leon, Portugal,
Toledo, Gallicia, Seuile, Cordoua, Murcia, Iaen, Algarue, Algezire, and Lord
of Lara, Biscay and Molina, some few daies after this great victorie wonne by the Portugals.
S. Iren yeelded, with all that countrie, there remaining not any place on this side the
mountaines, that held for the king of Castile. At Saint Iren D. Nugno Aluarez of Pereira
Constable of Portugall, was made Earle of Oren, in recompence of his valour and faithfull
seruice: and the new King D. Iohn vsed great bounty vnto all the Castillans that were
prisoners,Liberalitie of the new king of Portugal. sending them home free without any ransome. After that time, leauing the
conduct of the warre to his Constable, he employed his time in workes of pietie, and giuing
thankes to God for the victorie which he had giuen him, that is, he went in pilgrimage
on foote to Saint Mary of Oliuera of Guimaranes, which is foure daies iourney
from S. Iren. In the meane time the Constable passing Guardiana, entred into Castile with
two thousand lances, comprehending the light horse and genets, and good troupes of
foote, where he got another victorie against the Castillans: whereof the king his master
was aduertised being at Porto; who to reward the Constable, and to incourage him to do
better, he gaue him the title of Earle of Barcelos. This Constable, besides that hee had
in him the chiefe parts and ornament which make Nobility, hee was issued from one of
the noblest families in Portugal: for his father Don Aluar Goncales had beene Prior of S.
Iohn, or of Crato, as the Portugals say, being at the battaile of Salado or Tarriffa, wonne
against the Moores, in the yeare 1340. by the kings D. Alphonso the 12. of Castile, and D.
Alphonso the fourth of Portugal, he founded our Ladies Church of Fleur he Rose, and
the strong castile of Ameyra, with the pallace of Bonjardin.

This Prior besides many other children (for some say he had 32.) had this Don Nugno
Aluarez of Pereira, Constable of Portugal, a great and famous Captaine, the founder
of the house and state of Bragance: whose mother was called Heira Goncales of Caruahal,
he being borne in the yeare 1360. At the age of seuenteene yeares he married the widow
of Vasco Goncales Barosso, a chiefe Nobleman in Portugal: of which mariage besides two
sonnes which dyed young, issued one daughter named D. Beatrix, who was heire to her
fathers Estate, and was married to D. Alphonso of Portugal, base sonne to this king Don
Iohn, who was borne whilest he was Master of Auiz, of a mistris of his called D. Agnes,
she being afterwards made commandresse of Santos. This Constables Grandfather was
D. Goncalo Pereira, Arch bishop of Braga, a Prelate of a royall magnificence in his manner
of liuing, and exceeding bountifull. The Constable hauing charge to continue the
 war, whilest that the King D. Iohn was otherwise employed touching the gouernement
of the realme, he past into the Prouinces beyond the mountaines, where hee reduced to
the new kings obedience, Chaues, Bragance, Almeyda, and other places, which held yet
for the Queene D. Beatrix, and her husband the king of Castile, so as there remayned few
which were not made subiect, and brought vnder the iurisdiction of Don Iohn king of
Portugal.
But for that such quarrels are not determined by one or two victories gotten by the
weaker,Iohn King of Portugal cals the English into Spaine. against one more mighty, the new king duly considering all this, and with good
counsell, thought it necessarie, that D. Iohn king of Castile should be quite ruined, that he
might the better maintaine his new conquest, and to this end he called the English with
the pretext of apparent right: for as we haue sayd, the Duke of Lancaster, Vncle to king
Richard the second then raigning, hauing married D. Constance daughter to the deceased
king D. Pedro of Castile, pretending that the Realmes of Castile and Leon did belong to
him, and carried the title and armes. Wherefore Ambassadors were sent vnto him, to
summon him to come into Spaine, with assurance and promise, that he should be assisted
with all the forces and meanes of Portugal, protesting that if he let slip this goodly occasion,
besides the losse, he should reape dishonor, and be scorned of all the world. On the
other side, D. Iohn king of Castile, hauing beene visited by the Infant of Nauarre, who
came expresly to Seuile, and receiued letters from Pope Clement at Auignon, full of consolation,
he came to Vailledolit, and there held a generall assembly of the Estates of his
Realmes,D. Iohn King of Castile cals in the French. from whence he sent Ambassadors to Charles the sixth iof French king, intreating
him to send him succours to recouer his Realms of Portugal and Algarbe, his wiues
patrimonie, which were detayned from him by a bastard rebell. Thus these two princes
called in strangers to the preiudice of Spaine.
The Duke of Lancaster passed into Portugal with fifteene hundred Lances, and as many
Archers on foot: and Lewes Duke of Bourbon the kings vncle, was sent out of France
with two thousand Lances in fauour of D Iohn king of Castile. The English armie running
along the coast of Galicia, tooke sixe gallies of Castile, and came to the Groine on
Saint Iames day, in the yeare 1386. In the meane time the king of Portugal had led his armie
into Castile, and beseeged the towne of Coria, but could not take it. It was then
that he sayd, He had need of the good Knights of the round table, to which hee was answered
by Men Rodrigues of Vasconcellos, that they had also need of a king Arthur, who
could distinguish and reward good Knights: the which the king. Iohn turned to a ieast
and would not seeme to be touched.
At this seege hee had newes, that the Duke of Lancastets armie was landed: wherefore
hee presently dislodged, and came to receiue and entertaine them at pont du Maure,
neere vnto the Towne of Porto: The Duke had brought with him his wife Donna Constance
of Castile, and two daughters, the one by her, whose name was Katherine, the other
by his first wife, called Philippe. At this enterview, a marriage was treated betwixt
the King Don Iohn and that Ladie Philippe, who was then deliuered into the hand of the
King, her future husband, and soone after they were married, with such pompe as consorted
with their persons and dignities.
Hauing consulted concerning the warre, they beganne to spoyle the Countrie of Galicia,
where they took some places: but the heat of the plague, which consumed both the

countrie people, and the English armie stayed the course of these conquests. The King of
Castile bad fortified and manned cittie of Leon, Benauent, and other places in Gallicia
with good Garrisons, vntill he went to field, vppon the comming of those succours
which hee expected from France and Nauarre. In the meane time hee caused the Duke
of Lancaster to bee dealt withall about an Accord, but hee continued constant in his demands
to haue the Realmes of Castile and Leon: Whereuppon the King sent Ambassadours
vnto him, to let him vnderstand publikely, that should content himselfe with
that which hee had done, and not to vexe the Countrie any more: and that if hee pretended
any wrong were done vnto him by him, hee defied him to the combate, man to
man, and hee that vanquished should bee King of Castile: but vnder hand the Ambassadours
had charge to propound other conditions vnto him, whereuppon they came to
treate of a marriage betwixt the Infant Don Henry of Castile, and Catherine the Dukes
daughter, by Donna Constance, with many offers, which were not accepted, at the least
it did not then appeare so^ for the Portugals hauing ioyned with the English armie, they
marched farther into the territories and iurisdictions of Leon,An. 1387. in the yeare 1387. and beseeged
Benauent in vaine, they passed by Villalobos, Pialas, and Valderas, the which they
took: from whence returning by Ciudad Roderigo, they retired into Portugal, wanting victuals,
and beeing pressed with the plague: and moreouer they had newes that the French
supplies had passed Nauarre, and were entring into Castile: the which aduanced the
conclusion of a peace betwixt the King of Castile, and the Duke of Lancaster, the which
was made at Troncoso with these conditions.
That the Infant Don Henry the eldest sonne of Castile,Accord betwixt the king of Castile and the Duke of Lancaster. should marrie Catherine, the
daughter of the Duke of Lancaster, and of his wife Donna Constance of Castile, for whose
dowrie the king D. Iohn shold assigne certaine places: That the cittie of Guadalajara,
with the townes of Medina del campo, and Olmedo should be giuen to the Dutchesse D.
Constance, to enioy the reuenues thereof during her life: That the king should pay sixtie
thousand pounds sterling to the Duke, and to D. Constance his wife at certaine dayes: and
moreouer, foure thousand pounds pension during their liues, and the longer liuer of
them. In consideration whereof, of the Duke of Lancaster and Donna Constance should renounce
all rights, actions and pretensions which they challenged to the Realmes of Castile,
Leon, and their dependances, and that the places taken in Gallicia should be restored.
This accord beeing thus concluded, the Duke retired himselfe into the towne of Porto,
where he made his accord also with the King of Portugal: to which treaties it seemes
the Duke had bene forced by the plague, which had consumed two third parts of his men.
The duke of Lancaster then hauing for the fruites of his voyage married his two daughters
to two kings, he returned into Guienne in the yeare 1387. not very well satisfied with
the King of Portugal, nor the king with him. Of the marriage of Don Iohn king of Portugal,
and of D. Philippe, there came this issue: first, they had a daughter called D. Blanche,
which dyed young in Lisbon:Genealogie of Portugal. then the Infant D. Alphonso borne in the yeare 1391. at S.
Iren, who liued not aboue two yeares: their third child was Don Edward borne in the
Towne of Viseo, and succeeded in his fathers Realme. Moreouer, they had the Infant D.
Pedro, borne at Lisbon in the yeare 1392. he was Duke of Coimbra, and Lord of Mont
Major the old, and of Amero: then the Infant Don Henry, of whome the Queene was deliuered
at Porto, he ws Duke of Viseo, and Master of the Knights of Christus, and it was
he which first discouered the Ilands of Madera in the Ocean sea. Of this marriage also
came Donna Izabella, borne at Ebora in the yeare 1397. who was Dutchesse of Bourgogne,
and Countesse of Flanders, wife to Philip Duke of Bourgondie: by her was built
the Monasterie of Prolonga neere vnto Sintra, of the Order of Saint Ierome. They had
besides these the Infant Don Iohn, who was master of Saint Iames, borne at Saint Iren in
the yeare 1400. hee was Constable of Realme, and beeing married with Donna Izabella
daugther to Don Alphonso Duke of Bragance his bastard-brother, he ws grandfafather
by the mothers side to D. Izabella Queene proprietarie of Castile and Leon. And
in the end the king Don Iohn and Donna Philippe his wife had the Infant Don Fernand,
borne in the yeare 1402. at Saint Iren, who was Master of Auiz, a zealous prince to the
Christian Religion, and full of charity.

Before that the king Don Iohn came vnto the Crowne, being but Master of Auiz, he
had two bae children by a Geneltwoman called Donna Agnes, that is, Don Alphonso,
who married the daughter and heire of Don Nugno Aluares Periera, Earle of Oren and
Barcelles, and Duke of Bragance, called D. Beatrix: and one daugther named also Donna
Beatrix, who was married to Thomas Earle of Arondel. This is the issue of the King
D. Iohn the first of Portugal, who had yet a quarrell for the Realme with the King of Castile,
the poursuite whereof was deferred for a time: for the king of Castile beeing to performe
his promise to the Duke of Lancaster,French succors fruitlesse for Castile, and to pay him great summes of money, he
made choice at that time to send backe the French forces, and not to suffer them to stay
in his countrie, giuing them part of their entertayment, and good assurance for the rest.
Then hauing held an assembly of the Estates at Birbiesca, by reason the plague was at
Burgos, he propounded the neede he had of money to pay the English Duke: and therefore
he attempted to impose a generall Tribute vppon the Clergie, Nobility, and third
Estate without exception, wherein he was croft, beeing forced to seeke some other expedient.
From Birbiesca he came to Soria, and then to Calaorra, where he heard the French
Ambassadors, and sent others to Bayone, to the Duke of Lancaster, to confirme their
accord: and then it was concluded anew, that from thence-foorth the Infant Don Henry
should be called Prince of the Asturia's, and his wife Princesse,Title of Prince first giuen in Spaine to the Kings eldest sonne. after the manner of England,
whereby the kings eldest son is called Prince of Wales: and then began the custom
to call the eldest of Castile Princes, whom before they called Infants, and it is an error to
entitle them Princes of Castile or of Spaine: for they are not called Princes for any other
occasion, but that they haue the Asturia's for their portion and intertaynment, the which
was made a principality, first in this D. Henry, and his wife D. Catherina: to the patrimony
of which principality, Iaen, Vbeda, Bacca, and Andujar haue beene since annexed. It is an
error also to thinke that this title of principalitie is giuen to the Asturia's of Ouiedo, for
that in that region ws the beginning of the recouerie of Spain: for it proceeds not from
any thing else, but from this marriage betwixt Henry of Castile, and Donna Catherina of
Lancaster. Before the king Don Iohn of Castile parted from Calaorra, Charles the third
king of Nauarre, brother-in law to king Iohn, came to visit him, with the Queene Donna
Leonora of Castile his wife.
This prince had succeeded king Charles the Bad his father,D. Charles the 3. of that name and 31. of Nauarre. in the yeare 1386. beeing 
dead at Pampelona of a Leprosie, as the Spaniards say, and the French Histories, of a disease
he got by his incontinencie, whereof he languished long. It is he of whom they write
that the Phisitions hauing him in cure, applying Aqua-vitae to restore him, they set fire
of it, which tooke hold of the bed, so as he was burnt and could not be releeued: Others
say, that he was sowed vp in a sheet steeped in Aqua-vitae, and that the Surgeon seeking
to cut the threed, holding a waxe light, the sheet was suddenly set on fire and burnt the
king: but howsoeuer, hee ended his daies in great sicknesse at Pampelona, in the yeare
1386, the fiue and fortith yeare of his raigne, hauing raigned 73. His body was interred
in the Cathedral church of that cittie, where the heart of the Queene his wife lyes, who
dyed in France in the yeare 1378. his bowels were buried at Saint Maries of Ronceuaux,
and his heart at S. Maries of Vxue. The same yeare he dyed, his daughter Ieanne was first
married to Iohn of Montfort Duke of Brittany, by whom she had foure sonnes, and three
daugthers, and afterwards to Henry King of England. Before his death he pacified the seditions
which they of Pampelona had raised among themselues, causing the authors to
be punished: among which, one of the chiefe was called Andrew of Turilles, who was
executed.


Charles the 3. of the name, the 31. King
of Nauarre.
THis Charles succeeded to the Realme of Nauarre, beeing called the Noble, for his
bountie, affabilitie, and other vertues, which made him to be esteemed by all Christian
Princes his neighbours, and generally beloued of all men. Hee was 25. yeares old,
when he came to the Crowne. At the decease of his father, he ws at Pennafiel in Castile,
with the King D. Iohn his brother-in-law, of whom he tooke his leaue with infinit teares,
vppon the receit of these newes, And such was the loue of singular affection which the
k. of Castile bare him, as from the beginning of his raigne he granted him full restutution
of the townes and castles of Tudele, S. Vincent, Viana, Guarda, Estella, Miranda, Larraga,
and other places, which were in deposit^ since the last pacification made with Don
Henry king of Castile, although the ten yeares capitulated were not yet expired: moreouer
he forgaue him 20000. doublons of gold, which had beene lent to the decease king
his father, and did discharge him of the promise of two thousand pounds sterling, which
he had made for the libertie of Perlas of Tortui an Englishman beeing prisoner in Castile.
Such and greater was the bountie of D. Iohn king of Castile to Charles the third king of
Nauarre his brother-in-law, and likewise to the Queene D. Leonora his sister, and to their
daugthers who were at that time in Castile: and moreouer hee caused the king to bee accompanied
into his Realme by the chiefe of his Nobility, who beeing come to Pampelona,King of Nauar during the schism adheres to the Pope of Auignon.
and there receiued with great pompe and ioy by the Estates of the Realme, the first
act he did for the gouernment thereof, was to resolue with his subiects and Councellors,
to adhere to Pope Clement the 7. remaining at Auignon, and to reiect Vrbane the sixt, as
the kings of France of Castile had done, yet with this protestation, that hee would not
separate himselfe from the holy Apostolike church, but obey that which shold be decreed
by a generall Councel concerning the Schisme. Then he sought the allyance of neighbor
Princes, sending ambassadours vnto them, especially into Arragon, where he made a
league with the duke of Girone, the heire of Arragon, and treated the marriage of Donna
Ieanne his elder daugther, with D. Iames eldest sonne to the Duke of Girone, haunig an intent
to vnite the crowne of Nauarre to that of Arragon, for that hee had no sonnes, but
this marriage tooke no effect.
In the beginning of the yeare 1387.Genealogie of Nauarre. Queene Leonora his wife fell into a long and languishing
sicknesse, which bred much trouble betwixt them. He had by her these children
following: D. Ieanne the eldest, who was wife to Iohn of Foix, sonne to Archambault: D.
Maria who dyed a virgin at Pampelona, D. Blanche, who was Queene of Sicily and Nauarre,
D. Beatrix Countesse of Marche, wife to Iames of Bourbon, and D. Izabella, who
dyed also a mayd. After these fiue daugthers they had Don Charles their sonne, who dyed
a child, and Don Lewis which liued but sixe moneths. These be the lawfull children of the
king Don Charles the third. He had out of marriage one sonne called Godfrey of Nauar,
who was Marshall of the Realme, and Earle of Cortes, and one daugther named Donna
Ieanne of Nauarre, who was married to Inigo Ortiz of Estuniga, sonne to Diego Lopes
of Estuniga.
Of these children mention is made in this kings testament, the which is in the Cathedrall
church of Pampelona, in the which his breethren are also named: Peter Earle of
Mortaing, and Leon a Bastard, and Donna Maria also a Bastard, married to the Earle of
Denia.
In the yeare 1387. the warre betwixt Castile and Portugal beeing hote, the
French troupes, led by Lewis Duke of Bourbon to the succour of King Iohn, past through
Nauarre, where they were furnished with all necessaries by King Charles, who after their
retreat and accord made by the king of Castile with the Duke of Lancaster, hee came to
Calaorra, as we haue sayd, to reioyce with the King Don Iohn, for this pacification.

Returning to the treatie of this warre, we say, that the Princesse Catherine hauing followed
her father into Guienne,Castile. was after a new confirmation of the accord, sent by him 
to Fontaraby, and there deliuered to the Prelates and Noblemen deputed by the king of
Castile, to receiue her, who conducted her to Palence, where the marriage betwixt her
and the Prince D. Henry was solemnized, he being but ten yeares old, and shee nineteene.
The Dutchesse of Lancaster, mother to the Princesse, past afterwards into Spaine, and
came to the king D. Iohn her cousin at Medina del campo, whome among other presents
she gaue a rich Crowne of gold, saying, that the duke her husband had caused it to
be made, hoping to be crowned king of Castile: but seeing they were agreed otherwise
then he expected, it was his due, and therefore she presented it vnto him. The king receiued
it with great ioy, and required the Dutchesse with other gifts of price, putting her in
possession of the townes promised by the accord, whereunto he added Huete. The Dutchesse
past afterwards to Guadalajara, hauing had a promise of an enterview betwixt the
king and the Duke of Lancaster her husband, at Fontaraby or Bajone. The king stayd not
long to come to Victoria for this meeting, and the Dutchesse went before the draw her
husband to Fontaraby: but he excused himselfe by reason of his apparent indisposition,
and vpon the sharpenesse of the winter, which made the passage of S. Adrian difficult. D.
Pero Lopes of Ayala, Bishop of Osma, and Fernand of Illesca were sent vnto him from the
king to whome he propounded an allayance which he desired to make betwixt Castile and
England, and to induce the King D. Iohn to quit that of France, whereof the ambassadors
excused their master. The interview being hindred by this occasion the king D. Iohn came
to Segobia, to giue order for the warre of Portugal, which had beene somewhat quenched
since the duke of Lancasters retreat: for the pacifying whereof Fernando of Illesca,
of the Order of the preaching Friars, and the Kings Confessor, had laboured much, but
could not conclude any thing.
The King of Portugall falling sicke in this pallace of Cordal, gaue some hope that matters
would turne fauourable for Castile:Portugal. for his sicknesse was so violent, as all men despayred
of his life: whereat the Queene Donna Philippe was much grieued, so as shee was
deliuered of her first child before her time, which made them doubt shee would not
haue any more: but midwiues rules are not alwaies true; for she had afterwards those children
whereof we haue made mention.
Friar Fernand and others, who treated a truce betwixt these two kings, being not able 
to effect that which they pretended,Exploits of the K. of Portugal in Spaine. the King of Portugal being recoured, he entred into
Galicia, and spoiled the countrie, and tooke Tuy by Intelligence, and Saluaterra: after
which spoiles the Confessor Fernand returned into Portugal, and renewed the treatie,
where he wrought so, as he yeelded to a truce for sixe yeares, in the yeare 1389.1389. by the
which Tuy, Saluaterra, and all the Portugals had taken from Castile, was yeelded. By this
pacification which continued long. Don Iohn King of Portugal, had meanes to settle him
selfe in his Royaltie, and wholly to exclude D. Beatrix.
As for the affaires of Arragon, we find that before that war betwixt Castile and Portugall,
the king D. Pedro being very old,Arragon. married the fourth time with D. Sibilla, widow to
Artal of Fosses, whom he caused to be crowned at Sarragossa, in the yeare 1381. whether
the Estates wer called to the effect. At the which the Noblemen which had subiects that
were no Gentlemen, maintained that they had soueraigne power ouer them, their goods
and liues, and that it had beene long practised in Arragon. This action was begun vpon
the complaints made by the Inhabitants of Anzanego, against D. Pedro Sanches of Latras
their Lord: but it was prohibited, and a sentence was giuen by way of prouision, that
the Noblemen shold enioy the rights which they had accustomed, although they were
not according to the common law or written law: and although they could not shew any
priuiledges bgranted vnto them in that behalfe, yet should it not be lawfull for the king to
draw them into question, for any violence or bad vsage done vnto their subiects, but the
punishment of any excesse done by the superiors to their subiects, should be left to God,
the which gaue way to infinit wickednes. These Estates ended with trouble and confusion,
for that D. Briande of Luna, hauing left D. Lopes Ximenes of Vrrea her husband, and married
D. Lewis Cornel, these two Noblemen went to armes, and kept the field.

As for the Estate of Sardynia, the Arragonois wer in a manner reduced to despaire, by
the Sardynians and Geneuois their adherents: but if falling out, that Hugh Iudge of Arborea
had,(...). by reason of his tyrannies, beene cruelly murthered by his subiects, the partie
of Arragon began to be in more esteeme. Brancaleon of Oria came then to Moncon, to
the king D. Pedro, hauing a pas-port. The Estates beeing there assembled, he was receiued
and honoured with the title of Earle of Moncon: this Lord had married Leonora sister to
Hugh of Arborea. In the meane time the Sardynians desirous to shake off the Arragonois
yoake, and to submit themselues to the Geneuois, held all the Ports of the Iland: whereas
Leonora of Arborea, wife to Brancaleon, ioyning with the Geneuois, made her selfe head
of the partie: which made the king to stay Brancaleaon, notwithstanding his pas-port, wherupon
he was sent into Sardynia, and kept prisoner in the castle of Cailleri, during the life
of the King Don Pedro.
There was another assembly of the generall Estates called at Moncon,Estates in Arragon. in the yeare,
1383. where as the Infant D. Martin, Earle of Xerica and of Luna, in the name of the Estates,
made complaint of many concussions and violences which had beene committed
throughout the Realme, beeing countenanced by the Duke of Girone, the kings eldest
sonne, and Gouernor of the Realme: from whose counsell proceeded many vniust ordonances,
charges and exactions vppon the people, by the which the Estate was decayed.
He sayd moreouer, that some of the Dukes Councell had secret intelligence in Castile,
and other places, yea with the Rebels of Sardynia, with Lewis Duke of Anjou, the Geneuois,
and with the enemies to the Arragonois partie in Sicily; and had fauoured the attempts
of the Infant of Majorca, who had some yeares before made roades into Cattelogne
and Arragon: requiring that information might be made, and the offendors punished:
the which the king ordayned. Whereupon the Vicount of Roa, Gaston of Moncade,
Americ Scintilla, Iohn Bellera, and Fernandes of Heredia, Bishop of Vic, were commanded
to leaue the assembly, being suspected: the which bred great troubles and seditions,
and some Noblemen were chased from Court, and from the Duke of Girones house, who
by reason therof grew in bad tearmes with the King his father, and worse with the Queen
D. Sibilla, his mother-in-law, by whom he was poursued, as the king D. Pedro his father had
beene by D. Leonora of Castile. The marriage with this Infant D. Iohn Duke of Girone
made then with Violant daugther to the Duke of Bar, against his fathers liking, who desired
he should marry the heire of Sicily, put him more into disgrace, and gaue the Queen
meanes to keepe him out of fauour: so as the gouernment of the Realme was taken from
him: and for that Don Iohn Earle of Ampurias, with other Noblemen were discontented,
the king sent to ouer-runne the territorie of Ampurias, and to beseege Chastillon,
where the Earle was, who was forced to flie by sea into Prouence. The Earle of Vrgel was
for the same reason poursued in hostile manner: and such were the practises of Queene
Sibilla, as the Prince with his wife D. Violant, were foeced to retire themselues farre from
Court, to Castelfolit, where as the Bishop of Vic, and the Vicounts of Lisle and Roccabertin
kept him company. Among other persons of the Dukes house, whom the king hated,
was D. Constance, widow to D. Francis of Perillos, who was the guardien of all his
secrets, and of the Dutchesse Violant his wife, wherefore the king did still command that
she should be chased away.
By reason of the Duke of Girones absence from Court, Queene Sibilla had meanes
to giue many places, and to aduance her friends, yea she got a promise, by oath, from the
chiefe townes of Arragon, to defend her life and goods against the Duke; who, notwithstanding
the king had forbidden him to meddle with the affaires, carried himselfe still for
Gouernor of the Realme: and the King seeking to force him, hee appealed to the Iustice
Major of Arragon.Authority of the Iustice Maior of Arragon. This Magistrate beeing of great authoritie, stayes all matters of fact,
vntill he hath giuen sentence vpon the appeale or oppositions. In the meane time the
Earle of Ampurias, who had fledde to Auignon, and had employed all his meanes and
friends to leauie men in France, arriued in the Countie of Rossillon with eight hundred
horse, whereof Iohn Earle of Boullen was the Leader: But the King beeing aduertised of
his desseins, had so well prouided for all things, as the French seeing that all exploites of
warre would be very difficult, returned, and abandoned the Earle of Ampurias.

This King D. Pedro being in peace with Castile, and other potentats of Spaine, he ws
then to contend for the Island of Majorca,Pretension of Iewis Duke of Aniou. the country of Rostillon and Cerdagne, Colibre
and Valisper, with Lewis Duke of Aniou, sonne to Iohn the French King, who pretended
a right to those Estates, by vertue of a cession made vnto him by the Marquesse
of Montferat, sister and heire to Don Iames the last King of Majorca; but they came not
to armes for these things, the Duke of Aniou being diuerted by the affaires of Italy, hauing
being adopted by Ieanne Queene of Naples, and crowned King of Naples, by Pope
Clement the seuenth, in Auignon. Who passing into Italy with an army, died there. So
as Don Pedro King in Arragon, was freed from the feare of warre, which hee expected
from France.
About that time, or little before, Frederic the third King of Sicile, whom they surnamed
the Simple his sonne in law, died, without any heires male, who leauing but one
onely daughter,Pretensions of the King of Arragon to the realme of Sicile. called Donna Maria, hee pretended that the Realme belonged to the
crowne of Arragon, according to the testament of Frederic the second King of Sicile,
who was of the house of Arragon, and also for other rights which he pretended. By ths
Testators will, if there were no issue male of the direct line, the women were excluded
from the succession of the Realme, willing that it should be vnited to the crowne of Arragon,
vpon these pretensions the King Don Pedro made great instance in the court of
Rome and in the end made Cession of the right which hee pretended to his sonne, Don
Martin of Arragon, Earle of Xerica and of Luna, and afterwards duke of Momblane.
The quarrels and troubles which threatned Sicile, were afterwards ended by accord, in
the time of King Iohn his sonne, vpon condition that Donna Maria, heire of the realme,
should marry the sonne of Don Martin, called also Don Martin. This D. Martin the
father was Constable of Arragon. King Frederic had had diuerse quarrels with Ioane
Queene of Naples who pretended the realme of Sicile to belong vnto her: but there was
an accord made in the yeere of our Lord 1372. and since their accords were ratefied and
confirmed by Pope Gregory the eleuenth, in Auignon, by whose authority the two
realmes did for many yeeres after continue diuided.
The King D. Pedro being come to the fiftith yere of his raign,Exactions vp the Clergie. in the yeere of our Lord
1386. for the which there were great feasts and ioy at Barcelona, hee would also giue the
prelats and churchmen cause to remember it: for contrary to all custome, hee exacted
throughout his realme great summes of money vpon the Clergy. Afterwards this
King being afflicted with griefe, by reason of the seditions of his owne, beeing charged
with yeeres, and wholy gouerned by his wife Queene Sibile, hee died: wherevpon the
Clergy, to the end they might terrefie Kings,Death of D. Pedro King of Arragon. that should that should attempt to impaire their reuenues,
said, that he hauing violently vsurped the patrimony of Santa Tecla of Tarragone,
by the perswasion of Queene Sibile, he ws cited by the proctors of that church, to appeere
before the Tribunall seat of God, within three score daies after, to giue an account
for that fact, and that the last day of the assignation hee died: But it is to bee presumed
that it ws time for him to leaue this world, for hee was aboue three score and twelue
yeeres old, and had raigned fifty one. Hee died at Barcelona in the yeere of our Lord
1387. where he was laied in the Cathedral church, and was afterwards transported to the
royall Monastery of Santa Maria of Poblete.


D. Iohn the first of that name and foureteenth
King of Arragon.
TO the Realmes and soueraigne Estates of the deceased King, succeeded his sonne D.
Iohn,D. Iohn King of Arragon acknowledgeth the Pope at Auignon. the first of that name, the eldest of his brethren, the which Queene Sibile his
mother in law, sought by all meanes to hinder, and had almost perswaded the King Don
Pedro her husband, to reiect him from the crowne: but beeing giuen to vnderstand that
such an iniustice procured by a mother in law, against his eldest sonne might cause great
troubles after his death, he gaue way to the Order of nature, and Don Iohn was King of

Arragon. It is remarkable that at the same time both in Castile and Portugal, there
were Kings raigning of the same name. The King Don Pedro his father was a louer of
learning, he entertained the vniuersity of Lerida, and erected one in Huesca. Hauing giuen
to his sonne Iohn the towne of Girone with the title of Dutchy, then beganne
the custome, that the eldest of Arragon are called Dukes of Girone, as the eldest sonne
of France is called Daulphin of Vienne.
The new King Don Iohn beganne his raigne with the persecution of his mother in
law, who like vnto Donna Leonora of Castile, was retired from Barcelona, seeing the
death of the King D. Pedro approch, and had put her selfe into Zaroca, where shee was
soone beseeged, and taken by Don Martin of Arragon the Kings brother. And for that
the King Don Iohn lay languishing in his bed, and could not be eased by the art of Physicke,
this widow Queene was accused to haue caused him to bee poisoned, wherevpon
she was strictly examined, and all those of her houshold. All the goods the deceased
King had bestowed on her, wer made for faite, and giuen to the Queene raigning Donna
Violant. The Regency or Gouernment of the realme was giuen to don Martin, who
also was made duke of Montblanc, by letters giuen at Grenoillez neere to Barcelona.
The preuiledges, lawes and statutes of that city were confirmed by him at his comming
to the crowne,Pope Clement at Auignon acknowledged in Arragon. and hee did advow Pope Clement at Auignon, by the councell of the
Cardinall Don Pedro de Luna, and the perswasion of the Queene D. Iolant or Violant,
and he of Rome was declared vnlawfull, as made by force.
All grants made by the King D. Pedro since the yeere 1365. were reuoaked. Such
were the first acts of this King: a Prince weake both in body and minde, giuen to idlenesse,
hunting, dauncing, musicke and poesie, with so violent an affection, as they say,
hauing at his comming to the crowne, sent a solemne Ambassage to the French King,
to treat of the affaires of their Estates, the chiefe Article was to require the French
King, to giue him certaine Poets of Prouence and Languedoc which did florish in those
times in their vulgar tongue, not much differing from the Cattelan, whom hee receiued
as a singular fauour, honoured them, and assigned them great pensions, instituting for
the loue of them schooles of their poesies. And to fill vp the measure of his imperfections,
he had no care but to please his wife, vnto whom he was wholy vowed and addicted.
The Generall Estates beeing assembled at Moncon, the Deputies nad charge to require
the seuerity of the ancient manners, and the restoring of martiall discipline, and that the
honour of armes might bee reuiued, wherevnto the King had no inclynation. But aboue
all,Estates require reformation of the King and Queenes houses. that the houses and courts of the King and Queene should bee reformed, and
reduced to the fashion and manner of their ancestors, and that some base and vicious
persons should be chased away. There were certaine Articles presented against D. Carrocia
of Villaragut, one of the Queens Ladies, in whom she wholy trusted, and gaue her so
great credit with the Kings, as the honors and offices of the realme, were distributed acording
to her aduice and will, without reason, measure, or regard of merit. The chiefe
which sought this reformation, were Don Alphonso of Arragon, Marquis of Villena,
D. Iames his brother bishop of Tortoca, D. Iames of Prages, D. Bernardin of Cabrera,
Vicont of Lisle and Roa, D. Pedro Queralt, D. Iohn Bellera, and Raymond of Bages; against
whom their banded some of the Kings Mignons, so as all the realme was in combustion
and armes: but the Kings weakenesse was at that time profitable; for it kept them from
fighting; and hauing graunted a safe conduct to D. Alphonso, D. Lopes Ximenes of Vrrea,
Iohn Ximenes of Vrrea, and other their complices, they met with Don Martin the
Kings brother, had conference vpon the reformation, and agreed vpon many Articles.
Amongst others Don Carrocia of Villaragut ws chased from the Queenes court, with
a prohibition neuer to conuerse with her, or any of the Princes or Princesses. During
these contentions Bernard brother to the Earle of Armaignac entred into Cattelogne,Vagabond troupes spoile Cattelogne.
with an infinit number of souldiars French and English, who forraged and spoiled all
they incountred, Bernard their leader hauing no other reason, but that he sought meanes
to entertaine the souldiars. This danger forced the King to arme, and to march against
these vagabond troupes, whereof some being found scattered and out of order,
were defeated, and the rest forced to repasse into Languedoc.

The affaires of Sardynia had beene compounded about the time of the death of the
King D. Pedro, so as the lands held by Marian Iudge of Arborea, were restored to Leonara
his daughter, and Brancaleon of Oria her husband deliuered out of prison; and betwixt
the King of Arragon, and the common weale of Genoua, there was such an order
set downe, as the Siegneury of Genoua might not keepe nor arme any gallies, but in
the ports of Genoua, Sauona, Albenga, and Porto Venere, in the riuer of Genoua, and
the Ligustike sea, and in other seas at Pera, Capha, Famogosta and Scio, Valencia, Majorca,
Monorca, Iuiza, Caillerij and Alguer; so as a peace was entertained in the Island
of Sardynia, about the yeere of our Lord 1389. when as the marriage was accomplished
betwixt D. Martin sonne to the Infant D. Martin duke of Momblanc, and Mary, daugther 
to Frederic the third King of Sicile; a subiect of new warre,Marriage of D. Martin with Mary the heire of Sicile. by reason of the factions
and partialities which were in that Island, amongst the Noblemen, some allowing and
others disliking this marriage of their Princesse, who according vnto some, had beene
taken out of the castle of Cattane, where by the will of the deceased King her father, shee
was entertained in the gard of Artal of Alagon, and conducted as it were by stealth into
Cattelogne, by them of Clermont.
The new Kings being come into Sicile, with the duke of Momblanc, who serued as a
Tutor, being accompanied by D. Bernard of Cabrera, Don Artal of Luna, allied to the
King, and many other Noblemen of Cattelogne, Arragon and Valencia, and with a good
army, they were receiued by them that held their party in the towne of Trapani, from
whence they sought to reduce the factions, some by mildnesse, and others by rigour. The
towne of Palermo was yeelded, vnto him by the Earle of Modica, and there they were
crowned; from whence they made a progresse, so as they were acknowledged throughout
the whole Realme, yet there were often troubles renued through the naturall lightnesse
of that nation.
This yeere 1389. died Pope Vrbain,Portugal. residing at Rome, in whose place the Cardinalls 
of his faction did choose Boniface the ninth, called before Peter Tomacel, a priest, Cardinall
of the title of Saint Anastasius. In the yeere of our Lord 1390. the citie of Lisbone
was made an Archbishoprike by him at the request of the King D. Iohn, who followed
the Pope at Rome,Lisbone made an Archbishoprike. and not him, at Auignon. To it ws giuen for Suffragan the bishop of
Coimbra for that time: and in processe of time the church of Portalegre was made a Bishops
seat by Paul the third.
The same yeere the King of Castile hauing assembled his Estates at Guadalajara,Castille. being 
thrust on with a continual desire to be King of Portugal, wherevnto he was animated by
the Queene Donna Beatrix his wife, hee propounded to his councell, that hee had resolued
in that assembly to giue ouer the Realmes of Castile and Leon to his sonne Don
Henry, together with his other Lands and Siegneuries, except Seuile, Cordoua, Iaen,
Murcia,Estates of Castile, and all the Moores frontiers: reseruing also for himselfe the third part of the reuenues
of the church, granted vnto him by Pope Clement, saying, that he was aduertised,
that vpon this renunciation the Portugals would receiue him for their King: for they
had no other reason to oppose themselues, and to reiect him, but for that they could not
endure to see the realme of Portugal vnited to that of Castile. But his councel did aduise
him not to doe a thing so dishonourable for himselfe, and not profitable for his
countrie, in quitting his fathers realmes, to thinke to get a strange one, which was held
by a resolute enemy: shewing him by reasons and examples that he did hazard the losse
of both, and to bee a fable to the world for euer: Hee did willingly heare and beleeue his
councellors, and supprest this desire, enioyning them silence. In this assembly he granted
a generall pardon to all those that had offended him during the last warres, except
the Inhabitants of Tuy, who had yeelded to D. Iohn King of Portugal, and to his brother
D. Alphonso Earle of Gijon, to whom he would shew no mercy. The Estates graunted
him a greater subuention of money then euer any King before him had. Beeing required
the Deputies of the Prouinces he reformed the expences and superfluities of his
court, and reduced his ordinary troupes of horse, for the gard fo the realm, to foure thousand
Launces, fifteene hundred Genets, and one thousand crosbowes one horsbacke:
he ordained that euery launce should furnish two horses of seruice, and the Genets in

like manner. To the Launciers and Genets he assigned fifteene hundred Marauidis by
the yeere, and sixe hundred to the crosbow men, a coine which was then very currant:
granting them moreouer many great preuiledges and immunities. There also it was
decreed, that the King should send vnto Pope Clement, to intreat him that in the prouision
of the benefices of Spaine he would not admit any that were not borne in the country,
by reason of the great inconueniences which did grow thereby: vpon the complaints
made by the Clergy especially of Guipuscoa, Biscay, Alaua and Galicia, by the
Bishops of Calaorra and Burgos,Vsurpations vpon the Clergis. for that many lay men, vnder collour of right of Patronage,
had seized vpon many lands, tents and other goods of the church, by reason
whereof the diuine seruice was ill attended in many places of those Prouinces, and buildings
were ruined, and there were not Ornaments necessary for the places and persons
dedicated to holy workes.
The king being not well instructed of those rights, left matters in the Estate they were,
least he should cause some tumult before it were iustified. Besides this, the subiects complained
that many Noblemen hauing iurisdiction presumed to carry themselues in a
manner like Soueraignes, both in ciuilland criminall causes: it was therefore ordained,
that it should be lawfull for any one of what estate or quality soeuer, finding himselfe
grieued by the Chastellans, or other subalternall Iudges, to appeale to the Iudge, royall.
In the behalfe of the Bobility it was required,Lands of the crowne giuen in recompence of ser^^^es. that it would please the King to take
away the clause mentioned in the testament of the deceased King Don Henry, touching
the succession in the collaterall line to lands of the crowne, giuen by him to Noblemen
and Knights which had followed and serued him in the conquest of those
Realmes: wherevnto answere was made* that euery one should enioy that which had
beene giuen him by the deceased King his father, but hee would in no sort reuoke
that clause.
In this assembly of Guadalajara the truce was confirmed with Granado, the Moores
Ambassadors being come thether, who brought vnto King Iohn many rich presents.
There also the King gaue vnto the Infant Don Fernand his sonne, who was Lord of Lara
the title of Duke of Pegnafiel, hauing a ducale crowne set vpon his head, with great
sollemnity, the which was made like a bande round the vnited, without any floures
surpassing one an other, which did belong onely to Kings, though now it bee otherwise
vsed, euerie one seeking to countenance his authority, by vsurping of title and
marke beyond their due. Hee also gaue armes to the said Don Fernand, that is, a
castle and Lion with the royall Bands of Arragon, for that hee had him by the Queene
Donna Leonora of Arragon his first wife.Duke of Benauent the first, duke in Castile. He was the second Duke in the Realme, for
that hee of Benauent was the first. These and other things were decreed at Guadalajara,
whether Ambassadors came from Charles the Noble, King of Nauarre, to sommon
The Queene Donna Leonora, sister to King Iohn, to returne into Nauarre, to the King her
husband, but they could not preuaile.
This Princesse beeing two yeeres before fallne into a great sicknesse, and finding
 no helpe by physicke,Nauarre. shee was aduised to change the ayre and to goe into Castile,
hoping shee should recouer her health sucking the breath of her natiue soile. For
this cause the King Don Charles her husband, who loued her much, conducted her
himselfe vnto the King Don Iohn her brother; with whom shee had continued some
daies in feasting and sportes in the towne of Nauarre, and then hee returned and left
the Queene Donna Leonora to remaine there, vntill shee had recouered her health.
The Queene was not onely well entertained by the King of Castile her brother,
but her whole houshold was defraied, and shee was bonoured as much as might bee.
Beeing thus at her ease, shee soone recouered her health againe: but as her bodie
was in better disposition by this change of ayre, so her minde was much impaired;
for were it for the commodities and delights shee receiued in this stately and magnificent
court of Castile, or for some other occasion, shee resolued to remaine and
keepe there still,D. Leono^a Queene of Nauarre light and vnkinde. and to returne no more into Nauarre, grounding this vnreasonable
resolution vpon the badde vsage shee said shee had receiued from the King her
husband, who did not loue her said shee, but was hard vnto her; that her reuenewes

were not welll paied her: that the Knights and other Castillans which did serue
her, were not respected in Nauarre, with other such womanish excuses, with whom
vanity in an other place was of more esteeme, then honesty in her owne house: the
which the King Don Iohn did heare with a brotherly affection, but with great discontentment,
knowing, or at the least doubting, that they were but collours without truth.
King Charles hearing that shee was in good health, hee wrote diuerse times vnto her, to
haue her returne, but shee excused herselfe, finding sometimes one let, sometimes an other:
so as in the end knowing her intention, hee imployed the Cardinal Don Pedro de
Luna a Cattelan, but without effect: for the Queene seeking to capitulate with the
King her husband, she propounded such vnreasonable conditions, as they were forced
to take an other course.
Shee had continued two yeeres in Castile, the King her husband vsing all friendly
meanes to draw her home, forbearing to cause himselfe to be crowned King of Nauar,
for the desire hee had to celebrate this ceremony in her company, and to haue her
crowned with him: but seeing that hee lost time in writing and sending messengers, hee
sent Don Ramires of Areillan and Don Martin of Ayuar, Ambassadors to the King of
Castile, being at the Estates at Guadalajara, to intreat him to enterpose his authority
with his sister Donna Leonara, that she might returne into Nauarre, and liue with the
King her husband, as God and honesty did require. The King gaue a courteous audience
to the Ambassadors, and offred to doe his dutie therein, the which he performed:
for going the day following to his sisters lodging,Admonition of the King of Castile to his sister the Queene of Nauarre. he let her vnderstand that it was iust and
reasonable, seeing she was in health, and her husband required it, that she should goe vnto
him; and the better to perswade her he promised that if she had not entertainement
fit for her royall State in Nauarre, he would impart some of his vnto her, and giue her a
good company of Knights and Ladies to conduct her into Nauarre, with that honour
which did belong vnto her. She hauing no iust reason to contradict the King her brother,
answered him in these termes  Sir I am much bound vnto you for many respects,Excuses of the Queene of Nauar.
besides the good councell it pleaseth you now to giue me, wherein I know you seeke
my honour and proffit. The King my Lord and husband, must also be mindefull of
your bounty and brotherly loue, vsed towards him in many matters of great consequence,
for my sake: for if you had not imploied your selfe, at my request to the French
King, who held him prisoner, it may bee hee should haue found greater difficulties
in his deliuery. Being come into Spaine he knowes what honours, and what guifts
he hath receiued from you during the life of the King his father: And when he came
to succeed in the Realme of Nauarre, all the world hath seene how liberally you haue
restored him the places, which you might iustly haue retained in Nauarre, being left
in deposito at the peace made betwixt you fathers: Moreouer you haue discharged
him of twenty thousand doublons of gold, and of his promise for the English Nobleman,
who was a prisoner taken in warre, being two thousand pounds starling: presently
after the death of the deceased King his father, you caused mee to goe out of your
Realme, into his country, whether I carried whatsoeuer I had good and precious, to appeere
the more honourable amongst the Nauarrois, with the Ladies and Gentlewomen
of my traine, borne of great families, all things tending to the honour and profit of the
King my Lord: But in steed of acknowledging all this (it greeeues me to speake it, and I
cannot speake it without blushing) hee hath not receiued me, nor intreated mee as hee
ought. He appointed me certaine prouisions monthly, for the entertainement of my
house, my state and attendants, whereof I haue beene alwaies so ill paied, as I haue beene
often forced to ingage my iewels, to content my seruants, who complained often vnto
me. Besides falling dangerously sicke in Nauarre, and almost dead, I was duly informed,
that my languishing proceeded from certaine hurtfull herbes which were giuen mee by
a physition a Iew, sent by the King my Lord to cure me. I doe not thinke that these
herbes were giuen me by the commandement of the King my Lord, or with his priuity,
and God forbid it should once enter into my thought: but I finde it very strange that
hauing complained, he did not vouchsafe to punish this bad physition, as hee deserued.
Seeing my indisposition to continue I intreated him to giue mee leaue to come into

Castile, to your court, whereas God be thanked and your good reception, I haue recouered
my health. But during my aboade here, in this ease, I haue beene aduertised, that
many flatterers and bad seruants to the King my Lord and mee, haue charged me with
many slanders, the which hath much incensed him against me, so as I know not how my
Estate, or my life can be well assured in Nauarre, if I returne as you perswade me: wherefore
I beseech you Sir in the name of God, and for the brotherly loue you beare me,
that you would be pleased to consult with your good and faithfull councellors, vpon
my returne to the King my Lord and husband, whom I loue and honour, and to prouide
for the safety of my life and honor: for if I should fall into any danger, or receiue any
indignity, you should haue interest therein.
These words accompanied with a mournfull countenance, did much mooue the
King D. Iohn, who promising his sister that he would haue a care of her affaires, he conferred
with his councell, imparting vnto them the speech which the Queene of Nauarre
had vsed, causing them all to sweare that they should giue him good and faithful councell
touching her returne to the King her husband. The councell hauing duely consulted
of this businesse they came vnto the King, and told him, that they had found it expedient,
that hee should cause King Charles his brother in law, to sweare to vse the Queene
Donna Leonora his wife well and honourably, and for assurance thereof he should leaue
some places of Nauarre in deposito, in the hands of some Knights that were not suspect
whereby they thought the Queene might bee well assured to returne into Nauarre, and
to liue freely with her husband. The King of Castile allowed of this aduice, and hauing
caused his sister Donna Leonora to he called, he acquainted her therewith, exhorting
her to follow it, the which seemed nothing pleasing vnto her, yet shee yeelded, hauing
no iust cause of contradiction: wherefore the King D. Iohn hauing caused the Ambassadors
of Nauarre to bee called, hee would haue returned them home with this answere;
but they replied that the King their maister would take any oth, but to deliuer places into
a third mans hand, hee would not doe it: giuing many pertinent reasons, why hee
should not yeeld to it.
After many allegations and disputes herevpon, the Queene said, that if it pleased the
King her husband to sweare and promise to Pope Clement, the French King, and to the
King her brother to vse her well, she would returne. The Ambassadors answered, that
the Cardinal D. Pedro of Luna had already propounded such an oth, and that the King
their maister had answered, that it was not needfull the French King should meddle with
any controuersies betwixt him and his wife, and that for the rest he would make no difficulty.
These disputes increasing more and more, to the great griefe of the King of
Castile, who knew well that the Queene his sister was staied for some other consideration,
and that the obiections made against her husband were meere slanders, he was much
perplexed: for he both loued Charles King of Nauarre, and the Queene also. The Ambassadors
being out of hope to worke the Queenes returne; they demaund the Infanta D.
Ieanne, the King of Nauarres eldest daughter, to whom the succession of the Realme did
belong for want of heires males, to be deliuered vnto them, to carry her into Nauarre,
to the King her father, seeing he might not hope for any more children by the Queene,
persisting in her vnreasonable resolution, to liue from his company. The Queene excusing
her selfe, said, that it was not her intent to liue seperated from King Charles but
she desired to bee assured of her life: And the King her brother (who alwaies perswaded
her to bee well aduised, and to beleeue what he said vnto her) was forced to send Alnar
Nugnes of Villa Real, President of his Chancery, into Nauarre, to take information
of these venimous herbes, which shee said had beene giuen her by the physitian a
Iew, and to bring the depositions of the witnesses, whom shee named: but this was an
information made without any aduerse party, to the great scandale of Queene Leonoras
marriage: so as by the aduice of the royall councell of Castile it was supprest. The
Queene remayning obstinate, not to returne to her husband, the King of Castile
preuailed so with her, as shee yeelded to send Don Leanne her eldest daughter, for
hee gaue her to vnderstand that it would somewhat pacefie the King of Nauarre.
Besides it was to bee feared that if shee staied her, hee might in despight institute

his brother Peter Earle of Mortaing heire of his realme. It did much import the Nauarrois,
to haue this daughter in the fathers power, fearing least the mother should
marry her to some Castillan, against the fathers will, and to the preiudice of the liberty
of the Realme: The daughter was deliuered to the Ambassadors, with one of her sisters,
being royally accompanied from the towne of Roa, whether the King and his sister
came to send her into Nauarre, where shee was receiued with great contentment to the
King and the Nauarrois, yet he was much discontented at the rebellion and contempt
of the Queene his wife.
This businesse being ended,Castile. the King of Castile came to Segobia, where he did institute 
the Order of the Knights of the holy Ghost, causing collars of gold to bee made
like vnto the sunne beames, at which did hang a white doue. This collar hee himselfe
did weare, and gaue it to many Knights that were most familiar with him, shewing them
a certaine booke of Orders, which they must obserue. Moreouer he would also institute
an other deuice, which he called Reason, the which Esquires, which carried themselues
valiantly in Iousts and Tournayes, and did any commendable act, should carry:
yet hee beeing dead these things died likewise with him, which follwed the same
yeere 1390.
He was resolued to passe into Andalusia,An. 1390. to order the affaires of that Prouince, and
administer Iustice: passing in the month of October by Alcala of Henares, thether came
vnto him fifty Christian Knights borne at Maroc in Affrike, who being sent for by him
had past the seas with leaue from their King, and were come to doe him seruice: Hee
receiued them gratiously, and promised them pensions and lands in Castile. They
were of the most ancient families of Maroc,Farfanes-Christian aff^ ikans. hauing alwaies held the Christian, religion,
and were called the Farfanes. The King desirous to see them mannage their Genets
(for they had the report to bee good horsemen) went to horse-backe, and going out at 
the port which is called of Burgos, he entred into a plowed field, and beginning to gallop
his horse ouer the furroes, he stumbled in the medest of his course, and fell vpon the
King, who was so brused as hee died, being but two and thirty yeeres old, whereof hee
raigned eleuen and three monthes; his body was carried to Toledo, and buried
in the Chappell of the last Kings, where his father and mother lie. A Prince endowed
with good parts but vnfortunate, and too sharpe to his brother the Earle of Gijon,
the which did somewhat blemish the luster of his vertues: he was a friend and rewarder
of valiant men, and religious according to the time. Hee was founder of three of the
chiefe Monasteries in Spaine, and gaue them great reuenues; that is, the Carthusians
at Valdelo coya in the territorie of Segobia in Rascafrie, the which is commonly
called Paular: the royall Monasterie of the Order of Saint Benet at Vailedolit, the
chiefe of the Religion in the Realmes of Castile, Leon, Arragon and Nauarre, built
whereas the old fort did stand. And moreouer hee founded the church and house of
Santa Maria of Guadalupe, whereas he put religious men of Saint Ierosmes Order, and
tooke away the Chaplains which were wont to bee there; ar which place there is an Image,
which they hold doth miracles.
This King was very pittifull to Princes and men of marke that were strangers and afflicted,
as it appeered by the deliuery which hee sought with great affection of Leon
King of Armenia, who was prisoner with the Sultan of Aegipt to whom hee sent an honourable
Ambassage to that effect. And afterwards this Prince beeing retired into
Spaine, he gaue him conuenient reuenues and pensions vpon the towne of Madrid and
other places in Castile. It is he whose tombe is in the Celestins church at Paris where
he died mediating a peace betwixt the French and English.
The King of Nauarre hauing laboured in vaine for the haue the Queene his wife returne 
vnto him,Nauarre. desyring to haue her crowned with him, like vnto other Queenes, hee
resolued not to delay his coronation any longer: wherefore he assembled the Estates of
his realm in the city of Pampelone, whereas the sollemnity of his coronation was made,
as followeth: The Deputies of the Clergy,Ceremony at the King of Nauarres coronation. Nobility and third Estate beeing assembled,
with the Ambassadors of forraine Princes, in the great chappell of the Cathedrall
church; the Bishops beeing in their Pontificall habits; Don Martin of Salua

Bishop of Pampelone, who was afterwards Cardinall, spake the words vnto the King:
O King our naturall Lord, it is fit before you receiue the Sacrament of the holy vnction,
that you take the oth vnto your people of Nauarre, which hath beene accustomed to be
taken in this Realme of Nauarre, by Kings your predecessors. Wherevnto the King
answered, that he was ready to sweare: then a crosse being presented vnto him, and a
booke; laying his hand thereon,Forme of the King oth to his people. he pronounced these words with a loude voice We D.
Charles by the grace of God King of Nauarre, Earle of Eureux etc. Doe sweare vnto
our people of Nauarre, vpon this crosse and vpon the holy Euangelist toucht by vs, and
to you the prelats and rich men of the cities and good townes, and to all the people of
Nauarre, for all your rights, lawes, customes, freedomes, liberties and preuiledges: that
euery one of them, as they now are, shalbe maintained and kept, to you and your successors
all the time of our life, without corrupting them, bettering, and not impayring them
in all or in part: and that the violence and force which hath beene done to your predecessors,
whom God pardon, or to you, by Vs or our Officers, we shall hereafter command
it to cease, and satisfaction to bee made, according vnto right, as they shalbe made
manifest by good men and of credit.
After the Kings oth,F^^m^ of the subiects oth vnto the King. the Deputies of the Estates, according to their degrees, standing
vp, did also sweare after this maner. We N. N. Barons of Nauarre, as well in our owne
names, as for all the Knights and Gentlemen of the realme, sweare vnto you, our King
and Lord, vpon this corsse, and these foure holy Euangelists, handled and toucht by vs, to
gard and faithfully to defend your person, and our country, and to aide you to keepe,
maintaine and defend the lawes and customes with all our power. After this manner
did the deputies for the cities and townes sweare, euery one according to the rights,
lawes, customes, preuiledges, freedomes and liberties, which they did enioy. This
oth beeing taken of either side, except by the Clergy, who sweare not, the King retired
himselfe into Saint Stephens chappell, of the same church, where he put off his roabes,
and tooke one of white taffity,Vnction fo the King of Nauarre. which was vsuall in such ceremonies, and then was
brought backe by the Bishops of Tarrasone and of Dax, to the great chappel, where as
all things necessary were prepared for this vnction. The King being there enuironed by
the Bishops, he was annointed with oyle by the Bishop of Pampelone, with the praiers
and suffrages vsuall in such actions: and the King hauing instantly put off that white
roabe he was richly attired in other royall habits, and so approched neere vnto the high
altar, where there was a sword, the royal crowne glistring with pretious stones, and the
royall Scepter, hee put on the sword, and then drew it forth, holding it vp on high in
signe of Iustice, and then sheathed it againe, then hee tooke the crowne, and set it on his
head, and last of all hee tooke the scepter in his hand, and in the meane time the prelats
continued their prayers. These things beeing done the King mounted vpon a target,
on the which were painted the armes of Nauarre,King of Nauar carried vpon a traget. the which was borne by the
Deputies of the Nobility, and them of the city of Pampelone and the three quarters
thereof, Bourg, Peuplement and Bauarre, as well in the name of the said city, as of other
cities and townes of the realme, as it had beene appointed by the King: wherevpon
publike protestation was made by the Deputies of Estella, Tudela, Sanguessa, Olite
and other townes, which could not set to their hands to support this target, on the
which the King was, that it was without preiudice at that time, or hereafter, to their commonalties.
Thus the King was raised vp by the deputies, who cried out thrice, Real, Real,
Real.
The King beeing thus carried after the manner of the ancient French, hee cast money
vnto the people, which done, hee was taken from thence by the Cardinall Don
Pedro of Luna, the Popes Legat (who assisted at this ceremonie) and by the Bishops of
Pampelone and Tarrasone, and led to a royall throne in great state: the prelats and other
Clergy men continuing still in their praiers and ending with a Te Deum.
These things thus performed, the Kings Attorney General, called Garcia of Leach,
in the Kings name, the Bishop of Pampelone for himselfe and all the Clergy of the
realme, with the Deputies of the Nobility, townes and commonalties, demaunded an
act of Peter of Godeille Apostolike Notary, of Peter of Iauariz Clarke and Apostolike

Notary for the Diocese of Pampelone, and of Iohn of Ceilludo Notary, and Secretary
to the King, the which was formally done. For the last act of this follemnity, masse
was sung by the Bishop of Pampelone, whereas the King, according to the custome of
his predecessors, offred scarlet, gold and siluer. This coronation was the fourth yeere of
this Princes reigne, in February in the yeere 1390. and to make more particular relation
of men of quality, which were at this assembly, deputed for the Estates or otherwise,
First of all there was D. Pedro of Luna Cardinal,Men of account at the King of Nauarres coronation. of the title of Santa Maria in Cosmedin,
Legat a Latere in Spaine, to Pope Clement residing in Auignon: Don Martin Salua
Bishop of Pampelone, D. Iohn of Calaorra and Calcado, D. Pedro of Tarrassone, Don
Fernand of Vic of Ossona, D. Pedro of Ampurias, D. Iohn of Dax, D. Garcia of Eugni of
Bayone, Confessor to the King, all Bishops. Moreouer the Abbot of Irache, the Deane
of the Collegiall church of Tudelo; the Abbots of the Monasteries of Saint Saluator
of Leyra, Oliuia, Yrancu Hitero and Saint Saluator of Vrax: the Prior of the Order of
Saint Iohn of Ierusalem, the dignities, Chanoins and Clergy of the church of Pampelone,
for the Estate of the Clergy. For the Nobilitie and millitary Order were Don
Lionell of Nauarre, the Kings base brother, D. Arnaud Raymond Lord of Grammont, D.
Arn^nd Sanches Lord of Luse, D. Pedro Lord of Laxaga, D. Martin Henriques of Lacarra
Marshal of the realme, D. Ramir of Areillan, D. Martin Lord of Mearcan, and of Saint
Iulian, D. Iohn of Vcara, D. Fernand of Ayanc, D. Martin of Ayuar, D. Bertrand of Lacarra,
D. Aluar Diaz of Medrano, D. Ximen Garcia Vicont of Baigner, D. Pedro Sanches
of Corella, D. Pedro Ynigues of Vxue, D. Martin of Artieda, D. Pedro Arnaud of Garro,
D. Iohn Gaston of Vrroz, D. Garcia Ramires of Asiayn, D. Iohn of Bern, the young Don
Pedro Sanches of Licaracu, D. Iohn Rodrigues of Ayuar, D. Raymond of Esperca and Don
Pedro of Ayanc: these were accompanied with many other Noblemen and Gentlemen,
as it was fit for the Maiesty of such an act. The were also the Deputies of the
commonalties, and good townes of the realme of Pampelone, Bourg, Peuplement and
Nauarriere which were thre quarters, or countries, of the city, euery one hauing a seuerall
Iudge, the which kept them long in diuision, and bred lamentable mutinies and seditions:
but this King by wise councel reduced them all into one body, and supprest the
cause, to the good and quiet of the Inhabitants: Moreouer there were present the Deputies
of Estella, Tudela, Sanguessa, Olite, Puent la Reyna, Arcos, which at this day belongs
to Castile, Viana, Garde, which is also of Castile, of Saint Vincent, of Saint Iohn
of Pie de Port, of Montreal, Ronceuaux, Lumber, Willafranca of Aguilar of Bernedo, at
this day vnited to the crowne of Castile, and of Lans. Besides these deputies, there
were many Barons, Knights and others of quality of Castile, France and England, which
did honour this coronation, with the Ambassadors of forraine Christian princes. Namely
Iohn Vicont of Fussensaguet, Raymond of Beruat, Lord of Castlenau, D. Alphonso of
Luna, Archdeacon of Girone, Doctor Iohn Fernandes of Arana, D. Diego Lopes of Estunina,
high Treasorer, Diego Lopes of Lagran, Steward to the King of Castile, Francis of
Pau of Arragon, Sicart of Montagu, Bernard of Rostaing a Basque. These with many
others. were witnesses of all that past at this ceremony, as appeeres by the acts and writings
which are in the chamber of accounts of that realme. In Iuly following the quire
of the church fell, where these things were celebrated, for the re-edefying whereof, the
King and others did contribute very much. The death of D. Iohn King of Castile, fell
out then vnfortunatly for the King of Nauarre: for besides that hee loued him, and was
beloued of him like a brother, hee was a fit instrument to tame the wilfulnesse of the
Queene Donna Leonara, who did afterwards much trouble him, before hee could made
her leaue Castile, and returne to him.



D. Henry the 3. of that name, the seuenteenth
King of Castile 38. of Leon.
 VVHen as the King Don Iohn had this mortall fall,Castille. Don Pedro Tenorio, Archbishop
of Toledo, a wise man, knowing the alterations which doe commonly follow
such accidents, to the preiudice of States, hee sodainely caused a Pauillion to be pitched
in the place whereas the Kings body lay, and hauing set gards about it that it mought
not be seene, hee dissembled his death, giuing it out that he was sore hurt, but without
any danger of death: and the better to conceale this businesse, he caused his physitions
to come vnto the Tent, to whom he imposed silence, then at a conuenient time, he caused
the Kings body to bee brought into the towne, and laied it in the Chappel of the
Archbishops lodging.
In the meane time he made such dispatches as he thought fit to the cities and townes
of the realme, and to the Prelats and Knights who he knew were affected to the deceased
King, and to his sonne D. Henry. The Queene Donna Beatrix was at the time of this vnfortunat
accident, at Madrid, where she receiued letters from the Archbishop, aduising
her to goe to Alcala, the which she did, leading in her company D. Iohn Serran bishop of
Siguenca Chancellor of the Kings priuy seale, and others, who were very sorrowfull for
these lamentable newes: but especially the Queene Donna Beatrix, who had not any
children by the King her husband, and was now dispossest of her realme of Portugal,
without any hope euer to recouer it. Beeing come To Alcala, the Archbishop hauing
comforted her, and left her there for the gard of the body, he went to Madrid, where hee
did set vp the Standards of Castile and Leon, for the new King D. Henry, who was then
at Talauera with his wife Donna Catherina, and his brother the Infant Don Fernand,
whereas their father had left them when as he ment to goe into Andalusia: but hauing
receiued letters from the Archbishop, he came presently to Madrid. The Archbishop
gaue such order for al things, as there was no alteration. The funerals for his death were
performed throughout all Spaine, with great heauinesse, the which was followed with
great demonstrations of ioy,D. Henry the third proclaymed King of Castile. for that D. Henry was proclaimed King in the same towne
of Madrid, wehther the Deputies of Prouinces, and the Estates of the realme began to
come; the first were D. Laurence Suares of Figueroa maister of Saint Iames, D. Gencalo
Nugnes of Guzman maister of Calatraua, and some others, who did not medle with any
affaires, nor with the gouernment of the King (who was not yet eleuen yeeres old) by
reason of the absence of Don Frederic duke of Benauent, of Don Alphonso of Arragon,
Marquis of Villena Earle of Denia and first Constable of Castile, and Don Pedro of
Castile Earle of Transtamara, Princes of the bloud royall, who wer sent for, and it was
fit to attend them. Notwithstanding the Archbishop of Toledo thought it fit to conclude
a marriage which was of great importance, and very preiudiciall for the Duke
of Benauent, which was of Donna Leonora daughter and heire to Don Shancho of Castile,
brother to the King D. Henry the second, Countesse of Albuquerque and Montalban,
and Lady of many other townes and castles: to which rich marriage Don Frederic
pretended, the which was thought fit an conuenient, both for that hee was of the bloud
of Castile, as also to recompence him in some sort for the marriage which had beene
concluded, betwixt him and Donna Beatrix of Portugal, whom the King D. Iohn did afterwards
marry,Marriage betwixt the heire of Albuquerque and the Infant D. Fernand. whereby he had beene vndoubtedly King of Portugal. But the Arch-bishop
thinking that the marriage of Donna Leonora would bee more fit for D. Fernand
duke of Pegnefiel, brother to the new King, hee did worke it, and concluded it, with the
Kings consent and the Ldaies, vpon condition that it should bee consommated when the
Infant were foureteene yeeres old. Shee beeing sixteene yeeres old, promised it, but
not the Infant, for that by the marriage betwixt Don Henry and Donna Catherina, the
Duke of Lancaster her father had reserued, that if Don Henry should chance to die without

consommating of the marriage with hid daugther, then D. Fernand his brother
should marry her. The Noblemen, Prelats and Deputies of the towne of Castile and Leon,
beeing not yet assembled, the Archbishop of Toledo demaunded of Peter Lope of
Ayala, a worthy Knight and learned, if he knew whether the deceased King had made
any will, to whom he answered yea, and that hee himselfe being present with others, the
King had made his will at the seege of Cillorico in Portugal, the one and twentith of
Iuly in the yeere of our Lord 1385. and that he had sent his will to him being Archbishop
of Toledo. The Archbishop remembred this, but he said that he had since deliuered
that vp to the King. By this testament it was ordained, that the King dying, leauing
his sonne D. Henry vnder age, the gouernment of the King and realme should remaine
in the hands of D. Alphonso of Arragon, Marquis of Villena,Ordonances made by the King D. fohn in his testament. of the Archbishop of 
Toledo, D. Iohn Garcia Manriques Archbishop of Saint Iames, D. Pedro Nugnes maister
of ther Calatraue, D. Iohn Alphonso of Guzman Earle of Niebla, and D. Pedro Goncales of
Mendoca Lord Steward of the Kings house, and with them one or two Bourgeses of
either of the sixe townes: that is Burgos, Toledo, Leon, Seuile Cordoua and
Murcia.
But afterwards the King did shew by actions, that he had changed his resolution, not
meaning that this should be receiued for his last will and testament, wherevpon there
grew such debate, as it was hard to pacefie it. D. Frederic duke of Benauent, D. Pedro
of Castile Earle of Transtamara, the Archbishop of Saint Iames, with some others, being
arriued, hauing kist the Kings hands, as their naturall Lord, the Estates beganne to
conferre concerning the gouernment of the King and realme, and hauing first propounded
the aboue-named will, it was concluded that the Archbishop of Toledo, the Maisters
of Saint Iames and of Calatraua, the Duke of Benauent, the Earle of Transtamara,
and Pero Lopes of Ayala, should enter the chamber where the King kept his papers,
to finde out this will. The chamber was opened by Ruis Lopes of Aualos, who
afterwards was Constable, and Iohn Martines of Castille, gardiens of those writings,
where this will was found: It beeing read in the presence of the aboue-named, and
they all disallowing of that which the King had ordained, they commanded him that
read it to cast it into a fire which burnt in a chamber neere vnto the Bishop of Cuencas,
one of the houshold to the deceased King, to auoide all contention and trouble, yet hee
durst not doe it, but laied it vnder a bed, whereas the Archbihop of Toledo tooke it,
saying, that there were some clauses which did concerne his Archbishoprike of Toledo,
and so carried it away.
After some great contention betwixt the Noblemen and Deputies assembled, in
the end it was concluded, that without any regard to the Kings will, or any other writing
whatsoeuer, the gouernment should be mannaged by a set councel, wherefore they
named the duke of Benauent, and the Earle of Transtamara Princes of the bloud royall
of Castile,Orders for the Gouernment of the realme of Castile. the Marquis of Villena, and the Archbishops of Toledo and Saint Iames,
the maisters of Calatraua and Saint Iames, with some other Knights: and it was said,
of the Deputies of sixteene cities of this Realme, eight should assist at this councell
by sixe monthes, with this clause that not any Prelat, Knight, Maister, Deputie or any
other should haue any voice or authority, but when they were resident in the court.
This resolution pleased them all except the Archbishop of Toledo, who refused for
to sweare to certaine good Articles concluded by the councell, answering with the
Bishop of Cuenca, that hee did it for that hee would not infring the lawes of the realme,
which said, that the King comming to the crowne in his minority, the father hauing
appointed him no Tutors, in that case the Realme should choose one, three, fiue, or
seuen to gouerne. Wherefore if they would heare what he had to say therein, for the discharge
of his conscience, and that they would afterwards proceed otherwise, hee should
bee contented with that they should conclude. His answere beeing allowed by the
councell, he was willed to present himselfe the next day in the castle, where he should be
heard. The councell was of opinion that the Archbishop would not be so rash, as publikely
to contradict a generall accord which they had made, else they prepared to giue
him a bad reception.

The Archbishop beeing aduertised by one of the Deputies of the resolution of the
councell, hee ioyned with them the next day in a church, and sware the Articles, to auoide
the scandale which had happened, if hee had done otherwise. This beeing thus
repaired, the Archbishop desired to bee discharged of the gard of Don Alphonso Earle
of Gijon, brother to the deceased King, who had beene a long time prisoner in the castle
of Almonacid: wherevpon he made such instance, and so great protestations, as the
councell (not able otherwise to pacefie him) decreed that the prisoner should bee deliuered
into the hands of the maister of Saint Iames, who should take charge of him,
and he caused him to be conducted to the castle of Monreal, belonging to the order of
Saint Iames.
 Some daies after the councell being assembled in the church of Madrid, whereas
it was often held,Archbishop of Toledo turbulent. certaine Gentlemen belonging to the duke of Benauent entred, hauing
shirts of maile, whereat many were amazed, especially Don Pedro Tenorio the
Archbishop, who therevpon tooke occasion to dislodge from court, and in all places
where hee past, he published that they had made a councell contrary to the will of the
King don Iohn: writing to all the chiefe townes of Spaine, and to the Noblemen that
were absent, who had beene named Tutors by the Kings will: Hee did moreouer write
to Pope Clement, and to the consistory of Cardinals, and the French King, and him of
Arragon, intreating them not to allow of, nor receiue the dispatches of this councell.
This did much trouble them of the councell, who incited by this disorder to a greater,
would beginne to diuide the charges, offices, places and fortes of the Realme betwixt
them. The duke of Benauent was the first,Diuision among the Lords of the councel. who demaunded the office of high Treasorer,
or Super-intendant of that Treasor, for Iohn Sanches of Seuile, an infamous man
by reason of his great vsurie, beeing also indebted to the King in great summes of money:
wherevnto the Archbishop of Saint Iames opposed, saying, that it was not fit that
hee who ought to bee araigned, should bee aduanced to an office which had iurisdiction:
wherevpon there grew great troubles, and scandales, and the Noblemen of the
councell beganne to fortefie themselues with armes, causing their seruants and vassals
to approch neere to Madrid, so as the Inhabitants of the towne set gardes at
their portes: by reason whereof the Duke went out of the towne, and retired to Benauent,
leauing his companions in great feare least hee should ioyne with the Archbishop
of Toledo.
 As this man was mooued with zeale for the affaires of state,Sedition against the Iewes, caused by D. Fernand Martinez. so at the same time Don
Fernand Martines of Eccia, Archdeacon of Seuile, was mooued for religions cause against
the Iewes, dwelling in Spaine, inciting the people against them, not onely in
his sermons, but also in market places and streetes: so as the Iewes seeing they intended
to spoile and murther them, they had recourse vnto the Lords of the councell at
Madrid, who deputed Iudges to preuent this disorder at Seuile, Cordua, and other
townes of Andalusia: but the people were so incensed against this sect, as notwithstanding
all the diligence of the Iudges, many were slaine, and their goods spoiled: An indidirect
course to draw Infidels to the religion of Iesus Christ.
The King Don Henry who grew in yeeres and Iudgement, did much apprehend
the troubles, wherein the Noblemen of the councell did ingage the Realme, and
therefore hee did write vnto the Duke of Benauent, and the Marquis of Villena, who
had not beene present at all these things, that they should come, or send presently
to Madrid, men with full authority: complayning by his letters which hee did write
to Don Frederic Duke of Benauent, for that hee had gone from court without leaue.
The Duke sent Aluar Vasques of Losada, a Knight of honour vnto him, who gaue
him a good accompt of his actions. The Marquis of Villena excused himselfe vppon the
dissention of the Councell, who wrote in the beginning of the yeare 1391. to the Arch-bishop
of Toledo,An. 1391. complaying greatly of the innouations which by his occasion did
threaten Spaine, protesting for their parts, to yeeld vnto all that should be ordayned by
the Estates of the Realme: and as for the last will and testament of King Iohn, they would
alwaies referre it to his oath, if he had not declared before his death, that he meant not it
should be of force.

The Arch-bishop when he receiued these letters, was at Alcala with the Duke of Beneuent,
the Marquis of Villena, D. Martin Ianes of Barbuda, Master of Alcantara, and D.
Diego Hurtado of Mendoca, with other discontented Knights, by all their aduice, hauing
made a league together, answer was made vnto the messengers, that hauing resolued among
themselues they would make a fit answer: to whom the messengers that were sent
from the King and the Councell replyed, that in the meane time the Arch-bishop should
forbeare to assemble forces, and shold not employ the reuenues of the church to leuy soldiers:
whereunto they answered, That whilest they of the Councell did gouerne to their
preiudice, they could do not lesse then to seeke a remedy. During these broyles in Spaine,
D. Domingo Bishop of S. Ponce, Legate to Pope Clement residing at Auignon, came to 
Madrid, with letters to the King, condoling for the death of the deceased king his father,Pope Clement sends a Legate into Castile.
and congratulating his assumption, who also brought letters from the Pope to the Councell,
by the which, like a good pastor and father, he did exhort them to do iustice, and to
gouerne the Realme well; the Legate making a long speech to that end: to whom Garcia
Manrique Arch-bishop of S. Iames, answered. After which the Councell intreated the
Legat to be a meanes to pacifie the troubles which had beene raised by the Arch-bishop
of Toledo, and that he would take the paines to look into the will and disposition of both
parties, to the end he might make report thereof vnto the Pope. The Legate offered to
employ himselfe in any thing they should thinke fit for the publike peace: wherefore the
Councell hauing thanked him for his good will, they deputed Peter Suarez of Quignones,
Gouernor of Leon, a wise and discreet Knight, Garcis Alphonso of Sahaghun, and
Doctor Anthony Sanches of Salamanca, an Auditor, who did accompanie the Legate.
Beeing arriued at Talauera de la Reyna, where as the Arch-bishop was, he intreated him
very earnestly to hearken to the peace and quiet of Spaine, giuing him many Theologicall
reasons, beeing a great learned Doctor, especially vppon the wasting of the goods
and reuenues of the Church, which was the patrimonie of the poore, propounding vnto
him in the behalf of the Councell, the iust conditions which they had deliuered vnto him,
and promised to performe; perswading him and his associats to come vpon his faith and
assurance, vnto the castle of Buytrago, belonging vnto D. Diego Hurtado of Mandoca,
to consult with them of the Councell, of the meanes how to accommodate all their diuisions.
The like request and offer was made by Peter of Quignones in the behalfe of the
Councell, signifying vnto them, that if they lost this opportunity, they might afterwards
desire it in vaine: and of all this he protested and demanded an act. To all this the Arch-bishop
answered vpon premeditation, and excused himselfe, as well vppon the testament
of the deceased king, as vpon the lawes of the Realme which were infringed, persisting
in the answer which had beene made at Alcala, pretending other lets, so as they could not
go to Buytrago.
In the meane time ambassadors came from France, to the new king Don Henry, to
condole the death of the deceased king,Ambassadors from France to Castile. and to performe such ceremonies as are vsuall at
the comming of new kings, the Bishop of Landresi, chiefe of this Ambassage, offering to
the king Don Henry all friendship and ayde, in the name of the king his Master, and to
confirme the league made betwixt their predecessors. To which ambassage the Arch-bishop
of S. Iames made answer in the kings name with great applause: the king did then
renew and sweare the league betwixt France and Castile, and so did the Ambassadours.
They being dispatched, and honoured with many goodly presents, they were accompanied
with other Ambassadors, whom the king Don Henry sent into France, for the confirmation
of this league: within few dayes there came also to Madrid, Ambassadors from
the Kings of Nauarre and Arragon: from the Duke of Lancaster, and other Christian
Princes, vpon the same subiect. They of Nauarre particularly intreated the yong King,
that he would so worke with the Queene Donna Leonora his aunte, as shee might returne
into Nauarre, and liue with the King her husband; wherein they of the councell
imployed themselues with great affection,Queene of Nauarre will not returne to her husband. but they preuailed not, for she vsed the same
excuses, which shee had done to the deceased Kign Don Iohn, so much shee was pleased
to liue in the court of Castile. The King of Arragons Ambassadors, besides their generall
Legation, had charge to perswade all the councellors in particular, to gouerne

the realme with such care and loyalty, as the young yeares of the king his nephew required.
And they of the Duke of Lancaster demanded, that the league made with the deceased
king, at the conclusion of their peace, should be renued. All these receiued courteous
answers, and were sent backe with content.
In the meane time the Arch-bishop of toledo leauied forces, and made great practises
throughout all the chiefe townes, and with the Nobilitie of the Realme. And on he
other side, at the incitation of the seditious Arch-deacon Don Fernand Martines, the
 people of Seuile,Cruelties and murthers committed on the Iewes. Cordoua, Toledo, Logrogne, and other townes, of Castile, had fallen
vppon the Iewes, making a horrible butcherie of this miserable people, and spoyling
their goods, forcing by this meanes the rest, who escaped the present fury to become
Christians, or at the least to faine themselues so: What can poore Infidels thinke (seeing
such cruelties practised by Christians, and such greedinesse in them to imbeazle other
mens goods) but that their religion is bloudie, desiring nothing lesse then the health of
those whome they entertaine in their ignorance, by such detestable courses, and diuelish
couetousnesse? With the like furie were the neighbour countries infected: for they of
Valencia and Barcelona did the like, yea the rage of these zealous men had extended vnto
the Moores dwelling in Castile and Arragon, if they had not feared that the king of Granado
would haue massacred many Christians that were his prisoners, and that it should
cause some new warre with the Arabians.
This worldly consideration respecting the commoditie of this life retayned them, not
the zeale and honour of Iesus Christ, which consists not in murthers and spoiles, but to
do good to all men, and to pray for their enemies. The King Don Henry was aduertised
of all these disorders, but by reason of his youth which was contemned, he could not apply
fit remedies. Yet he did somewhat pacifie the mutinue against the Iewes: But as for the
Arch-bishop of Toledo, and his Confederates, they had need of a sharper restraint. The
Councell sent twice vnto him: that is, the Master of Saint Iames, who came vnto him at
Illesca, and afterwards at Talauera de la Reina, D. Iohn of Velasco, Lord Chamberlaine
to the king, and Peter Fernandes of Villegas Merin Maior of Burgos, who admonished
him to forbeare to assemble forces, and that he should be content to vndergo with them,
the resolution of the Estates, vppon their differences, but they had no other answer, but
what he had formerly made.
 Amidst these tumults there fell out a new occasion to increase them:D. Pedro of Castile demands the office of Constable. for hauing beene
propounded in the Councell of the deceased king D. Iohn, to take the office of Constable
from D. Alphonso of Arragon, Marquis of Villena, for certaine reasons: being now in diuision
with the Councell, and not greatly beloued of the young King D. Henry, D. Pedro of
Castile Earle of Transtamara, came to demand this office, who had yearly for his dyet and
entertaynment 70000. marauidis. The Councell did let him vnderstand, that the king at
the beginning when the Estates assembled at Madrid, to gratifie the Marquis D. Alphonso,
had confirmed him in the dignity, and that there were no reason thus to degrade him,
without some apparent cause, the which might be a means to increase the troubles which
were but too great: wherefore they were of opinion, that he shold for that time forbeare
and content himselfe with a pension, equall to the Constables entertainment, the which
they promised him in the meane time: but they sayd, that they must proceede against the
Marquis by the course of Iustice: for the effecting wherof, they would procure the king to
cite him to come to Court, and if hee did not obey, they promised to giue him his Estate.
D. Pedro ws satisfied with this answer, and D. Alphonso Ianes Fajardo, Gouernor of Murcia
was sent by the King vnto the Constable, to cause him to come to court: but hee excused
himselfe from comming presently, promising to be there soone after, notwithstanding
it was farre from his thought: for he had intelligence with the Arch-bishop of Toledo,
and others of the league, who drew men together from all parts, to come to the
Court in armes, to the end they might haue the testament of the deceased king D. Iohn,
put in execution, and chase away the Councell.
The Arch-bishop of S. Iames, the Earle of Transtamara, the Masters of S. Iames and
Calatraua, Iohn Hurtado of Mendoca, Lord Steward of the kings house, and others (whereof
some were named Tutors by the kings will, and some not) knowing that this was not the

cause which drew the Arch-bishop of Toledo, but onely a colour pretended by him and
his confederates to retire from Court, and to take armes; they also prouided for their
parts, and called all their friends to ayde them: they drew D. Leonora Queene of Nauar,
vnto their league, binding themselues by oath one vnto another,Queene of Nauar intangled in the troubles of Castile. and they wrought so, as
the king Don Henry continued vnto the Queene his Aunt the pensions which the deceased
King D. Iohn was wont to giue her with an increase: By whose perswasion, and others
of the Councell, he tooke the office of Constable from Don Alphonso of Arragon, who
had enioyed it nine yeares, and gaue it to the Earle of Transtamara, who was sonne to D.
Frederic, Master of Saint Iames, and cousin to the king. Hereuppon they fell to armes
in Castile, committing great spoyles, robberies, and murthers of all sides, diuiding the
Realmes, Prouinces, Citties, and Townes, especially Seuile, whereas Don Aluar Perez
of Guzman, great Admiral of Castile, and D. Pedro Ponce of Leon, Lord of Marchena, Gouernor
generall of that cittie, held the Concells part: and Don Iohn Alphonso of Guzman,
Earle of Niebla and others, that of the Kings testament.
he Arch-bishop of Toledo with the Master of Alcantara were about Auila, to whom
they of the cittie of Burgos made many protestations, offers and prayers in vaine, for a
peace; the like they did to the Duke of Benauent, and then they sent vnto the King, who
was come to Cuellar, beseeching him to giue eare vnto a peace, and to end the troubles
by a conuocation of the Estates; the which if he thought good to hold in their cittie, they
offered to deliuer all their children in hostage, for their assurance that should come. The
King mooued with the loue and willingnesse of them of Burgos, sent the Legate and
others to the Arch-bishop and his confederates, but they answered, That when they shold
be neere the place where the king ws, they would declare their intentions more at large.
The Duke of Benauent, and the Arch-bishop of Toledo, were alreadie ioyned with their
forces, consisting of fifteene hundred men at armes, and 3500. foote, vnto whome the
Queene of Nauarre came, intreating them, that before matters grew worse, they should
be satisfied with the resolution of the Estates: and whilest that she laboured with the confederates,
the king went to Vailledolit, whither came about sixteen hundred men at arms,
with some other forces. The confederates little regarding the Queene of Nauarre, came
to lodge at Simancas, where as she was more amazed then before, and employed all her
endeauors to make some accord: In the end shee obtayned that there should bee a conference
at Perales, whereas at diuers times, in the presence of the Queene and Legate, the
parties met and conferred. Once among the rest, the Arch-bishop beeing demanded by
him of Saint Iames, if he had any true intent, that the deceased kings testament should
take place: he made him no answer, for that the Duke of Benauent, who was not named
in it, was present, whom he feared to offend: an infalliable argument, that priuate respects
did moue him more,Archb. of Toledo respects not the publike good. then any zeale of the publike good, or the Kings seruice. It was concluded
in Perales, that the Kings testament should be of force, and that the tutors named
therein should gouerne: and to the end a peace might be the better entertayned, and that
all emulation and iealousie might cease, there were added vnto them Don Frederic duke
of Benauent, Don Pedro Earle of Transtamara, and the Master of Saint Iames: and for
the better strangthening of this accord, the generall Estates were held at Burgos, Iohn
Hurtado of Mendoca,Estates at Burgos for a peace. Pero Lopes of Ayala, Diego Lopes of Estuniga, and Iohn Alphonso de
la Cerde, either of them giuing one of his sonnes in hostage, for the assurance of such as
should come to Court.
Thus the Estates were called at Burgos; which citie was at great charges for that cause,
and for the kings seruice. But before any proceeding, the Councell pretending to bind
Don Alphonso Earle of Gijon vnto them, being prisoner in the hands of the Master of S.
Iames, they decreed his deliuerie, and procured the king to restore vnto him all the lands
which he had enioyed in the Asturia's.D. Alphonso the kings vnkle deliuered out of prison. There came vnto the assembly at Burgos, the king
with Queene Catherine his spouse, the Infant Don Fernand, and his future wife D. Leonora,
who lodged in the Castle, whereof Diego Lopes of Estuniga was captaine. The Estates
beeign entred into conference, there grew a new tumult: for some of the Noblemen
not satisfied with that which had beene concluded in Perales, would haue D. Alphonso
Earle of Gijon admitted to councell, besides the aboue-named, wherewith the Duke



of Benauent his brother, the Queene of Nauarre, nor the Master of Saint Iames, were not
contented, saying, that his deliuerie had beene without their consents, with an intent to
make vse of him to the preiudice of them three, and others that were of their opinion.
Such was their inconstancie, as they which before would haue the kings will take effect,
demanded now the accord of Perales. In the end they made choice of two of the greatest
Doctors in Spaine, to be arbitrators, and to giue their aduice therein; which were Don
Goncal Goncales Bishop of Segobia, and Aluar Martines of Villareall, but they made their
controuersies more obscure, with their importune subtilties and obstinacie.
 Whilest that great men contended for the gouernement of the Realme, the Kings Officers
who had charge to recouer his rights,Exactions caused tumults in Guipuscoa. and to receiue his reuenues exacted vpon the
people, according to an order which had beene set downe by the Councell, pressing an
imposition which is called Pedido, wherewith the countrie was charged, in the time of the
King Don Pedro, from the riuer of Ebro vnto the sea, without any regard of the Priuiledges
or exemptions of the Nobilitie, namely, of the Inhabitants of this Prouince of Guipuscoa;
which tribute had beene contradicted in the time of the sayd King D. Pedro, and
since in the raignes of Don Henry, and D. Iohn, who had caused such exactions to cease,
in consideration of the auncient immunities of the Guipuscoans: but in the time of this
king the Councell beeing diuided, and all things in combustion, the Treasurers had reuiued
this receipt, whereof the Inhabitants of the countrie complayned in vaine. For this
cause there was an assembly of the towne and commonalties of the Prouince of Guipuscoa
in the parish Church of Saint Mary, in the towne of Tholousa, in August this yeare
1392. whither came the Deputies of Tholousa, Segure, Mondragon, Motrico, Gueraria,
Villafranca, Vergara, Salmas, and Sarauz, to aduise what was expedient for the defence
of their immunities, who decreed, That for asmuch as the Prouince of Guipuscoa
had first beene peopled by Gentlemen, and in all degrees free, and that by reason of the
barrennesse of the countrie, they had neuer beene charged with any tributes, they besought
the King, and the Councel, established by the Estates of Castile and Leon, to forbid
the Collectors, or any that haue to deale with the kings treasure, to exact any more
mony of them. And attending the Councels resolution vppon their petition, the sayd
Tribute should not be payed, beeing assured that it was both the King and the Councels
intention, not to lay any vndue charge vppon them: they ordayned by way of prouision,
as followeth:
First,Articles made in the assembly of Tholousa in Guipuscoa. that the Collectors and receiuers comming to exact money, there should not
any thing be payed them but the sayd Collectors should be apprehended, and led to the
assembly at Vsarraga, there the Councell to determine of them according vnto reason
and equity.
2 That if any of the Collectors should arrest one of the Inhabitants of the countrie,
by reason of the sayd tribute, he crying out, and demanding ayde, the neighbours without
exception, shall be bound to go foorth in armes, and poursue the sayd Collector, and
hauing taken him, present him to the assembly at Vsarraga.
3 If any Collector hauing leauied a pawne of one of the Inhabitants of the country,
shall escape, and cannot be apprehended, the value of the pawne shall be taken out of the
kings ordinarie reuenues, with all costs, dammage, and interest, for the indemnitie of
the pawne.
4 That all the people of the country shal iustifie the petition presented vnto the king,
tending to this, that he shall prouide a necessarie remedie for this mischiefe, and they
shall be bound to contribute towards the dammages which may happen.
5 That if the merchandize or wares, which they of Guipuscoa are accustomed to
send towards Victoria, Saluaterra, Treuigno, Argancon, and other parts of Alaua vnto
the riuer of Ebro, shall be arrested and stayed by any commonalties, townes, Lords that
haue iustice, or by any person whatsoeuer, in regard of these tributes and impositions,
whosoeuer shall haue the losse, shall make it knowne vnto his superiors, and to this end
the Councell shall assemble at Vsarraga, and the townes shall be bound to send, that is to
say, Tholousa ten men, Mondragon ten men, Segura ten men, Salmes two men, Vergara
fiue men, Motrico three men, Guetaria three men, Villafranca ten men, and Sarraux

two men, of the most sufficient among them, who together shall ordaine of the restitution
of those things thus seazed, with the charges and fines, to the end the owner may
not be damnified.
6 And for rhat the Merins Majors, and rulers of the countrie, were accustomed to
make their circuits in great troupes, so as the people were charged and damnified, to the
prejudice of the lawes and liberties of the countrie, it was ordayned that hee that should
haue this Office, were he Knight or Esquire, should be receiued as a Knight or Esquire,
in all townes and places, so as his force should alwaies remaine in townes, in the which if
the sayd Merins, or their men, did commit any insolencie or violence, for what cause soeuer,
euery man should be bound to take armes, and oppose himself against the sayd force,
appealing to the Councell and assembly of the sayd townes, and worke so as the liberties
and priuiledges of the countrie might remaine vnuiolated, and he that was wronged vndamnified.
7 Item, that if by reason of the sayd imposition and tribute called Pedido, some seazure
hath beene made either of men or goods, by the sayd Collectors, Receyuers, Iudges,
or any other within a towne, and that the sayd towne did consent thereunto, or winke
at the sayd seazure, and that it hath beene transported to some other place, and there receiued
and detayned, and the partie interressed can get no restitution, in this case the other
townes beeing required by him, or some other for him, shall bee bound to go with
force, to the place where such persons or goods are detayned, and there take so much of
the Inhabitants goods as shall be needfull to satisfie the intertessed, and themselues also,
who are come thither for this cause, for all their costs and charges, and for euery man that
hath beene carried away, they shall take two, and detayne them vntill the deliuerie of the
first, withfull satisfaction of their dammages.
8 If by reason of these things any of the Inhabitants of the sayd townes or iurisdictions
should be cited or adiorned before the Prouost of the Kings Court, or other Iudges,
or otherwise called in what manner soeuer; they shall not be bound to appeare, but the
sayd townes shall take his cause in hand, and send their Atturneys to appeare, and defend
him that is cited, without any cost and charge vnto him, but at the charge of the sayd
Townes.
9 That there shall be a firme friendship and brother-hood, sworne betwixt the sayd
townes, and the Inhabitants, such as in the time of the king D. Iohn, vppon the paines ordayned,
and they shal be bound to ayde one an other, so as where any wrong is done, they
shall employ both body and goods one for another, and maintaine themselues in iustice.
10 And for that in former times the townes aboue-named had a league with other
townes of Guipuscoa, not mentioned in this accord, their meaning was, that it should
not hereafter take place, but with the consent of the king and his Councell, and that at the
instance of all the townes of Guipuscoa, the sayd brother-hood and ord^nances thereto
belonging, were confirmed by the king D. Henry their Lord.
11 If any Baylife, or other Magistrate, or Gouernour, should giue assignation to all
the aboue-named townes, enioyning them to their Atturneys or chiefe men of the sayd
townes, they shall name their Atturneys, and send them to the place appointed, vppon
condition that he shall neither do, nor suffer any displeasure to be done vnto them by his
Ministers, for the which they shall giue caution. And if the assignation bee giuen out of
the aboue-named townes, if it were in the towne of Saint Sebastian, the Deputies of the
confederate townes shall assemble at Tholousa: if it were to appeare in the towne of Miranda
of Yraurgui, called Azcoitia, or at Saluaterra, called Azpeytia, or a Blgoybar,
that they shall assemble at Guetaria, or Motrico, to consult what is fit to be done, both
for the kings seruice, the preseruation and increase of the sayd townes, and of their Immunities
and Nobility.
12 That in two assemblies which were made yearely in the name of the sayd brotherhood,
the sayd townes should be bound to appeare by their deputies, as had beene accustomed
in precedent times but at extraordinarie conuocations which should be made by
the other townes of Guipuscoa, they shall not be bound to go nor send, vntill their generall
association be confirmed by the king, at the sute of them all in generall.

To these Articles the sayd townes bound their goods and persons for euer, vpon paine
of fifty marauidis of money then currant to be payed by him that should infringe them,
and applyable to the Councell of the rest, which should maintaine the contents thereof,
to dispose according to their wils: and the towne which hath fayled, shall be forced by
the rest of pay the fine, by all ordinarie and extraordinarie meanes, with all charges, domages
and interests.
It is credible that the other townes of Guipuscoa made the like associations, in regard
of their priuiledges and liberties. Vppon this question they pleaded against the Kings Receyuer,
and there are letters found granted by the King Don Henry vppon the same, by
the which he did abolish these tributes and exactions in fauour of the townes and places
of Saluaterra of Iraurgui, Miranda of Iraurgui, Vilamajor of Marquina, called Elgoyuar,
Val of Mendaro, Monreal of Deua, S. Andrew of Ayuar, Placenzia, Elgueta, S. Cruz of
Cestona, the Chastelenie of Sayas, S. Nicholas of Orio, Bellamount of Vsuruill, with Aguinaga,
Astigarraga, Aynduayn, Vrreota, S. Peter of Asteaucu, the quarter of Larraul,
Ichaco, Cicurguil, Gauiria, Ataun: the country of Lescano of Aduna, the Chastelenie
of Aiztondo, that of Areria, Curnatraga, the parish of Beasain, Arama, Alcega, Echasonda,
Saldibia, Gainca, Legorreta, Goyas, Vidania, Beycaina, Rexil, Aya, and the territorie
of Azgoytia, whereof there are letters found giuen in Saint Marie of Pelajos, in the
yeare 1399. and confirmed at Vailledolit 1401. and by other kings. Thus the Guipuscoans
defended their freedomes and liberties against the Kings Officers, who made their
profite during the confusions and troubles betwixt the Noblemen and the Councell.
Afterwards all the Townes, Boroughs and places of this Prouince of Guipuscoa were
vnited and made one bodie, and haue maintained themselues so vnto this day, to the
great good and generall commoditie of the Countrey, and the seruice of the soueraigne
King.
 The Estates of Burgos continued with little concord, by reason whereof in the beginning
of the yeare 139^. the Deputies of the Estates,Vnion of all the townes of Guipuscoa. with the consent of the parties contending,
propounded euery one to write his voice in bulletins,An. 1392. vppon that which was in
question: Whether they should follow the testament of King Iohn, or not, and the sayd
bulletins beeing cast into a coffer and then opened, the partie that had most voyces should
carrie it: but without comming to this triall, ^he Queene Donna Leonora, who alwaies laboured
to reconcile these differences, made another accord, and brought so many reasons,
as Don Frederic duke of Benauent, and D. Alphonso Earle of Gijon, were receiued
into the gouernement and councell: so as the Councell should consist of tenne spirituall
men, besides the Deputies of the sixe townes, whereof fiue should reside sixe moneths:
and these were thus deuided: the Duke of Benauent, the Arch-bishop of Toledo, the Master
of Saint Iames, and Iohn Hurtado of Medoca for one sixe moneths: the Arch-bishop
of Saint Iames, the Earles of Gijon and Transtamara, and the Master of the Calatraua
for the other: the Marquis of Villena, and the Earle of Niebla should make vp the ten, but
they would not come to Court. It seemed by this expedient, practised by the Queene of
Nauarre, that the affairs were in a course of peace: but the death of Diego Sanches of Roja
a knight of the Earle of Gijons faction, who was slaine neere vnto Burgos by two horsemen
of the Duke of Benauents house troubled the whole assembly againe, and had like
to haue caused great slaughter in the citie: he that was slayne was interred, and the murtherers
escaped. For which fact the Deputies of the Estates were so much discontented,
as they neglected all that had beene decreed and done, touching the establishing of a
Councel, and took the way of writing their voyces in bulletins, the which being put into
a coffer and that opened, it was found that all did ioyntly require to haue the will of the K.
D. Iohn in force. Wherupon the Duke of Benauent, who was not mentioned, went from
Court much discontented.Accord betwixt the Noblemen of Castile. The Arch-bishop of Toledo seeing him retired, agreed with
them of the aduerse party, vpon these conditions: That whensoeuer the Marquis of Villena
and the Earle of Niebla should forbeare to come to Court, hee should supply their
places, and that a moitie of the kings reuenues should be deliuered to him, to be distributed
as he should thinke fit; that the should be satisfied for the charges hee had bin at in seeking
the execution of K. Iohns testament. These things thus concluded, the next day the

king with the knights and deputies of the Prouinces being present, it was decreed, that the
testament of the deceased king D. Iohn should be obserued, and that sixe tutors with the
Deputies of Burgos, Toledo, Leon, Seuile, Cordoua and Murcia, should gouerne. There
were then present of the tutors, the Arch-bishops of Toledo and S. Iames, the Master of
Calatraua who was successor both in the dignity and tutelague to D. Pero Nugnes, and D.
Iohn Hurtado of Mendoca, representing in like manner in this charge D. Pero Goncales of
Mendoca, named by the will. And for that the Maquis of Villena, and the Earle of Niebla
were absent,Order for the gouernment of Castile. the king sent for them to come to Court by a certaine day. The Legate
was very ioyful of this accord, and absolued all them that had sworne to the contrarie: and
in like manner the king did pardon all those that had made any leagues or assembies. And
to giue some contentment to the Duke of Benauent, and the Earle of Gijon, who were
excluded from the gouernment, the tutors agreed to giue to either of them a pension of
a million of marauidis yearely, during their liues. In this manner the gouernment of the
realmes of Castile began to take some form: but yet the factions dyed not, for euery man
sought rather his owne aduancement, then the publike good, as well such as remayned in
Court, as those that left it: some with extreame ambition and desire to gouerne all, as the
Archb. of Toledo, and others vpon diuers pretexts of discontents, they did for a long time
entertayne diuisions and factions.
During the troubles of Castile, D. Iohn king of Portugal, did quietly enioy his conquered 
realme,Portugal. with whom the tutors of Castile sought to prolong the truce, which was almost
expired. For the effecting whereof they sent vnto the frontier D. Iohn Serran bishop
of Siguenca, Garcia Goncal of Herera, and Diego Fernandes of Cordoua, Marshals of Castile,
with Anthony Sanches, Doctor and Auditor: to whom vpon proposition of a perpetuall
peace, or of a long truce, there were such vnreasonable conditions demanded by the
deputies of Portugal, as the Castillan Ambassadors were forced to return without effect.
The K. of Portugal shewed himself intractable in his demands,Treaty of marriage to the preiudice of Castile. by reason of the new support
he thought to find in Castile. For they treated a marriage betwixt a base daughter of
his called D. Beatrix, and D. Frederic duke of Benauent, who gaue willingly eare vnto it.
The Ambassadors hauing made their report to the king D. Henry their master,Castille. whome
they found at Segobia; hee sent back into Portugal the bishop of Siguenca, and
Doctor Anthony Sanches, adding vnto them Pero Lopes of Aiala, Alcaide Maior of Toledo.
They were much troubled concerning the marriage of D. Frederic, whereof the Q. of
Nauar did aduertise the king D. Henry, yea she did sollicit in the name of the D. of Benauent,
that either he might bee allowed to marry the daughter of the K. of Portugal, or else
they should giue him the Countesse of Albuquerque to wife, who was secretly accorded
to the Infant D. Frederic. The K. desiring neither of these marriages, seemed to refer all to
the Countesses will, who told the Archb. of Toledo in the presence of them all, that shee
wold do all that pleased the king: wherefore there was hope giuen to the Queen of Nauar
to haue the marriage finished at Areualo, and a dispatch was sent to D. Frederic, to aduertise
him of what was past: but all this was but to diuert the marriage with Portugal, being
more pleasing to the Duke, then that of the Countesse of Albuquerque, the which hee
made openly knowne vnto the king: wherefore the king proceeding in the same manner,
sent the Archb. of Toledo to him, to perswade him with reason, that neither of these two
marriages was fit for him, and rather to offer him the Marquis of Villena's daughter, with
a more ample dowrie, then that which the king of Portugal could giue to D. Beatrix his
daughter. But he could draw no other answer from D. Frederic, but that many Noblemen
about the king declaring themselues his enemies, he was forced to seeke fauor and friendship
in Portugall.
At the same time the Inhabitants of Zamora, growing iealous of the captain of the castle,
and of the tower of S. Sauior (being a gentleman called Nugno Martinez of Villaycan,Troubles in Zamora.
a deuoted seruant to the Duke of Benauent) put themselues in armes, and made trenches
and barricado's against him, saying, that he had some bad desseine with the Duke of Benauent,
whose men he receiued daily into those forts in great numbers, so as they sent to demand
succours of the king, and of the Master of the Calatraua, who had beene sent with
some troupes, to keepe a garrison at Salamana, against the frontier of Portugall.

The Master considering the consequence of this trouble, at this time when as the tru^
with Portugal being expired, they expected warre, would not send any succours, lest he
should incense the Duke in shewing himselfe partiall; the which pleased the king, who
sent the Bishop of Siguenca speedily to Benauent, whereas the Arch-bishop of Toledo
was yet, to the end they might so worke with the Duke, as these trobles of Zamora might
be pacified, the which they effected, and the Archb. came to Zamora, and brought the captaine,
vpon assurance that the king would take it well to promise to deliuer the fort of S.
Sauior, into the hands of Fernand Alphonso of Montnegro, Gouernor of Toro: the towne
also gaue hostages: which things beeing thus ended, the Arch. returned to the king at
Segobia.
 The Deputies of Castile appointed to treate a peace with Portugal, hauing met with
the Prior of S.Portugal. Iohn of Protugal, and others appointed by the King D. Iohn at Sabugal, and
conferred often of that busines, they could not yeeld to those hard conditions which were
demanded: for the Portugals would haue the townes of Miranda and Sabugal left free to
them: that the king D. Henry should giue 12. Gentlemen,Conditions of peace propo^nded by the king of Portugal. and 12. good Burgesses in hostage
for 12. yeares, for the assurance of the peace; which should be changed euery foure
yeares, and others of the like quality deliuered for them. And that during the sayd 12.
yeares he should not giue any ayde vnto the Queen D. Beatrix, nor to the Infants D. Iohn
and D. Denis, brethren to the deceased king D. Fernand, who were in Castile, nor to any
other that should attempt against the Portugals: that all prisoners of either side sholdbe
deliuered, with other conditions, which seemed so hard vnto the Castillans, as they durst
not aduenture to promise any thing, but onely concluded a truce for two moneths, that
they might conferre more amply vpon this pacification.
In the meane time the king D. Henry came to Medina del campo,Castile. to bee neere to Portugal,
and to the duke of Benauent, who made shew to breed some innouation within the
realme, hauing drawne together aboue 500. lances and a great number of Gentlemen at
Pedroco, and about Toro. By reason wherof, and of many other insolencies, wherof complaints
came daily to Court, the king sent the Archbish. of Toledo againe vnto him, with
some Deputies of the citties which were of the Councell, to let him vnderstand, how vnseemely
it was for him to entertaine the realme, whereof he was a member, in such ielousie,
and to consume the people by the spoils and robberies of his men who kept the fields:
to what end went he so armed? what feared he? whereon did he complaine? what great benefit
did he pretend by the allyance of Portugal, that he should disdaine the fauours of his
king, who had dealt both bountifully and honourably with him, giuing him a million of
marauidis yearely, and might hope for greater matters, and seing that he had such ample
restimonies of the kings loue, and the councels, to perswade him to come to court, where
he might purchase more fauor then euer? The duke answered to all that which the Archb.
had propounded vnto him, that he had neuer giuen eare to a marriage with Portugal, but
in case a peace or a long truce were concluded betwixt the two realmes. As for that hee
went accompanied with souldiers, it was well knowne that he had enemies in Court, who
had factions throughout the realme, which forced him to stand vpon his guard, and therfore
they should not hold it strange if he came not to court. Moreouer, if he had receiued
fauors from the king, he was ready to employ them in his seruice, and his whole estate.
The Archb. deliuered many reasons vnto him, in presence of the Deputies to pacifie him,
and then returned to Medina del campo, where hauing giuen an accompt vnto the king
and councel of his employment, he held it fit to content the duke in some sort, for the mariage
of Portugal was much aduanced. Thereupon it was bruted (whosoeuer were the author)
that the Duke approched neere vnto the towne, and that hee had intelligence with
some, to be brought in with his forces, with caused a great mutiny among them, and euery
man began to gather souldiers together for his owne assurance.
The Archb. who a was friend to the duke (so far-forth as he did entertaine the troubles
wherein he tooke delight) propounded a means which he held very conuenient, to auoid
the spoiles which might follow these quarrels, which was, that he with the Archbish. of S.
Iames, and the Master of the Calatraua should retire themselues to their houses, and that
about the king there should only remaine Iohn Hurtado of Mendoca, and the Deputies of

townes, and that the king should consult with them how to giue content to the duke of
Benauent, and to find him a party equall to that which was offered him in Portugall.
By these factions,Miscries of ciuill warre. all the Realme was in combustion, and all sorts of insolencies were
committed both in town and countrie, iustice was abused, and the treasure mis-gouerned.
The city of Seuile was molested by D. Pedro Ponce of Leon, Lord of Marchena, and D. Aluar
Perez of Guzman, Admirall of Castile, who seized thereon, in the absence of D. Iohn
Alphonso of Guzman, Earle of Niebla one of the turors, chasing many of his seruants and
followers out of the city. On the other side Nugno Martinez of Villaycan, captaine of the
fort of Zamora, not satisfied with the accord which had beene made by the meanes of the
Archibsh. of Toledo, sent to the duke of Benauent to haue him approch, and he would deliuer
him vp the castle which he had in guard: the duke posting thither, could not effect
this enterprise, for that the inhabitants of Zamora, being aduertised by some of the dukes
men, prouided for it, whereupon the Duke returned, and many that followed him did abandon
him* wherevpon the king sent the Archb. of S. Iames, and the Master of Calatraua
to assure the townes that were suspected, but they were shut out of Toro, the Inhabitants
saying, that they would not receiue any, if the king were not in person, but they entred
into Zamora, where as many knights of the dukes traine yeelded vnto them, and soon
after the king came. But the Duke was aduertised thereof at the castle of Majorga, belonging
to the Infant D. Fernand, by Iohn Alphonso de la Cerde, who hauing bin high Steward
of the Infants house, and then displaced by the kings tutors, substituting in his place Pero
Suarez of Quignones, Gouernor of Leon, had through despight fallen to the Duke of
Benauents partie.
Whilest that these contended in Castile, the Deputies,Portugal. appointed to treat a peace with 
the King of Portugal during the truce which had beene prolonged, came to Extremos
in the yeare 1393.1393. the Portugal demanding for a finall resolution, these Articles following.
That they should giue in hostage the base sons of the duke of Benauent,Demands of Portugall to Castile. of the Earls
of Gijon, and of Niebla, (for the great men of Spaine had more base children then legitimate)
the nephewes of the Masters of S. Iames and Calatraua, of the Arch-bishops of
Toledo, and S. Iames, of Iohn Hurtado of Mendoca, and of Diego Lopes of Estuniga. But
aboue all they demanded the Duke of Benauents son, thinking he would not giue him, vnlesse
the king of Castile, would deliuer the castle of Zamora into his hands, the which they
desired, being assured that the Duke was wholy at their deuotion: but when they vnderstood,
that he had fayled to enter that fort, and that he began to be abandoned by many
of the knights which had folowed him, they became more tractable, and yeelded to a turce
for 15. yeares, so as they would giue them in hostage, the Earle of Gijons son, and eleuen
Knights sonnes more, with 12. children of the cittizens of Burgos, Toledo, Leon, Seuile,
Cordoua, and Zamora: yet would not the Deputies of Castile conclude this truce, which
was most beneficiall for Portugall, but demanded some respite to aduertise the king and
his tutors. The king with his councell hauing considered the danger wherinto the homebred
toubles, together with a forraine warre would draw them, they yeelded to all the
Portugals demanded, namely, not to ayde nor assist D. Beatrix the window Queen, nor D.
Iohn, or D. Denis her Vncles. This a truce was concluded for fifteene yeares betwixt Castile
and Portugal.
The Court being in the cittie of Zamora, the captaine of the castle refused for some 
daies to deliuer the place vp to the king,Castile. saying, that his father Iohn Martines of Villaycan
lately deceased, being Gouernor of Zamora, and He had held it by fealty and homage, and
that they might not deliuer it vp vntill the king were 14. yeares old complete: but the tutors
sought him by so many meanes, and made him such promises, that he should be recompenced
for his fathers estates, which had beene giuen to others, as in the end he deliuered
the palce into their hands, for the which he was in effect recompenced. They had
promised him the gouernement of Ledesma, which did belong to the Countesse of Albuquerque
but they of the place refusing him, for that they did not trust him, he was otherwise
prouided for. The Court remaining at Zamora, the Archb. weary of too much rest,
retired himselfe into his Bishoprick, being not greatly affected to the kings seruice, but to
take part and adhere wholy to the Duke of Benauent, he now gaue them greater cause to

suspect him, for that he grew in choller with them of the Councell vppon his departure,
pressing them to giue the Duke of Benauent contentment, and to pay him the Arrerages
of his pensions: and that they should also giue satisfaction to D. Diego Hurtado of Mendoca,
touching the Admiralty which he demanded, and to Iohn of Velasco, for the Office
of Lord Chamberlaine to the King, and to Don Iohn Alphonso de la Cerde, touching the
place of Lord Steward to the Infant D. Fernand, which they had taken from him, to giue
it to Pero Suarez of Quignones. Whereunto they answered mildly, that it was fitte such
men should be satisfied, and that they would resolue, according to iustice and equity, and
as their dignitie required. Besides these importunities, and other presumptions, it was reported,
that he had receiued the twentith penny of all merchandize and goods which had
beene sold within the Realme,Archb. of Toledo and D. Iohn of Velasco detayned prisoners in Court. with other vnlawfull impositions: whereuppon the Gouernors
gaue order to stay him, and Don Iohn of Velasco. Whereupon they were commanded
to deliuer vnto the King or his Captaines, the castles which they held: so as the
Arch-bishop was constrayned, notwithstanding any excuses, and allegations of his good
seruice, to dispossesse himselfe of the castles of Talauera, Vzeda, and Alcala the old, and
Iohn of Velasco of that of Arnedo. For the Arch-bishops imprisonment there was a generall
interdiction in the Diocesses of Zamora, Palence, and Salamanca, and in the court.
Such things past in Castile, during the minoritie of the King D. Henry, which did much
greiue the confederate Princes their allyes, to see a young Prince so ill intreated by his
ambitious subiects; among which, the most remarkable were the great Prelates of the
realme. Among others, Charles the sixth, the French king, did the office of a Christian
Prince and friend, sending this yeare 1393. a sollemne ambassage to the king of Castile,
the which came to Toro, where as the Court then remayned, to condole for the disobedience
of his subiects, especially of the Noblemen, offering the king, in their Masters
name, all ayde and support of the forces of France, if he had need. The French did also
write to euery one of the Gouernors, to the chiefe Noblemen of Castile, and to the principall
townes, exhorting them by the duty which they did owe vnto God, and to the crown
of Castile, to obey their King, and to seeke the peace and quiet of the realme. This ambassage
was receiued, heard, and sent backe with great honor, as it was fit.
To draw the Duke of Benauent to the kings seruice, the Arch-bishop of S. Iames went
to him being at Tordehumes, a place belonging to the duke, hauing a safe-conduct from
D. Alphonso Henriques of Castile, son to the deceased D. Frederic, Master of S. Iames. This
Aarchb. wrought in such sort, as he reclaymed the duke, promising him in the kings name
a confirmation of his annuall pension, and to giue him 70000. thousand frankes of gold,
to aduance him to some good marriage, so as he would leaue the allyance of Portugal,
and moreouer, the King would pardon him all that was past. After which the Duke
came to Burgos to the king, without any distrust, yea he refused a son of D. Iohn Hurtado
of Mendoca, and one of D. Diego Lopes of Estuniga, with the Arch-bishoppes nephew,
which were offered vnto him for hostages: at which his free disposition the king and the
whole court did much reioyce. Beeing at Burgos, the truce concluded with Portugal was
proclaymed, as it had beene in like manner in Lisbone: thither came Ambassadours from
the Duke of Lancaster, to demand two yeares arrerages of the pension which the deceased
king D. Iohn had granted to the sayd Duke, and to the Dutchesse D. Constance his
wife, beeing foure-score thousand Frankes of gold, the which was willingly payed, and
therefore the Duke did quit the interest which hee pretended, for want of due payment.
 The King Don Henry growing to the age of fourteene yeares, when as hee should take
vppon him the gouernement of the Realme,Maiority of D. Henry king of Castile. being riper of iudgement then of yeares, he
did anticipate three moneths to free himselfe of his tutors: and therefore hauing called
the Noblemen and Prelats which did freely frequent the Court, with the Deputies of the
townes, in the presence of D. Domingo Bishop of S. Ponce, Legat to Pope Clement, hee
declared that from thence forth he tooke the gouernement of his realmes into his owne
hands: wherfore none of them should any more stile themselues Tutors, nor meddle with
the gouernment, vnlesse they were called.
In this assembly the Legate was a meanes to haue the Arch-bishop of Toledo restored
to those places and Castles which had beene before violently taken from him, and the

interdiction of the three aboue-named Bishopprickes was taken away, the king making
great submissions: There they also treated to reforme many disorders within the Realm,
by reason that Bishopprickes and other spirituall liuings were giuen to strangers,
whereas they should be employed to entertaine youth at schoole,Orders for the giuing of spiritual ^iuings. or to reward men of
merit, and such as were borne in the Country, which was the cause that Spaniards did
not studie, for want of meanes, whereby the Realme was much damnified, not onely in
spiritual matters, but also in temporall. The redresse must come chiefly from the Pope,
who (being importuned by such as had bin preferred to benefices, and by letters of fauor
from forraine Princes) decreed, that they should enioy them, but after their deaths none
should be preferred to any benefice in Castile and Leon, if he were not borne in the countrie.
In this businesse the king carried himselfe afterwards as he pleased. Beeing free from
his Gouernors, hee had many waightie affaires, especially for the confirmation of the
peace made with the Duke of Lancaster, and for the truce newly concluded with the king
of Portugal, there beeing a reseruation in both treaties of a confirmation when he should
come to the full age of fourteene yeares. And moreouer, it did behooue him to send an
ambassage into France, to renew the League with king Charles the sixth. Besides, the ordinarie
expences in the Gouernours time amounted to fiue and thirtie millions of marauidis
then currant mony, so as it was needfull to cut off this excessiue charge: for these
considerations and others, he called a generall assembly of the Estates at Madrid. Whilest
that they assembled, he passed into Biscay, where hee had not beene since his comming
to the Crowne.
The Companies and commonalties of the countrie, at his comming assembled in the
field of Arechaalaga, according to their vsuall manner, demanding from the king a confirmation
of their auncient liberties, rights, and priuiledges, the which he granted Moreouer,Demands made by them of Biscay to the king of Castile.
they desired to bee freed from all royall Prerogatiues which had beene imposed in
that Prouince, since the death of King Iohn, and that he should confirme the new societies
erected among them, for the punishment of malefactors: and hee did also grant the
combate as it was vsed among Gentlemen in Castile: of all which things he granted then
full power with the aduice of his Councell. There the King was receiued for the Lord of
Biscay, where hauing kissed his hands, he was led to the church in the towne of Larrabecua,
where according to the custome of his Predecessors Lords of Biscay, hee tooke an
oath vpon the altar to maintaine the rights of the countrie. Beeing afterwards come to
Guernica, some Biscayens presented a petition vnto him, to haue all crimes which had
beene committed in the country since the death of King Iohn pardoned, from the which
hee was disswaded by the Noblemen of his Councell, that loued iustice to auoyd the pernicious
consequence thereof. Hee did also sweare at Berneo, in Saint Eufemia's church,
to maintaine the freedomes and liberties of that Town, but not so amply as they desired.
Beeing returned to Guernica, after much disputation touching the combate, which some
demanded, and others denyed, he granted it by pluralitie of voyces, and then was this
manner of challenge brought into Biscay, the King beeing set vnder a tree, in the vsuall
place, and after the accustomed manner. Then hee returned by Durango and Victoria
to Burgos, and from thence to Madrid, where the Estates assembled.
This yeare some Biscayns and Guipuscoans, armed certaine shippes at Seuile, at their 
owne cost and charge,Discouery of the Canaries. to seeke their fortunes at sea, and came to one of the Ilands of the
Canaries, called Lancarote, where beeing landed, they made prey of all hey found, against
whome the Ilanders with their King gathered together, and came to encounter
them, but the Biscayns had the vpper hand: they slue many of their enemeies, and caried
away an hundred and seuenty prisoners, with the King and Queene of the Iland: hauing
well obserued these Ilands, with the number, greatnesse and sytuation, they returned into
Spaine with great store of hydes, wax, and other things, whereof those Ilands abound. The
king D. Henry was very ioyfull of this exploit, and from that time challenged a right of
propriety in the Ilands of the Canaries, which they hold to be the ancient fortunat Ilands,
whereof he afterwards gaue the conquest to a French Gentleman, called Iohn of Betancourt,
reseruing the fealty and homage thereof vnto his Soueraigntie.
In the assembly of the Estates held at Madrid, the Kings majoritie was confirmed, who

 also did auow whatsoeuer his Gouernors had done. The necessities propounded for the
payment of great yearely summes,King of Castils maiority approued by the Estates. as well for the treaties of peace, payment of souldiers,
ordinarie pensions giuen to the Princes and Noblemen of the Realme: as also for the entertaynment
of the Kings house, the Estates made a free offer of a contribution: yet they
besought him to cut off his superfluous gifts and pensions; and to cause the militarie orders
to be obserued: for of 4000. Lances which were in pay, it was manifest there were
not 2000.
They let him vnderstand, that the reuenues of the Crowne beeing well husbanded,
were great and sufficient for all expences. They moreouer besought him to dispose
of his affaires by the aduice of men of iudgement and experienced in the gouernment of
the Realme. The king thanked them for their good aduice, promising to order all things
according to right and equity. And for proofe, he cut off many pensions, and reuoked the
offices and gifts for life, out of the reuenues, and other things ordained and assigned by his
Gouernors, especially to D. Leonora his Aunt, Queene of Nauar, notwithstanding that
some were confirmed by the meanes of his fauorites. He gaue to the Duke of Benauent a
pension of an 150000. marauidis onely: he disanulled all leagues, associations and homages
done, by reason of the precedent troubles, and caused an absolution to be published
by the Legate, with Apostolicke authoritie of all oathes which had beene formerly
taken in that regard.
During this assembly the marriage of the Infant D. Fernand, the kings brother, and of
D. Leonora Countesse of Albuquerque, which had beene kept secret vntill that time, was
published, and a present promise made, and then they began to call her Infanta: she was
cousin, one degree aboue her husband: for D. Sancho her father, and the king D. Henry
the second, Grandfather to this D. Fernand, were brethren: shee raigned with her husband
in Arragon. The Estates beeing dissolued, the king being come to Illesca, the Archbishop
of Toledo came thither vnto him, and was graciously receiued: but D. Frederic
Duke of Benauent, beeing discontented for that they had cut off part of his pensions had
gifts, retired himselfe about Leon, where he violently seazed vpon the Kings mony, and
the reuenues of the Infant D. Fernand: whereof the king being aduertised, he sent a commandement
vnto him to forbeare those courses, and that he old giue order to his Treasurers
to pay him that which was in equitie due vnto him; whereof he made no great accompt,
but made shew to treate a new league, and confederacies with the Queen of Nauarre
his sister, D. Alphonso Earle of Gijon his brother, and D. Pedro Earle of Transtamara
his cousin: to whom the King sent Garci Goncales of Herera, his Marshal, especially to the
Queene of Nauarre his Aunt, beeing in the castle of Roa with her daughters, intreating
her instantly to forbeare those tumults. Garci Goncales of Herera told the Duke of Benauent,
that he would proceed criminally against him, and others, if they continued to troble
the Realme, and would not be satisfied with that which had beene decreed by the Estates
at Madrid, for it was impossible to pay them that which the Gouernors had granted
them before.
Yet hee offered to the Queene Donna Leonora, besides the Decrees of the Estates,
an 100000. marauidis, for the entertaynment of her daughters. The Duke sought to excuse
himselfe, saying, that the king had beene ill informed by his enemies, but if it pleased
him to giue him for assurance the sonne of Iohn Hurtado of Mendoca, one of Diego Lopes
of Estuniga, and one of Ruy Lopes of Aualoz, hee would willingly come to Court, to
giue an accompt of his actions, and to purge himselfe of the blame which was layed
vppon him: The Marshall promised, and returning to the Court, hee met with the
Arch-bishoppe of Saint Iames in Amusco, who vppon a counterfeit excuse retired himselfe
from the Court, pretending to be sicke, and therefore could not come: but in effect
it was, for that hee saw the Arch-bishop of Toledo beganne to gouerne all, and to be in
greater fauour then before.
 The King of Nauarre hearing that his wife had giuen cause to the King Don Henry
to be discontented with her,Nauarre. by reason of her turbulent practises in Castile, hee thought
it a fit and conuenient meanes to draw her into Nauarre, which shee did contradict all
shee could: whereupppon he sent his Ambassadours to the King Don Henry which were

Martin Ayuar Gouernor of Tudele, and a Doctor, who found the court at Alcala of
Henares: They intreated the King of perswade the Queene his aunt to dispose her selfe
to come into Nauarre to liue with her husband, as duty required: but if shee could not
be drawne vnto it, that hee would interpose his authority, that the Infants his daughters
might be deliuered vnto them, to carry them to the King their father, who would hold it
for a great fauor. The king D. Henry was very desirous she should retire her self, being but
a fire-brand to kindle combustions in Castile:King of Na^^^ sends for his wife. but being of a milde and gentle disposition,
he could not resolue to force her: wherefore he answered the Ambassadors, that his
will was to please the King their maister, both in this and in all other things, and that hee
would doe what he might to perswade his aunt to returne; so as he sent a messenger vnto
her, with perswasiue letters: but shee made answere touching that which concerned
her selfe, as shee had done often before. In regard of her children, shee said, that seeing
she had sent two vnto the father, they might well leaue her the other two, for her consolation.
The King hearing this answere, willed the Ambassadors to returne, and to assure
the King of Nauarre, on his behalfe, that hee would so deale, as the Queene his wife
should returne vnto him; desyring him not to take it in ill part, if hee first tried all milde
courses, and be^itting Princes so neerely allied: or at the least, if shee continued obstinate,
he would send him his daughters. The ambassadors after they had renued the old
league betwixt the two Princes, in the which many great men of Castile entred, they returend
into Nauarre, to giue an account vnto the King of their negotiation.
The Marshal Garci Goncales of Herera, who returned from the Queene of Nauarre,
Duke of Benauent and others,Castille. reported vnto the King that the Duke and Queene had
met at Roa, and that they complained of his fauorits, which were, D. Iohn Hurtado of
Mendoca his Lord Steward, D. Diego Lopes of Estuniga Iustice Major, and Ruy Lopes of
Aualos, his Lord Chamberlaine: and soone after the King was aduertised that the Archbishop
of Saint Iames had ioyned with the Duke,League treated to the preiudice of the king of Castile. and that they treated a league betwixt
them, the Earle of Gijon, the Infants of Portugal, and others, the which did much
trouble him. The Ambassadors of Nauarre staied not long before they returned into
Castile, which were the same Gouernor of Tudele, and the Bishop of Huesea, a Frenchman
borne.
The King hauing past the mountaines was come to Vailledolit, where he was againe,
in the King of Naurres behalfe, prest with his promise, wherevpon hee tooke two
months respight to send the Queen and her daughters, or at the least the Infantas, without
any futher delay: and hauing propounded it in councell what assurance the Queene
of Nauarre might with reason demand of her husband, they gaue their opinions, that
the King D. Charles, with some of the chiefe Knights, and Deputies of the cities and towns
of Nauarre swearing that she should be wel and honourably intreated, she had no cause
to refuse to goe vnto her husband. Hee sent a gentlemen with the Ambassadors of
Nauarre,Resolution for the Queene of Nauarres returne to her husband. to let the King their maister vnderstand what had beene thought fit in
councell, and to receiue the oth. To preuent the tumultuous troubles in Castile, and
to breake the league which the aboue named Noblemen with the Queene Donna
Leonora had plotted, the King D. Henry drew together two thousand Launces, beeing
newly incensed by the refusall which D. Alphonso Earle of Gijon had made to sweare the
truce made with Portugal, it being concluded that certaine prelats and noblemen of
Castile should sweare it, and signe it with the King: the Earle excusing himselfe for that
he had married a wife of the bloud of Portugal, to whom there had beene certaine places
and other things promised by the treaty of marriage, which had not beene kept: the
like refusall was made by D. Alphonso of Arragon, Marquis of Villena, saying, the truce
had beene made without his priuity, whereof the Ambassador of Portugal, being sent
to that end into Castile tooke an act. For this cause, and other signes tending to open
rebellion, the King armed, and sent D. Diego Lopes of Estuniga, to the Archbishop of
Saint Iames, to know his intent, and what cause he had to complaine: The Archbishop
answered, that these tumults grew, for that they had cut off these Noblemens pensions,
and confirmed them to others: and that there was no better meanes of peace, then
to giue contentment to the duke and the rest. Don Diego Lopes aduised him to come

to court, to giue his opinion touching these things, but hee answered, that hee would
not come, whilest the Archbishop of Toledo was in court.
 With these intestine troubles, the King D. Henry was almost drawn into an vnseasonable
warre,Moores. with the Moores of Granado, by the vaine ouerweening of D. Martin Iuanes
of Barbuda, maister of the Alcantara, a Portugal borne, who being entred into quarrell
with Ioseph King of Granado, touching religion, would make triall of the truth of Christian
religion by armes; of his person against the King of Granado, or of a hundred
Christian Knights against two hundred Moores, or more, to that proportion, vnto a
thousand. The King being aduertised of this other tumult, hee commanded the maister
by his letters not to enter into this action; for that hee would not by any meanes haue
the truce broken with the Moores: but the maister not regarding the Kings prohibition,
marched to Cordoua, with three hundred Launces, and one thousand foote, hauing
a crosse for his Ensigne. They of Cordoua, let him know that he should not vndertake
this enterprise, which was contrary to the Kings will and seruice, and the peace of the
country, giuing him many examples of their ruine which haue caused vnnecessary war:
but he gaue more credit to an Hermit, called Iohn del Says, who had assured him that hee
should haue the victory, wishing him not to giue care to any that said the countrary:
Moreouer being much giuen to Astronomy, he thought he had foreseene some thing
by the starres. The wisest men fo Cordoua, namely D. Alphonso and D. Diego, Lords of
Aguilar, seeing that no reasons could preuaile with the maister, would haue slopped his
passage at the city bridge: but he was so fauoured by the superstitious multitude, vnder
collour that it was dishonourable to hinder an enterprise of the crosse against Infidels:
so as he not only past, but so augmented his troupes, as being come to Alcala the Royal,
he had aboue fiue thousand foote. At A cala D. Alphonso Fernandes of Cordoua Lord
of Aguilar, and his brother D. Diego Fernandes, came vnto him, who did admonish him
againe, adding withall, that euery one would hold it indiscreetly done of him, who was
reputed a wise Knight, and Maister of the Order of Alcantara, to goe and defie the King
of Granado, who was so neere, as with in lesse then two daies hee might incounter him
with two hundred thousand foote;Great power of the realme of Granado. and fifty thousand horse, and that without doubt, besides
the daunger and hurt hee might doe vnto the realme, by the breach of the truce,
and defeat of his men, he should blemish his honour, and draw vpon himselfe perpetuall
blame, amongst all men that professed armes as a rash and ill aduised captaine: but finding
him obstinate, and pretending that it would be held cowardise and basenesse in him,
if hauing past so farre,Asores the bounds betwixt Granado and Castile. hee should now returne: wherevpon they wished him to lead his
men to the riuer of Acores, which makes the limit betwixt Granado and Castile, and
there attend the King of Granado a day or two: if hee appeered, hee should either fight
with him body to body, or else a hundred Christians against two hundred Moores, as
they agreed: But if the Moores came not to the confines, hee should bring backe his
troupes, and so hee should preserue his honour and reputation. The Maister who was
confirmed in his desire to fight with the Moores, beeing moreouer incensed for that the
Granadins had intreated two Gentlemen ignominiously, whom hee had sent vnto their
King, to carry this challenge; hee answered brauely to these Kinghts, that hee thanked
them for their good aduice, but he was resolued not to stay, vntill hee saw the port of Eluira
at the city of Granado, or fight with the Moores, if hee met them vpon the way,
and that he did hope to let the world see a miracle within few daies. Thus he entred vnfortunatly
into the country of Granado, and did assault the tower of Excla, where hee was
hurt in the hand, and neeere vnto him were three of his men slaine by the defendants,
whereas hee beganne to bee amazed, for the Hermit which followed him had told him,
that he should not loose a man,Hermit an Impost^r. and therefore hee demaunded of him what it ment, that
they had already slaine three of his men, to whom the Hermit answered, that it was ment,
in battaile, and not at the seege of places, the which the Maister beleeued, as assayling the
tower more furiously then before.
The King of Granado seeing the rashnesse of this vnaduised Maister of the Order of
Alcantara, sent Ambassadors to the King of Castile, to complaine of the breach of
the truce made betwixt them, and to demaund if it were by his commandement or not.

On the other side hee assembled a good number of horse and foote, with the which hee
marched towards the fronter, he surprized the maister, who was ill aduertised, and charged
him, with his troupes so furiously, as without giuing them time to arme, hee slue the
maister, and all his horsemen, with most of his footmen, of the which about fifteene
hundred saued themselues by flight. The maister D. Martin Iuanes caused himselfe to
bee surnamed Without feare, and there is such an Inscription found vpon his tombe in
Alcantara, whether his body was carried by the permission of the King of Granado.
The King of Castile had newes of this defeat being in the Monastery of Santa Maria of
Pelayos, neere vnto the towne of Saint Martin de val d' Eglise, where in a manner at the
same time arriued the Ambassadors from the King of Granado, who made their complaint,
and demaunded if the maister of Alcantara were entred in hostile manner into
Granado,Ambassage from the king of Granado to the King of Castile. by his commandement, and what his pleasure was for the entertayning of the
truce. The King answered, that what the maister had done did much displease him, and
that he had forbidden him by his letters to vndertake such quarrels, it auayling nothing
to countenance religion by the breach of the truce, which he desired to entertaine with
the King of Granado his friend: but he had not obayed him, for the which he had beene
punished, if God by his iust iudgement had not abandoned him to bee slaine by the
Moores, and his men defeated, as they had well deserued, whereof he was newly aduertised,
to his great content. The Messengers were sent backe with this answere, the which
did increase the ioy which the Moorish King conceiued for his victory, by the assurance
which they brought him of the continuance of the truce betwixt Granado and Castile.
This trouble vpon the Moores frontier, was a pretext for the Duke of Benauent and 
other of the confederates to arme,D. Henry reduceth the rebels to his obedience. and to fortefie themselues, euery one in his quarter,
saying, it was to be ready at the Kings commandement, if the Moores did enter into Andal^sia.
The King did cause D. Fernand Roderiques of Villadobos, to bee chosen maister
of the Knights of Alcantara, in the place of the deceased Barbuda. D. Laurence Suarez
of Figueroa maister of Saint Iames, vnderstood of this route in Ocagne, where he was,
and came presently to the King being at Pelayos; he aduised him to haue his forces in
a redinesse for all euents, assuring him that he should easily supprsse the Duke of Benauent
and the Earles of Gijon and Transtamara, with other Malcontents, the which hee
should not much regard, but rather be carefull of the Moorish warres, if they grew hot.
And to assure the frontier of Andalusia it was expedient that he were sent to Villa Real,
with the Archbishop of Toledo, to ioyne with the Maister of the Calatraua, and that
the King should come to Toledo: promising moreouer that he would perswade D. Alphonso
of Arragon Marquis of Villena to come and doe him seruice. The King beleeued
this councell, and came to Toledo, whether D. Diego Lopes of Estuniga came vnto
him, and gaue an account of the ^oiage which hee had made vnto D. Iohn Garcia Manrique
Archbishop of Saint Iames: but the King being otherwise aduertised of the disobedience
of the Duke of Benauent, and of his confederats, and how they continually
leauied men, he came to Illesca, being followed by the Archbishop of Toledo, the Maister
of Saint Iames, the Earle of Niebla, D. Diego Hurtado of Mendoca Admirall, Iohn
Hurtado of Mendoca Lord Steward, Diego Lopes of Estuniga chiefe Iustice, Ruy Lopes
of Aualos Chamberlaine, and other Noblemen, with about seuenteene hundred
Launces.
Heere D. Alphonso of Arragon Mrquis of Villena, who had not approched neere
the court all the Kings reigne, came and kist his hands, being accompanied with a hundred
Knights and Squiers of the country of Valencia, which he had aduentured through
the absence of the Earle of Transtamara his competitor, who was in disgrace with the
King D. Henry. The Marquis hauing purged himselfe of such things as might bee obiected
against him,D. Alphonso of Arragon receiued gratiously by the king of Castile. and made many excuses, for his not comming to court, he made sute
to be restored to his Office of Constable of Castile, which had beene taken from him by
the gouernors, to conferre it vpon D. Pedro Earle of Transtamara, to the preiudice of
his honour and dignity, to whom the King gaue a gratious answere, assuring him that
he would order his affaires with all equity and Iustice: then he intreated him to passe the
mountaines and to come with him into Castile the Old, but the Marquis excused him

selfe, saying, that he was not come so well appointed as he desired to doe him seruice,
but if he gaue him meanes he would returne willingly to serue him. So he returned into
his country, not well satisfied with the King D. Henry, who made no account to restore
him to his office of Constable, but soone after, by the aduice of the Archbishop of
Toledo, he tooke from him the title of Marquis of Villena, for that it seemed not safe,
nor profitable for the Estate of Castile, that a Marquisate frontering vpon a forraine
Realme, should remaine in the hands of a Knight who had so strict an alliance as the
Marquis D. Alphonso had with the Kings and Realme of Arragon. From Illesca the
King past to Vailledolit, where he was aduertised that the duke of Benauent was at Cisneros
with six hundred Launces, and two thousand foote; and the Archbishop of Saint
Iames in Amusco, with other six hundred Launces and one thousand foote. Many were
of opinion that the Kings forces should be led against them, to fight with them: but the
sounder iudgment disswasded al fighting, if it were possible, for the realm should loose of
either side, besides the hazard where into the King should thrust both his Estate and
life, by a battaile, to the which a Prince must neuer come against his subiects, vnlesse he
be forced by ineuitable necessity. This aduice preuailed, and there were sent vnto the
Archbishop of Saint Iames, and at his request, Iohn Hurtado, and Diego Lopes of Mendoca
to Calabacanos, with whom they wrought so, as they drew him to court vpon assurance,
whereas the Arachbishop did also obtaine a safe-conduit for the Duke of Benauent,
to whom he went himselfe, and brought him to court. The duke being in the Kings presence,Duke of Benauent comes to court, and seekes to purge himselfe.
sought to free himselfe of the accusations which were laied against him. First he
maintayned that he had taken none of the Kings reuenues within his iurisdiction, but
what was due vnto him, the which should not be held so great a crime, seeing that many
prelats and others of lesse quallity then himselfe, had often vsed it, and were not drawn into
questio^. As for the men of war which he had gathered together, he had therein followed
the general command, for feare of war with the Moores, after the defeat of the maister
of Alcantara: and if he had beene at Roa, to see the Queene of Nauarre his sister it was
not preiudicial to the realm, nor contrary to the Kngs seruice. These excuses were held
neither good nor true by the king; who notwithstanding told him, that he would willingly
forget al that was past,Conditions propounded to the Duke of Benauent. so as he would from threnceforth liue in peace and obedience,
propounding vnto him these conditions. That if it were found he had leauied more money
then had beene assigned him at the last Estates held at Madrid, he should restore it
vnto the king, or to such as it did belong: that he should cause D. Pedro to come to court,
whom the King pardoned, for that which did concerne him, restoring to others their interests:
that the duke should giue his two base sonnes in hostage, and should leaue in deposito
the castles of Medina del Riosecco, and Tordehumos for foure yeeres; with this
clause that if he raised any tumults, those places should come vnto the King: That if he
shold fal from the Kings seruice, certain Knights of his houshold shold promise and swear
to turne vnto the kings party: that the pension of an hundred and 15. thousand Marauidis,
graunted vnto the Duke at the Estates at Madrid, should be augmented to fiue hundred
thousand: that for the seuenty thousand frankes of gold which had beene promised him
for his marriage, the King gaue him the reuenues of Valencede Campo, the which Iohn
of Portugal had till then enioyed, and now he tooke it from him, for that hee had beene a
practiser and confederat against his Estate. These things being thus ordred, the duke and
the Archibishop went from court, and being come to Cisneros, the duke ratefied all, and
dismist his troupes, retayning only a hundred launces for the Kings seruice.
Within few daies after D, Alphonso Henriques came vnto the King being at Vailledolit,D. Pedro Earle of ^ranstamara comes to court.
with a letter of credit from the Constable D. Pedro Earle of Transtamara his brother,
telling the King, that if it pleased him to giue some assurance vnto the Earle, hee would
come to court: wherevpon the King assured him, and hee came presently, freeing himselfe
of many things whereof he had beene accused: then he complained of D. Alhonso
Earle of Gijon, who had forcebly taken from him the towne of Paredes of Naua, which
the deceased King D. Iohn had giuen him in exchange for the towne of Alua de Tormes,
which he had taken from him, to giue it to D. Iohn Infant to Portugal.
The King gaue the Constable a good reception, promising to prouide for all things

according vnto Iustice: and presently he went in person to Paredes of Naua, which place
he deliuered into the hands of Ruy Lopes of Aualos his Lord Chamberlaine, and did sommon
his vncle D. Alphonso Earle of Gijon, to appeere within threescore daies, and to
produce what right he had to this place, wherevpon Iustice should be done him: but if
he did not appeere, it should be adiudged to D. Pedro. The King did also presse him to
sweare the Articles of the truce of Portugal, as other Noblemen, Prelats and Knights
had done according to the capitulation; the which the Earle would not doe, but sought
excuses and euasions, wherewith the King was very much discontented. This was a
matter of great importance, for the Marquis of Villena and the Earle of Gijon refusing
to sweare the Articles, the King of Portugal pretended that the truce was of no force,
and that the hostages were forfeited vnto him: So as he refused the oth which the Marquis,
after his refusall, would haue taken when as hee came to court, saying, that the
time prefixed for such ratifications was past, wherefore they must capitulate a new.
During these troubles in Castile, the King of Nauarre did still sollicit his wiues returne
or at the least of his two daughters: and the King D. Henry had a great desire to see her
dislodge, but he knew not how to send her honestly out of Castile: But she her selfe prepared
the way: for when as shee vnderstood that the Duke of Benauent, and others of
the league were reduced vnder the Kings obedience, fearing some surprise, she procured
D. Pedro the Constable to come to Roa, with two hundred Launces, and some footemen,
and then seeing her selfe as it were assured, shee sent vnto the King, to demaund assurance
to come to court, to iustifie her selfe: but the King thinking that the Duke of
Benauent, the Constable, his aunt, and all they of the league in Generall, did smother
in their brests the same wils they had before, hee resolued to punish them, one after an
other; and therefore he caused them, that the Queene of Nauarre had sent vnto him, to
be staied, and then being come to Burgos, he propounded in councell, what was to bee
done. There were present the Archbishop of Toledo, the maisters of Saint Iames and
Calatraua, D. Iohn Hurtado of Mendoca the Admiral, D. Iohn Hurtado, D. Ruy Lopes of
Aualos, and others, whereof some came armed to councell, by the Kings commandement.
D. Frederic Duke of Benauent came also, notwithstanding that some of his friends
had wished him to retire, telling him that they ment to take him: as he entred into the
place where the councell was kept, the King went forth, making shew that he would goe
sup, and speaking aloude, that they must consider what answere to giue to the Queene of
Nauarre.
And soone after hauing sent them word, that they should speedily dispatch that
which they had to doe,D. Frederic Duke of Benauent a prisoner. the Duke was taken prisoner, and put in the castle of Burgos, in
the custody of the Maister of Saint Iames, from whence hee was afterwards transported
to Monreal, and in the end in the time of the King. D. Iohn to the castle of Almodouar
del Rio neere vnto Cordoua, where he ended his daies.
This is that famous prison of D. Frederic duke of Benauent, celebrated throughout all
Spaine. This done the King sent Diego Peres Sarmiento the Gouernor, to seize von all
the Lands and goods, not onely of the Duke of Benauent, but also of the Constable D.
Pedro, and by the same meanes he seized vpon the lands of his aunt. Donna Leonora
Queene of Nauarre, and he himselfe, being followed with some troupes, went to Roa
(where she was) to beseege her, and take her: wherevpon the Constable who was with
her, abandoned her, and went into Galicia, to prouide for his owne affaires. The
Queene seeing her selfe forsaken, beganne to lament, filling all the castle of Roa with
pittifull cries;Queene of Nauar da^^ted. and the more to mooue them to pitty, she attired her selfe, her daughters
and women in mourning weeds, and sent her Confessor vnto the King, to know his
pleasure, seeing hee came in that manner with an army. The King gaue him some reasons,
and marched on to Valera, from whence he sent Iohn Hurtado of Mendoca and Ruy
Lopes of Aualos to the Queene, to whom (being full of teares, and with a mournfull habit
and countenance) she complained much of the King her Nephew, saying, that hee
sought to take away her goods; and demanded assurance to ^^oe and speake with him.
The Inhabitants of Roa, careful of their safeties, sent to offer the place vnto the King, if
it pleased him to receiue them as his owne, and not to alienate them any more, wherewith

the King was content: wherevpon they receiued the Archbishop of Toledo, Iohn
Hurtado, Diego Lopes and Ruy Lopes with their followers, and soone after the King entred,
to whom the Queene being come, they entred into a church, and there had much conference.
In the end the King granted her the reuenues of Roa, Sepulueda, Mardrigal
and Areualo, retayning the Iustice vnto himselfe and he commanded her to follow him
to Vailledolit.
This businesse being ended,Earle of Gijon seizeth vpon Oueido. the King marched towards Leon to make warre against his
vncle D. Alphonso Earle of Gijon, who was in the Asturia's, and had seized vpon the city
of Oueido, which did belong vnto the King, the which he did fortefie, with the towne of
Gijon, and other places. By the way hee had conference with the Archbishop of Saint
Iames, who was much mooued for the imprisonment of the Duke of Benauent: for he
had come to court vpon his word and assurance. The King made him promise that he
should not enter into any league, yet the griefe hee had for the Dukes detention, made
him forget all the affection he had had to the seruice of the crowne of Castile, which in
the end he left, and retired into Portugal, making the Schisme in the church his pretext,
saying, that of his knowing the Pope raigning in Auignon was not lawfull, but he that
held his seat at Rome: and for that the Portugals did adhere vnto him he retired into
Portugal, where he obtained the Bishoprike of Coimbra,Archbishop of S. Iames retires into Portugal. and then the Archbishoprike
of Braga, where he ended his daies. He was of the noble family of Manriques, a man of
a small stature, but of an actiue spirit, full of courrage, high minded, eloquent, liberall,
apt to compound great mens quarrels, ambitious, and one that enuied the Archbishop
to Toledo. D. Pedro of Tenorio, who was of a different humor; seuere, statly, ambitious
also,His disposition. but he couered his ambition with modesty, maintayning his dignity in such sort
as he was respected and feared. He lost in Castile the Archbishoprike of Saint Iames,
the office of Chancellor to the King, with many other lyuings. The King in passing
caused the castle of Mansilla to be razed, and vnited the towne (which had belonged vnto
the Duke) vnto his demaines. He then sent his men against Gijon, the which they
did beseege both by sea and land.
Being come to Leon, he made a declaration in a great assembly, in the chiefe church,
of the rebellions and fellonies of the Earle D. Alphonso his vncle, committed both against
the King D. Iohn his father and himselfe,VVar against the Earle of Gijon. the fauors he had done him since his inlargement
by the Gouernors, and his Ingratitude, for the which he did confiscate all his
goods to the crowne, except the Siegneury of Noruegna, which he gaue to the church
of Ouiedo, as had beene formerly ordained by the deceased King his father. The King
hauing sent some troupes towards Ouiedo the Earles men were chased away, and the
King was maister of the city; so as the Earle was forced to shut himselfe into Gijon,
where he was straightly beseeged. One of his base sonnes called D. Hernando holding
the castle of Saint Martin, deliuered it vnto the King, and came vnto his seruice. The
Constable D. Pedro Earle of Transtamara, seeing what had befallne the Duke of Benauent
and the Queen of Nauar, and how they handled the Earl of Gijon, he found means
to make his accord, and came vnto the King at the seege of Gijon, by whom he was well
receiued, and had giuen him the townes of Pont Ferrada, Villafranca and Varcarcell,
which had beene the Duke of Benauents. The yeere growing towards an end, and the
country of Asturia being barren, not able long to maintaine an army, the King resolued
to make some accord with the Earle,Accord made with the Earle of Gijon. who sought it: wherevpon they concluded these
Articles. That the French King should be Iudge of their controuersies, who should
iudge within six monthes whether the Earle had offended, and if it were found that hee
should loose his lands, he was content, if not, all should be restored to him againe: That
vntill a definitiue sentence, the towne of Gijon should remaine in the Earles hands, vpon
condition it should remaine in the Estate it was then, without adding any supply of
victuals or men; and that the Earle should not goe aboue three leagues from the town,
if it were not into France, to sollicit the iudgement of this cause. In which case the
King should giue him thee hundred thousand Marauidis, to defray his charges: That
the Earles other Lands should remaine in the possession of D. Ruy Lopes of Aualos,
Lrod Chamberlaine to the King, who should hold them vpon his faith; and that the

Earle should giue his sonne D. Henry for hostage. By this composition the Earle D. Alphonso
was freed from seege.
This yeere 1394. died D. Iohn Alphonso of Guzman Earle of Niebla, a man of a peacefull 
spirit,Death of the Earle of Niebla. yet was he somewhat ingaged in the troubles of Castile, leauing his soone D.
Henry of Guzman heire to his great possessions. Pope Clement died also that yeere in
Auignon, the sixteenth yeere of his Popedome, in whose place the Cardinals of that
seat, meaning to proceed to the election of an other,Death of Pope Clement at Auignon. receiued letters from the Vniuersity
of Paris, to perswade them to deferre it for some daies, to know the intention of Pope
Boniface the ninth, resyding at Rome, touching the vnion of the church; yet notwithstanding
they entred into the Conclaue nine daies after the funeral, and without regard
of any letters written by the Vniuersity, and King Charles, they gaue their voices, and
withall made a protestation in writing, that the future Pope should not hinder the rooting
out of the Schisme, and that he should bee bound to giue ouer his dignity if neede
were; they made choise of D. Pedro de Luna, carrying the title of Santa Maria in Cosmedin,
a Cattelan and Doctor of the Canon law; a man of great authority, and well practised
in worldly affaires,Election of Pedro de Luna to be Pope, called Benedict the 13. whom they called Benedict the thirteenth. The French King
yeelding to that was done, sent his Ambassadors to Auignon, to doe the accustomed
homage to the new Pope: but beeing afterwards sollicited by some of the Cardinals,
who repented themselues of Benedicts election, he sought, by meanes of the protestation
which had beene made, to force the Pope to quit his dignity, vnder pretext to reconcile
the Schisme: but Benedict was loth to leaue so sweet a morcell, which so many of his
order had gap'd after, resisting long, to the great preiudice of all Christendome, and the
French king did in vaine sollicit by many Ambassages, D. Henry King of Castile, to ioyne
with him, in the displacing of Benedict from his Popedome, whom the Kings of Nauarre
and Arragon did also obey.
The King D. Henry hauing proceeded, as we haue said, against the chiefe authors of 
the troubles of his realme,Nauarre. he returned to Vailledolit, and knowing by good experience
the disposition of his aunt; whom he had brought with him, he resolued to send her into
Nauarre, to King Charles her husband, the which (notwithstanding the Estate shee was
in) she did impugne by all meanes possible: wherefore the King fearing she would steale
away, and put her selfe into some place of strength, which would be very troublesome to
take, he commanded the prior of Saint Iohn to set a gard about her lodging, and he himselfe
went to Tordesillas. Then the Queene knew that she must of force returne into
Nauarre, without any other assurances then such promises and othes as the King her
husband had giuen, and seeing no euasion, nor delay, she sent to intreat the King her
Nephew to be well aduised what he did, in seeking to force her to returne into Nauarre:
and seeing that it did concerne both her honour and life, she intreated him to propound
it to the graue and learned men of his councel, to resolue what was fit for her to doe. The
King was very well pleased herewith, and committed the businesse to the Bishops of Palence
and Zamora, by whose aduice it was concluded, that the Queene Donna Leonora
should returne to her husband, and that the King her Nephew should accompany her to
the frontiers of Nauarre, whereof she was aduertised, that she might dispose her selfe to
obay, but it was against her will: wherevpon the King returned to Vailledolit,Queene of Nauarre sent to her husband against her will. and from
thence they tooke their way towards Nauarre, hauing sent the Archbishop of Toledo
and him of Zamora, an Arragonois, and the bishop of Albi a Frenchman, with others,
to Tudele, to aduertise King Charles of his wiues comming and to take a new oth of him,
to intreat her well and honourably. The Archbishop of Saragossa came to meet the
Queene, being accompanied by many Knights of Nauarre, France and Arragon; to
whom she was deliuered, with her daughters, vpon the confines of Castile and Nauarre,
to the great contentment of King Henry, to whom she had beene chargeable many
yeeres, by her turbulent and adbitious spirit. The King D. Charles did shew by the
effects, that he was neuer ill-affected towards her; for he receiued her, with all that did
accompany her, with great honour, and shewes of loue and ioy: he intreated her curteously,
and honoured her as much as she could desire: commanding there should be
feasts and bonfiers made throughout all the realme of Nauarre, by reason of her comming.

And for that they had not yet had any sonne, he would haue the Estates of his
realme) assembled to that end at Pampelone, some monthes after the Queenes returne)
sweare the Infanta's his daughters for lawfull heires of the realme, and of his other Estates,
who should succeed one after an other, vnto the last liuer. He caused his subiects
to take this oth, as it was accustomed in Spaine, and to auoide warre and sedition,
whereof they had fresh examples in the neighbour countries of Arragon and Valencia.
D. Iohn King of Arragon,Arragon. sonne to D. Pedro the Cerimonious, hauing reigned nine
yeeres and three monthes, went about that time into the Island of Majorca, whether he
had beene drawne by the seditions of the Islanders, raysed against the Iewes, which
dwelt among them, whom they had slaine, and spoiled, after the manner of the Castillans
and Arragonois, incensed by a seditious Archdeacon, preaching at Seuile, with which
mischiefe all the townes of Spaine were in the end infected except Saragossa. The
King hauing punished the chiefe authors of these hatefull mutinies, in his returne, he
was driuen by a storme, to Cap de Cruz, about Ampurias, from whence being come to
Castillon,Death of D. Iohn King of Arragon. he was surprized by sodaine death; some hold that it was in chasing the Wolfe
in the woods of Foxa, others say, hee fell and bruzed his skull, in the yeere 1395. This
Prince,1395. as we haue formerly said, had taken to wife a French Lady, called Martha, daughter
to Iames Earle of Armaignac, who gouerned him quietly, by whom he had one only
daughter called Ioane, married at the time of his death to Mathew of Castelbon,
Earle of Foix, and Lord of Bearn, which was the cause of much warre in Arragon. The
Queene D. Martha being dead, soone after her deliuery, the King D. Iohn married Donna
Violant daughter to the Duke of Bar, who brought him a soone, but of short life, and
lies interred at Saragossa, and afterwards a daughter, carrying the mothers name, and
married in her time to Lewis duke of Aniou, sonne to that Lewis which died in Italy, pursuing
his interest to the realme of Naples. After the death of King Iohn, Mathew Earle
of Foix, who had married his eldest daughter, pretended, according to the custome
practised in Spaine,The Arragonois reiect D. Ioane from the succession and choose D. Martin. that the carowne of Arragon did belong vnto his wife, and sought
all meanes to botaine it: but the Arragonois would not then subiect themselues vnder a
strange Prince, and reiecting the womans right, they did choose D. Martin for their king,
who was brother to the deceased, and was then in Sicile.
These quarrels rysing from the succession in Arragon, and the reiection of the heire
of that realme, which happened soone after the returne of the Queene Donna Leonora
into Nauarre, it mooued King Charles to take an oth of his subiects, that they should
maintaine the Realme to his eldest daughter, and successiuely to the rest.
The end of the seuenteenth Booke.




SEMPER EADEMTHE EIGHTEENTH BOOKE
of the Generall History of Spaine.

The Contents.
1. PRroceeding of D. Henry King of Castile, against the Earle of Gijon in France.
2. Actions of Mahumet Guadix, and other Kings of Granado, treacheries, poysonings,
and other excesse of that nation to reigne.
3. Deeds of D. Henry King of Castile, called the sickly. Examples of his Iustice, temperance
and rigour, with other pollitike acts.
4. Iohn Pablo, a Iew, a learned man, and his conuersation with the honours and dignities,
which he and his children obtained in Spaine.
5. Reformation of the Knights of the Calatraua.
6. Warre betwixt Portugal and Castile, for the crowne.
7. The Dutchesse of Momblanc seizeth vpon the realme of Arragon, in the name of her
husband D. Martin, who was the 15. King of Arragon, and the first of that name, wherevnto
the Estates consented.
8. Confirmation of D. Martin King of Arragon: his carriage in the gouernment of his realme
to forraine Princes and the Pope.
9. Death of D. Pedro Tenorio, Archbishop of Toledo, his family, qualities, workes and buildings,
Vacancy of that sea foure yeeres.
10. Ruy Lopes d' Aualos, and the beginning of the house of Aualos.
11. Continuation of the Schisme, friar Vincent Ferrier a great preacher.
12. Warre against the Moores of Granado: the death of King Henry the 3.
13. Marriage of D. Blanche Infanta of Nauarre, with Don Martin King of Sicile. Accord
made by the King of Nauarre with the French King, for the Lands of his patrimony
that were seized.
14. D. Iohn the second of that name, King of Castile, an Infant of two and twenty monthes
old. Fidelity and modestie of D. Fernand the Kings vncle: Castile gouerned by him and
the Queene mother.
15. Warre of Granado managed by the Infant Don Fernand: first vse of Artillerie in
Spaine.
16. Superstitions, new sects and a third head in the church of Rome.
17. Warre of Sardinia, troubles at Valencia, death of D. Martin, the sonne King of Sicile:
Marriage of D. Martin the father, King of Arragon.
18. Warre of Castile against the Moores.

19 Death of D. Martin King of Arragon: Factions for the succession to that crowne: The
pretendants: Arbitrators named to choose a King.
20. Duke of Bena^ent escapes out of prison. The Iewes and Moores commanded to carry certaine
markes, by the councell of friar Vincent Ferrier.
21 D. Fernand first of that name, and the 16. King of Arragon: opposition of the Earle of Vrgel,
his imprisonment:
the Kings coronation.
22. Retreat of Pope Benedict into Spaine. Councell of Constance, Estates at Sarragossa: Marriage
of the Infant D. Alphonso of Arragon, with Donna Maria of Castile.
23. D. Alphonso the fifth King of Arragon.
24 Gouernment of Castile vnder Donna Catherina the Queene mother.
25 Proceeding of the Councel of Constance against Pope Benedict, and his obstinacy.
26 Conquest of the Canaries, by Iohn of Betancourt.
27 Family of Estuniga: death of the Queene Regent, and other affaires of Castile.
28 Deeds of D. Iohn King of Portugal: Monastery of the battaile, and other workes built by
him. Taking of Ceuta in Barbary: descouerie of the Madera's. First search of the Portugals
into the South and East seas.
29 Marriage of the Infant D. Iohn, brother to D. Alphonso King of Arragon, and of
D. Blanch of Nauarre, widow Queene of Sicile.
30 Marriage pursued with violence by Don Henry maister of Saint Iames, brother to
the King of Arragon, of Donna Catherina, Infanta of Castile; and what followed.
31 Causes of the warre of Naples attempted by D. Alphonso King of Arragon: Estate of that
Realme vnder Queene Ioane the second.
32 Aduancement of D. Aluaro de Luna, to be Constable of Castile.
33 D. Iohn first of that name, and 32. King of Nauarre, in the right of D. Blanch his wife.
34 Deliuery of D. Henry maister of Saint Iames being prisoner, Estates at Toro. Restitution
of the Constable, being chased away: ambition of D. Iohn king of Nauarre, and of his brother
D. Henry.
35 New Order of Monkes of Saint Ierosme in Spaine.
36 Estate of the Moores of Granado vnder Mahumet the left-handed, and other Kings.
37 Troubles betwixt Castile, Nauarre and Arragon.
38 Marriage of Donna Isabella of Portugal, to Philip duke of Bourgondy. Institution of the
Order to the golden Fleece.
39 Proceeding by iustice against the King of Nauarre and his partisans in Castile.
40 Peace concluded betwixt Portugal and Castile. D. Nugno Aluarez of Pereira first Constable
of Portugal, and his last acts.

Kings in Spaine mentioned in this
eighteenth Booke.

ARRAGON.
15. D. Martin 1.
16. D. Fernand 1.
17. D. Alphon 5.


CASTILE and LEON
18. D. Iohn 2. and the 39.


NAVARRE.
32. D. Iohn 1.


IN the reigne of King Henry the third, it often appeered how vaine the enterprises
of bad subiects are against a vertuous and innocent Prince: for
God did preserue this poore pupill, from the ambitious rage of his Tutors,
Princes, Prelats and great Lords of Castile, ruining them by their owne
discord. And he did so much honour the royall Maiesty, as when as this
young Prince had taken vpon him the gouernment of the realme, at the age of foureteene
yeeres, he deliuered them into his hands, to punish them, as their obstinate rebellion,
and ingratitude had deserued. Being freed (as we haue said) of the Duke of Benauent,
the Queene of Nauarre, and the Archbishop of Saint Iames, and hauing by their example
reduced the Earle of Transtamara and the Archbishop of Toledo, to their duties:
there onely remained D. Alphonso Earle of Gijon his vncle, who was reduced to that extremity,
as he was forced to vndergoe the censure of a strange Prince, in a cause which
concerned his honor, his goods and his liberty: the which he might haue enioyed with
reputation, yea much augmented his dignity, if he had contained himselfe with modesty,
in the fauor of D. Henry King of Castile his naturall Prince.
According to the accord made at the seege of Gijon, the King sent his Ambassadors to 
the French King, to debate the causes he had to dispossesse D. Alphonso, who hauing staied
many daies in the court of France,Proceeding against the Earl of Gijon. the Earle of Gijon, nor his Attorney appeering,
and the time of the assignation being expired, they prepared for their returne, when they
had newes that their aduerse party was come to the coast of Brittaine, and was comming
towards Paris: wherefore to giue more countenance to their cause, they attended.
Being arriued, hee spake with King Charles, for his iustification, accusing the King his
Nephew, that he sought to take his portion from him, lying in Asturia, Leon and Castile,
the which was asigned him by the deceased King D. Iohn his brother, adding many
other charges and excesse, wherevnto the Ambassadors answered pertinently, laying
open the Earles ingratitude, rebellion and conspiracy, against the King his Lord, and
benefactor, who had drawne him out of prison, and restored him to all his goods,
the which King Iohn had iustly taken from him, adding therevnto pensions, Estates and
honours; and accusing him in particular of the violent vsurpation of the towne of Paredes
of Naua, and other tyranicall actions done by him, hauing also refused to signe the
truce of Portugal, with many others acts of contempt and fellony: concluding that hee
ought to loose the Earldome of Gijon, and to be wholy left to the discretion and will of
the King his Lord; so as in the proofes of these crimes, exhibited by the Ambassadors, in
defence of their Princes actions, hauing not any thing to reply publikely, he gaue the
Lords of the French Kings councell secretly to vnderstand, that the ill will which the
King his Nephew bare him, incensed by his bad councellors, who werre corrupt and mercenary,
proceeded from nothing else, but that hee had alwaies opposed himselfe to the
practises and secret intelligences which they had with the English, in league with whom
they would draw the King of Castile, to the preiudice of the friendship and ancient alliance,
which was betwixt the houses of Castile and France: wherefore he intreated
them to deale so with King Charles, as he would iudge fauorably of his cause, causing his
Estates and Lands to be restored to him againe, promising, all his life time, to doe him
good and loyal seruice.
The King desirous to reconcile Princes that wee neere in bloud, caused the Ambassadors
to be treated with about a prorogation of the assignation; for they had protested
that the time prefixt being expired through the Earles negligence and contempt,
to whom the King their master had caused three hundred thousand marauidis to be deliuered,
for the charges of his voiage, and to take from him all excuse, that they could no
more appeere before him, as before their Iudge: yet they said, that seeing the King of
Castile their Lord had submitted himselfe vnto his Iudgment, for the brotherly
loue that was betwixt them, notwithstanding that many of his councell had diswaded
him, holding it a disparragement for the soueraigne Prince to contend with his vassall
and subiects before a strange Iudge, and out of his country and iurisdiction.
They were of opinion that if the Earle Don Alphonso did willingly deliuer the
towne of Gijon vnto the King of Castile, and submit himselfe to his will and mercy,

that by his intercession the Earle should obtaine a safe conduit and assurance to come into
Castile, and so he should treat of his affaires more profitably then by any other course.
They withall made a request vnto King Charles in the name of the King their Lord, that
for the league which was betwixt the two Kings and realmes, he would be pleased to
command D. Alphonso to depart his country, which the French King could not refuse,
and therefore he caused notice to be giuen vnto the Earle, that he should retire himselfe,
commanding all Gouernors of Prouinces, especially of port towns, not to giue him any
fauor or aide, wherefore he went away in poore estate, and kept himself some daies about
Rochelle. The six monthes of truce concluded betwixt the King and him being many
daies before expired, and yet the Ambassadors had not written any thing concerning the
conclusion of this sute, there were some troupes of horse and foote sent about Gijon, after
which the King came with greater forces, both by land and sea, the which did so presse
the place, as the Contesse, Donna Isabella of Portugal, yeelded it, compounding for her
life and liberty, and of some Knights that were within it, and the deliuery of her sonne
D. Henry, whom the King held in hostage. In the meane time letters came out of France,
from the Ambassadors, contayning what had past in this cause, wherewith the King was
wel satisfied. The miserable Countesse Isabella, daughter to D. Fernand King of Portugal,
being destitute of all meanes, went into France to her husband D. Alphonso, who was
poore,Gijon yeelded vnto the King, and the Earle dispossest and banished into France. and without any helpe or fauour, but from the Vicontesse of Touars, in whose
country he liued in the towne of Marant. After the taking of Gijon, the King went to
Seuile to treat a truce with the Moores, being sollicited by King Mahumet then reigning
in Granado, the third after the death of Mahumet the old, who was bruted to haue poisoned
the King D. Henry the second, and this was his succession.

Mahumet Guadix the tenth King of
Granado.
MAhumet surnamed Guadix, after the death of Mahumet the Old his father, was setled
King of Granado:Granado. he onely among all his predecessors, receiued this Scepter peaceably,
and left it quiet at his death. During this reigne which beganne in the yeere 1379.
and ended 1392. he had not any warre against Christian Princes for all the time of his
reigne, the Estate of Castile vnder King Iohn was so troubled with wars with D. Fernand
King of Portugal, and afterwards with the maister of Auiz, and besides with the Duke of
Lancaster, as the Realme of Granado felt no trouble. This Mahumet Guadix was soone
in law to the King of Tunis, whose daughter, named Hadisa, of the ancient linage of the
Almohages, he had married when his father liued, by whom he had Ioseph his successor to
the Realme, and yet he had other wiues, and many children by them, according to the
liberty of the Mahumetists, in that point. During this calme, he fortefied many places
in the Realme of Granado, especially towards the frontier of Andalusia; by the which
the Kings of Castile were accustomed to inuade the Moores. Hee renued the truce betwixt
the two realmes of Granado and Castile, with King Iohn, in the yeere 1390. the
which was sworne and confirmed by the Kings, and by their eldest sonnes and successors.
The name of Guadix was giuen him, for the great loue he bare to the towne of Guadix,
and that country, from his Infancy, the which he did frequent and beautifie with many
things whilest he liued. He died in peace, in the yeere of our Lord 1392. the thirteenth
of his reigne.


Ioseph the eleuenth, King of
Granado.
TO him succeeded this King Ioseph, of whom wee haue made mention, in the route
with he gaue vnto Martin Ianes of Barbuda, maister of Alcantara. Before there

was some likelihood of warre, during the raigne of D. Henry the 3. king of Castile, but it
was soone pacified, after an incounter neere vnto Lorca, wheras the Mores at the coming
of this king Ioseph, beginning to flie, were defeated with great losse. If the father had
raigned peaceably, as well among his subiects, as with Christian Princes his neighbours:
his son gouerned with great difficulty and tumults: for besides the quarels he had with the
Christians, (which succeeded reasonably well) he was pursued by his owne sonne, and in
danger to loose both Crowne and life.Sonne persecutes the father to raigne. This bad soone called Mahumet, as his Grandfather
was, thrust on with ambition to raign, ioyned with a Nobleman among the Mores,
called Aben Mohaya, who had long hated King Ioseph. These two together did what they
could to put him from his royall seate, dispersing among the Mores all the slanders they
could inuent against him: but chiefly they did charge him with the vice of clemencie,
which he had vsed to many Christian captiues, hauing set them free without ransome: an
vndoubted argument, sayd they, that he was a Christian in heart. There were great combustions
throughout all Granado, by meanes of this peruerse sonne and his confederats,
the which were pacified by the mediation of an Ambassadour from the king of Maroc, of
the linage of the Merins, who was then at Granado, for his Princes affaires, who wrought
in such sort, as the sonne and all that followed him, yeelded obedience vnto the king, to
the good of the Realme, which for a time enioyed a desired peace: for by reason of the
troubles, many Christians had imbraced these quarrels of the Moores, ioyning with either
partie, but all tending to the ruine of their estate. Besides this Mahumet, son to king
Ioseph, who made warre against him, Histories make mention of three others: that is, Ioseph
the eldest, who raigned, but not immediatly after his father, Cidi-Ali and Cidi-Amed.
After this pacification, and the defeate of the Master of Alcantara aboue-mentioned,
king Ioseph was more respected among his subiects, and gouerned his Realme in peace the
remaynder of his dayes without any opposition: He kept friendship with the Princes of
Spaine his neighbours, and with the Kings of Affricke, as much as he could: yet he grew
into secret hatred with the king of Fez, whereof no man knowes the occasion, neither did
he discouer it, vntill he felt the poison, which this trecherous king sent him: for among
many rich presents, there was a cassocke of cloth of gold, of great price, but infected with
this mortall poyson, which did not worke sodenly, but by degrees: an art much practised
among those damned creatures, to free themselues of their enemies,Ioseph king of Granado poysoned. or to make States
and Principalities voyd, as their ambitious appetites did driue them. King Ioseph hauing
no cause, as he thought, to suspect any such treason from a king of his sect, whome hee
had not offended, receiued the presents: but hauing one day put on the cassocke, he felt
himselfe presently poysoned without remedie: the which was of such force, as hauing depriued
him of all his naturall faculties,VVonderfull force of poyson his flesh fell away by peece-meale, with great horhor
to them that were about him, and amazement of the Phisitions, which had him in
cure, to whome the true cause of his infirmitie, nor the remedies wee euer knowne. Thus
this king died miserably, hauing raigned about foure yeares in Granado, in the yeare of
our Lord 1396. and of the Arabians 779.


Mahumet the 9. of that name, and 12. king
of Granado.
MAHVMET his sonne surnamed Aben-Balua, who had so much desired to raigne
in his fathers life-time, vsurped the Realme from his elder brother Ioseph, who yeelding
to the time, supported it as well as he could, beeing countenanced by some Noblemen,
that were friends to his deceased father and him. The first entrance of this king Mahumet
was pleasing vnto the Moores, by the cruelty he suffered to be done to two Friars
brethren, who mooued with an inconsiderate zeale, would goe and preach in Granado.
Beeing forbidden by the king to preach their doctrine to a people ill prepared to receiue
it, they persisting in their resolution, the Alfaguis and Doctors of the Alcaron fell vpon

and hauing whipt them, they slue them most cruelly, so as these two poore Friars were
held holy Martyrs, whereof some of their bones were gthered together, and carried to
Seuile, and Cordoua, to them of their Order, all men perswading themselues that they
wrought miracles. This king thinking himselfe setled in his estate, he confirmed the truce
with Christian Princes, especially with D. Henry king of Castile, who freed him of the
tribute which the kings of Granado were wont to pay to the Kings of Castile. The King
Don Henry shewed himselfe tractable,D. Henry of Castile, called the siekly. by reason of the indisposition of his person; who
beeing the rest of his daies ill disposed, purchased the surname of Sickly, and made him to
desire peace with his neighbours, and to hate warre. The friendship and familiaritte of
these two Princes was very great, and continued long, visiting one another by ambassages,
and sending presents, striuing who should be more stately and bountifull: and King
Mahumet desiring on a time to make demonstration of his loue to the king D. Henry, sending
him rich presents, hee gaue the charge of the ambassage to one of his wiues, the
which gaue great content to the king of Castile.
 But to returne to this king Don Henry, after that he had subdued the Princes of his
bloud, and their confederates,Castile. who contemning his youth, and thrust on by ambition,
had troubled his Realme, he beganne to be sickely, and vnfit for the actions of warre, the
causes where-of by the singular grace of God ceased. Hee had a great care of Iustice, and
to ease his subiects, and beeing in that estate hee sought all meanes to maintaine his reputation
and authoritie, fearing nothing more then to bee contemned of his seruants, to
whome he sometimes seemed seuere and rigorous, and sometimes was content onely to
terrifie them: Whereof they produce this example. The king on a time hauing hunted
late in vnknowne countrie, and ill followed, recouered his lodging, being readie to sit
downe to his supper, hauing a very good stomacke, he found it ill prepared, so as hee began
to grow in choller with the clarke of his kitchin, saying, that hee was negligent, and
that he would punish him. The clarke who (it may be) sought for this occasion, excused
himselfe vppon the small meanes which were appointed him by his Councellors to furnish
his table: so as, sayd he, besides the assignation which is very short, I recouer it with
such difficultie, as I am forced to pawne mine owne, to supply it: wherewith the king was
very sad, taking it for a great argument of the small esteeme the Noblemen that ruled,
made of him, by this dishonest sparing for a kings table, into whose coffers there entred
of yearely reuenue 70. millions of Marauidis, if Writers do not erre. And therefore he
beganne to studie, how he might make them know it, giuing to his Clarke one of his
roabes, called at that time Calandranas, the which hee pawned for two shoulders of mutton,
with the which, and some Quailes which they had taken, the king supped, beeing
serued by the Clarke.
Beeing returned to Burgos, he dissembled that which he had in his heart, and watched
an opportunitie to be reuenged. Hee was aduertised that the chiefe Noblemen of his
trayne and Councell, holding the greatest dignities in the Realme of Castile, the Prelats,
the Masters of knightly Orders, the Duke of Medina Celi, D. Ruy Lopes of Aualos, Don
Iohn and D. Diego Hurtado of Mendoca, Diego Lopes of Estuniga, Iohn of Velasco, Gomes
Manrique, Peter Alfan of Ribera, and others hauing gouernements in the chiefe Prouinces,
should meet together one night at a stately and sumptuous banket: wherefore hee
found meanes to enter disguised, to see their cheare, and heare their discourse: where hee
saw all things furnished in great aboundance, and with more then royall state, where
there wanted not any thing that might please the appetite, and as for their discourse and
table-talke, it was nothing but of the great and bounteous pension they drew from the
King, of the profits and commodities of their Offices and Gouernements, gifts, presents,
honours, fauours, and such like, which makes the Courtiers paradise. The King hauing
obserued all this, beeing returned vnto his lodging, hee secretly in the night, drew in
his Guards, and many other souldiers: and when it was day, hee sent for all these Noblemen
of the Banquet, to come vnto his Pallace, to bee witnesses to the Will which hee
would make, who flocking thither with all expedition, they stayed in the great Hall, vntill
it was past noone.
In the end the king came foorth with a naked sword in his hand, setting him downe

in his chaire, and then presently the hall was full of his armed guards, so as the Noblemen
were amazed at this vnaccustomed ceremonie. The king addressing his speech to the
Arch-bishop of Toledo, asked him, how many kings of Castile he had seene: he answered,
that he had seene foure; which were the king D. Pedro, D. Henry his grandfather, D. Iohn
his father, and himselfe. The like demand the king made vnto the rest, and euery one answered
as he had seene, according to their ages, some three, some foure, and some fiue.
How can it then be, sayd the king, that I who am younger then any of you, can brag to
haue seene aboue twenty: The Noblemen replyed, that they knew not what hee meant
thereby; for naturally with his corporall eyes he could not haue seene so many kings. Yes
truly, sayd the king, I haue seene them, and all you here present are those kings, who dispose
of my Realme, and mannage my rents and reuenues at your pleasures. I am king but
in name, and as a shade, but you are the bodie and the effect, wasting my goods to my
dishonour, and the contempt of my authoritie. I haue seene, I haue seene the pompe and
aboundance you liue in at my charge, and haue vnderstood how you intreat my subiects,
and abuse the power which I giue you in your estates and gouernments: but you shal not
liue vnpunished, I haue conuicted you all by your owne confessions and brags, and iudge
you all to die, like bad and trecherous vassals. This speech beeing ended, the Ministers of
iustice appeared, and among them the executioner of the court, carying an axe and cords,
the which did much amaze all the Noblemen, thinking verily, that they should lose their
heads: seeing themselues compassed in his guards, and considering that they had to do
with a young king, who for want of iudgement might giue way to his choller, and reuenge
his wrong without regard to the consequence. Beeing thus amazed, looking one
vppon another, and not knowing what to answer, the Arcbishop of Toledo tooke courage
to speake vnto the king, who kneeling downe, told him, that so seuere a sentence was
happily more iust then honourable for a young Prince, or profitable for the realme of
Castile, which for euer would feele the losse of so many great and worthie men, both for
councel and armes, as he meant to put to death, for that they had committed some faults
which are common to all that liue with kings, and are bred vp in great charges of realmes.
Moreouer, it was not reasonable to take that for a confession to conuict one, which is
spoken at banquets, and in wine, where men do vsually talke, and bragge, and oftentimes
without truth, yet he spake not these things to iustifie himselfe, or any of his companions
nor to contend against his clemencie, as beeing free from offence, the which they would
rather implore and trie, demanding with all humilitie, the liues of all these offenders, and
his pardon, adding many other reasons, the which wee allowed by the king, for he desired
an occasion to pardon them, yet he would haue them yeeld vp all the forts which they
had in guard, and he condemned them in pecuniarie fynes, so as he drew from them aboue
an hundred and fifty millions of marauidis, for the exactions and concussions done
vppon his people, and the kings money: keeping them two moneths in the castle of Burgos,
vntill the full payment and execution of these things.
If he were moderate in this act of iustice,Executions (...) Seuile. hee vsed greater rigour at Seuile, where all
was full of partialities, proceeding from the diuisions and quarrels which his tutor had
bred, which the Magistrates and kings officers could not suppresse. Being declared of full
age, he went thither and caused the Earle of Niebla, Peter Ponce of Leon, and other heads
and chief authors of these seditions to be put in prison; and hauing examined euery mans
actions, he banished some, others he condemned in great fynes, and losse of their offices,
and caused many to be hanged, or lose their heads: so as there were aboue a thousand persons
intangled in these punishments and executions of iustice: one of the chiefe ministers
whereof, was Doctor Iohn Alphonso of Toro, to whom the gouernement of Seuile was
giuen for matters of iustice: and the more to countenance him, the king stayed there many
daies.
This king gaue many other testimonies of his loue to iustice: he gaue audience to all
sutors indifferently, three dayes in the weeke, he heard all the complaints of his subiects,
and prouided for them: he could discerne of men of iudgement, which were fit for councell,
and the gouernment of the commonwealth. The most esteemed, and of greatest authoritie
about him, were Don Pedro Tenorio, Arch-bishop of Toledo, Friar Iohn Henriques,

and Friar Fernando of Illesca, with the Cardinall D. Pedro of Frias Bishop of Osma,
and these for the ClergieEl^etion of (...) men to (...) great aff ^^res. of Knights he made great esteeme of Don Laurence Suarez of
Figueroa, Master of Saint Iames, Goncales Nugnes of Guzman, Master of Calatraua,
Diego Hurtado of Mendoca, high Admirall of Castile, Ruy Lopes of Aualos, his Lord
Chamberlaine, and afterwards Constable, Diego Lopes of Estuniga chiefe Iutice, Peter
Lopes of Ayala, a knight of great learning, who came to be Lord Chancelour, Iohn Velasco
a Chamberlaine, and other knights of his Councell, which consisted of sixteene graue
personages. Among others, that were very deare vnto him, there was a Doctor, a Iew
 by sect, borne at Burgos, who afterwards imbraced the Christian Religion, called Don
Pablo, who for his learning and good life,Doctor Pablo, a Iew, learned, and of a good life. was in time chosen Bishop of Carthagena, and
in the end obtained the Bishopricke of Burgos. He had many times oppugned the Christian
Religion, as a Iew Rabin, and Master in the Iewish Law, but hauing receiued in gift
of a Christian Doctor, the booke of Saint Thomas Aquinas intituled de Legibus, he read
it diligently, and was so mooued with the reasons thereof, as he left his Iewish religion,
the which is not strange, say the Diuines of Spaine: for he that knowes not Saint Thomas
knoweth not any thing, and he that knoweth him, knowes all things. This Prelate who
was a great Preacher, a great Philosopher, wise and iudicious in matters of State, and of
the kings Councell, wrate many bookes, whereof some are yet extant. Beeing a Iew, he
was married,Doctor Pablos children all learned. and had three soones all learned men, whereof the one was Deane of Segobia,
and succeeded his father in the Bishoppricke of Burgos, he was called Don Alphonso
of Carthagena, from whome we haue the genealogie of the kings of Castile, written in
Latine. Don Goncalo another sonne of D. Pablos was Bishop of Palenca, a Prelat of great
learning: and the third was Aluar Garcia of S. Maria, a learned man also, D. Pablo their
father beeing of the King Don Henries Councell, notwithstanding that he had bin a Iew,
did aduise him and his successors,Counsel of a Iew against Iewes. not to receiue into their seruice, either of his housholds
Councell, or to any Offices of the Realm, any Iew, although he were conuerted, and that
for some speciall causes.
The King Don Henry being endowed with these good qualities beyond the Ordinary
of young Princes, had also some blemishes, like other mortall men: for hee was noted to
be sparing, and desirous to heape vp treasure, and yet they say, that it was without the oppression
of his subiects, the which is hard in a Prince: yet hee gaue many prouisions and
pensions to them that were neere to him in bloud, or allyed to him by affinitie: as to the
Queene D. Beatrix, his mother-in-law, whome he maintained in the estate of a Queene,
and to Don Fernand his brother, who shewed himselfe alwaies obedient to his will. His
countries beeing in peace, he gaue himselfe to repaire and fortifie the fronter places, and
did build a new the castle of Carthagena. As for religious buildings, the church, and conuent
of the Carthusians at Burgos, called Mirefleurs, are his worke: he was a great fauorer
of the Franciscans, to whome Queene Katherine his wife, had a particular deuotion,
who was a Ladie of great pietie, according to the instruction of that time, bountifull,
maiesticall, wife, and discreet in her words, yet superfluous in her manner of liuing, and
louing wine, whereby in her latter dayes she fell into a palsey.
The Kings infirmities which began at the age of seuenteene yeares, did in time so vndermine
him, being incurable, as he became drie and leane, so as the proportion of his body
was changed, and he seemed another man, then formerly he had beene: moreouer, he was
so sad and melancholicke, as most commonly he was alone, and would not admit of any
company. Yet he was alwaies carefull of the gouernement of the Realme. He alwaies entertayned
Ambassadours in Princes Courts, as well Christians as Mahumetists, by whom
he was aduertised what was done in forraine countries, their manners, and manner of gouernements:
a thing most profitable for him that sends them,Ambassadors discourer the councels and actions of Princes. but not for them that receiue
them: for by Ambassadors which are resident, the Councels and actions of Princes
are discouered, to the great preiudice of their estates. Two of his Ambassadors sent into
the East, the which wee Pelayo of Soto maior, and Fernando Pelasuel, fell into the hands
of Tamberlaine, Emperor of the Tartarians, after the defeate of Baiazet; who intreated
then graciously, and sent them backe into Spaine with an Ambassador of his, to demand
friendship of king Henry.

During his raigne, in the yeare. 1397, the order to the Knights of the Calatraua, in steed 
of a blacke hood which they had worne vntill that time,Red crosse the marke of the Order of Calatraua. tooke for their marke a red square
crosse, which they carry at this day, the which was done by the Bull of Pope Benedict
of Auignon, at the instance of Don Goncal Nugnes of Guzman, maister of the
Calatraua.
The realme of Castille being at peace with all men it was ingaged in new troubles by
Don Iohn King of Portugall, for that the Articles of the truce, concluded betwixt their 
Ambassadors for fifteene yeares,Portugal. had not beene signed and sworne by certain Noblemen
of Castille, as had beene agreed: with other light occasions, which drew him to field, being
yet proud of his former victories, and contemning the youth and infirmity of King
Henry his aduersary, wherefore he sodenly brought his army before Badajos, which towne
hee tooke, and the Marshall Don Garci Guttiere of Herrera in it: whereat the King Don
Henry was much incensed, and speedily prouided for all things necessary, to suppresse the
boldnesse of this Portugall King, both by sea and land. One of the most remarkable exployts
of this warre, which continued three yeares, was the incounter of fiue Castillan
gallies with seauen of Portugall comming from Genoa, laden with armes and souldiers:
the fight hauing continued very sharpe some houres, in the end foure of the gallies of
Portugall were taken, one broken and the rest put to flight.Victory of the Castillansat sea In this incounter the Portugalls
lost aboue fiue hundred men, besides the armes and equipage of their gallies, the
which were drawne to St. Lucar. Many noble men of Portugall at that time left King
Iohn, and retired into Castile, where they were entertained, and had lands and houses giuen
them by the King D. Henry. Among others Martin Vasques of Acugna, and his brethren
Giles Vasques and Lopes Vasques came also with an hundred lances, Iohn Fernandes
and Lopes Fernandes Pachecos bretheren, Aluar Goncales Camelo Prior of S. Iohn, with many
others. The king of Portugal entring by Gallicia, he tooke from king Henry the town
of Tuy, and towards extremadura he layd seege before Alcantara, to whose succour
was sent D. Ruy Lopes of Aualos, then made Constable of Castile, in the place of the
Earle of Transtamara, who raised the seege, and entring into Portugal, spoiled and burnt
the countrie, and tooke Pegna major, a place of strength, by force. On the other side, the
towne of Miranda of Duego was beseeged by King Henries captaines, who prest it in such
sort as it yeelded. After some courses and prizes made at sea by the Admirall of Castile,
the truce was renued betwixt the two kings, and was so entertayned, as it was the last war
which the Portugals had with Castile vntill our daies, so as these two Princes gouerned
their Estates in peace and quietnesse the remainder of thier liues.
In Arragon whilest they contended for the right of the succession against Mathew of 
Castelbon Earle of Foix,Arragon. and his wife D. Ioane eldest daughter to the deceased king D. Iohn
as we haue sayd: D. Maria wife to the D. of Momblanc, being absent in Sicily, took vpon
her the title of Queene, by the aduice of the councell of Cattelogne, in the city of Barcelona,
where there assisted D. Inigo Valterra, Archb. of Tarragona, Bernard of Pinos, Hugh
Anglesole, Roger of Moncade Viceroy of Sardinia, Michel Gurrea, Francis of Aranda, who
was held the wisest of his time, Bernard Michel, William Pujade, Gerard Paliol,Francis of Aranda a wise man. and Bernard
Zatrille. These were of opinion that the Regencie of the realme should bee put into the
hands of D. Maria, vntill her husbands coming, to whom they had sent D. Hugh of Bage,
Bishop of Tortosa, Iohn Foulq son to the Earle of Cardona, Emanuel Ragiadel, Raymond
Zaual, a Cittizen of Barcelonet, and Peter Grimald of Perpignan, Ambassadors, to giue
him notice of his election, and to hasten his returne. The widow Queene Violant, was in
the meane time accompanied by foure of the chiefe Ladies by order frm the Councell,
the which did neuer abandon her, and should haue a care of her deliuery, for that she said
she was with child. And for that many men of state, and others hauing had charges and offices
in the time of the deceased King,Officers called into question. had abused them, their actions were now called into
question during this Inte^egne, and some of them were committed at Barcelona. The
Will of the deceased King, beeing opened in the Assembly of Cattelogne, they found
that the same Duke of Momblanc, to whom the peoples fauour inclined, was there named
heyre and successor to the Crowne, in case the King Don Iohn dyed without issue
male, the which was signified to the Countesse of Foix.

At the Estates assembled at Sarragossa, to giue order that the realme should receiue no losse in the absence of the king D. Martin, these chiefe men were present:
D. Garci fernandes of Heredia, Arch-bishop of Sarragossa.D. Iohn Martines Murillo, Abbot of Montarragon.D. Pedro Fernandes of Ixar.D. william, and Raymond Allamans Cevuillon.D. Pedro Ruis Morio, for the great Prior of Amposta.The Prior of Rota.The Abbot of S. Fides.D. Pedro of Ladron, Vicount of Villanoua.D. Lopes Ximenes of Vrrea.D. Fernand Lopes of Luna.D. Iohn Martines of Luna.D. Alphonso Fernandes of Ixar.D. Pedro Fernrndes Vergua.D. Francis of Allagon.D. Pedro Ximenes of Vrrea, son to D. Lope.
The Atturneys of D. Lewis Cornel, of D. Artal of Allagon, of D. Iohn Ximenes of Vrrea
Atrasillo, of D. Pedro Galcerand of Castro, and of D. Anthony of Luna. Moreouer,
Iohn Ximenes de la Cerde, Iustice Maior of Arragon, with many other Noblemen, knights
and Deputies of towns and commonalties, who without regard to the demands and protestations
of Mathew Earle of Foix, and D. Ieanne his wife, confirmed the Duke of Monblanc
testamentarie heire of the Realme, disanulling the conuentions made by the deceased
king D. Pedro, grandfather to D. Ieanne,Articles of marriage broken by the estates to the preiudice of the Ea^le of Foix. at the treatie of her marriage with the
Earle of Foix, by the which it was sayd, that if Don Iohn her father dyed without issue
male, she should inherit the Realme: whereupon Mathew Earle of Foix sought to obtaine
his right by armes, seeing that iustice was denyed him. And hauing employed the
ayde of the Earle of Armaignac, of Iohn Duke of Berry, the French kings vncle, and of other
Noblemen of France, he passed with a thousand men at armes, three thousand
light horsemen, from the Vicountie of Castelbon, beyond the Pyrenees, and by the valley
of Ferriere at Villemur, he tooke Camaraca, and marched as farre as Lerida, where hee
spoyled the country: against whome the Estates did chose Don Pedro of Vrgell for Generall.
And for that it was suspected that D. Iohn Earle of Ampurias, had fauoured these
French troupes at the passage of the mountaines, he was committed to prison, but soone
after deliuered, hauing made proofe of his innocencie. Although the Earle of Foix did
much annoy the Arragonois, yet the greatest losse fell vppon himselfe, for beeing too
weake a partie to incounter the power of Arragon, he did nothing but spend his estate,
ingage himselfe, and striue for nothing, his army beeing forced to rise from before Barbastro,
and to retire for want of victuals and other discommodities towards Huesca, and
then to passe by Caparosso belonging vnto Nauarre, into Bearne, on this side the mountaines,
after which hee neuer made any memorable attempt. The king D. Martin, notwithstanding
all the importunitie of the Arragonois,Andrew of Clairmont beheaded at Palermo. was not resolued to leaue Sicile, vntill
he had seene his sonne peacefull king of the Iland, the which he effected after a long
and tedious warre, by the ruine of the noble families of Clairmont and Alagon, and of other
rebels, whereof Andrew of Clairmont Duke of Modica was beheaded at Palermo,
after which Artal of Alagon was expelled Sicile, with all his family, by vertue of whose
Predecessors, that Realme had beene in a manner conquered for the house of Arragon.



D. Martin the first of that name, and 15.
King of Arragon.
MAtters beeing thus brought to passe, D. Martin elect King of Arragon, leauing with
the King his sonne, called also D. Martin, and his wife Marie, William of Moncado,
Marquis of Malta, chiefe Iustice and Constable of the Realme, Peter Serra Bishop of
Cattanea, Francis Zagarriga, Hugh Santapaz, and other Cattelans and Arragonois, for
Councellers, he sayled towards the Island ***Corfica, whereas the Earle of Cinerche and others of the familie of Istria, and of that of Rocca, held many townes and castles at
his deuotion. From thence the King past into Prouence, where he did visit Pope Benedict
in Auignon, receiuing a rose from him on Palme sunday, hauing done him homage for
the Islands of Sardinia and Corsica: then continuing his voyage, hee arriued in Cattelogne
in the beginning of Maie, in the yeare 1397. At his entrie into the countrie, hee
found a stately ambassage, where were the chiefe Noblemen of Arragon, and deputies of
the citie of Sarragossa, who intreated him, that without any stay he should goe vnto the
Estates assembled at Sarragossa, and that he would not deale in any affaires of the realme,
vntill (according to the auncient custome) hee had taken and receiued their othes, the
which seemed something strange vnto the King: yet he answered these ambassadors gratiously,
that beeing tired with so long a voyage, he had need of rest: wherefore after some
little staie at Barcelona, hee would come presently to Sarragossa: notwithstanding after
his entrie into Barcelona, which was very stately, sitting in his tribunall, hee pronounced
a sentence against Mathew Earle of Foix, and D. Ioanne his wife,Sentence against the earle of Foix. beeing his neece, by the
which he declared them rebels, and guilty of high treason, and fallen from all their rights:
he did confiscate the Vicontie of Castlebon, and other lands held by them in the realme
of Arragon and Cattelogne, adiudging them vnto the crowne. Moreouer, hee sent from
thence shippes and souldiers into Sardynia and Sicile, sending backe D. Roger of Moncado
into his gouernment of Sardinia, and D. Pedro of Bage into Sicile. After which, hee
went to Sarragossa to the Estates about the end of October. The King presiding in this
assembly, did much commend the vertue, fide litie, and valour of the Arragonois, seeking
by good words to make them tractable and well-affected to him and his children: for after
the oath taken by him for the obseruation of the rights and priuiledges of Arragon
and other Prouinces, and reciprocally by them, he intreated the Estates to acknowledge
his sonne D. Martin King of Sicile, beeing absent, for lawfull heire of that crowne after
him, the which was willingly done, the King of Siciles ambassadors hauing promised an
vnion of the two realmes for euer, and to cause the King their master to ratifie it, and to
take the oathes accustomed in such acts. There was giuen vnto the King at these Estates
130000 florins of gold to pay his debts, and 30000 for his expences. During the assembly,
there was some tumult of warre in the Mountains, there being entred by the pace of
Sarazal some of the Earle of Foix troupes, who tooke and sackt Thermes: but without any
other exploite they returned. In the meane time Mathew of Castelbon Earle of FoixDeath of the Earle of Foix.
dyed without any children, being in the yeare 1398. wherby D. Martin remayned peaceable
King of Arragon, who setled himselfe, and disposed of his affaires according to his
desire.
First of all knowing that the wisedome of a Prince consists chiefly in knowing wel howVVisedome necessarie in a Princeto chuse men of valour.
to chuse men of valour, whose seruice he must vse in the gouernment of his Estate, he laboured
to draw vnto him, by his bountie and fauour, the hearts and affections of those
which he knew to be such: namely, he gratified D. Alphonso of Arragon much, and honored
him with the Dutchie of Gandia,; he made D. Iames of Prade Constable of Arragon,
and to many other Noblemen and knights, hee gaue gifts and priuiledges: hee restored
Archambaud of Graille, who had beene heire in the right of succession to the
Earledome of Foix by reason of his wife, sister to the deceased Matthew of Castelbon,

to the lands which he had forfeited: yet he made but a bare recompence to his Neece the
Countesse of Foix, who retired her selfe to Valencia, with 3000. florens of yearely pension,
for her whole entertaynment, where she ended her dayes. He maried his other neece
D. Violant to Lewis Duke of Aniou, chosen king of Naples, to whom hee gaue 160000.
florens in dowrie, so as she should renounce all rights and pretensions which shee might
haue to the Crowne of Arragon, and other lands of the deceased kind D. Iohn her father,
adding afterwards to this bond, an allyance which he made with Nauarre, to be the better
assured of the French. And not to forget the workes of pietie, couered with the vale of
religion, seing Pope Benedict greatly molested in Auignon, although it were by the practises
of the French king, he sent an armie by sea, to assist him, and if need were to carrie
him away, the euent whereof was miserable: for being come vnto the mouth of the riuer
of Rhosne about December, in the heart of a very sharpe winter, the gallies not being able
to go vp the riuer, by reason the water was low, most of the slaues, mariners and souldiers
dyed for cold.Statues sent by the Pope into Arragn^.
The fauour which the king of Arragon did shew vnto the Pope, did so far auayle him,
as it made the French king forbeare for a time to oppose himselfe: to acknowledge the
which, and in his loue to his country, he sent into Arragon foure statues of siluer and gilt
and enriched with stones, the which were kept in the citty of Sarragossa, and therin were
i^closed the relikes of Valerius, Laurence, Vincent and Encratia, reputed by the Sarragossans
for Saints, patrons and protectors.
Thus the king D. Martin sought in the first yeares of his raigne, to content the world
by his humane wisedome, and to purchase the fame of a politicke and religious Prince:
notwithstanding as humane wisedome faile smost commonly, he could not keepe such a
meane, but in gratifying some, he discontented others, yea the Arragonois themselues:
for the Realme being often in combustion, by reason of the old quarrels betwixt the houses
of Luna, Vrrea, and Gurrea, and especially during the interregne many of these factions
presumed to go to field, and did rob and spoile euen to the towne gates: whereuppon
the king raised some troupes to suppresse these theeues, giuing the charge thereof to Don
Alphonso, sonne to D. Alphonso of Arragon Duke of Gandia, making him as it were Gouernor
of the realme, and his Lieutenant generall: a great dignity, which was presently
impugned by the Noblemen of Arragon, mooued through enuy, alledging, that that
charge ought not to be giuen according to their ancient customes, but to one that was
borne in Arragon: wherefore they appealed before the Iustice maior, beeing an attempt
against their liberties and freedomes: so thinking to preuent a mischiefe,Troubles in Arragon. hee augmented
it, for the Realme was presently full of armes, which hee was forced to remedy with great
difficulties and seuere meanes, it may be vnworthie of his royall Maiestie.
The Schisme which was in the church of Rome,Castille. did somewhat trouble Spaine: yet by
the wise councell of Princes, all past without any great alteration. The French king did
greatly sollicite him of Castile to ioyne with him, to force Pope Benedict of Auignon to
submit himselfe to a compromise treated by the Princes, and according to the protestation
of the Cardinalls which had chosen him, to leaue his dignitie, vntill it had beene determined
who should be Pope, and head in the church of Rome. For the which the king
D. Henry hauing called a great assembly at Salamanca of Prelats and Doctors, both Diuines
and Canonists, in the end he yeelded after many difficulties: whereof D. Matrtin K.
of Arragon being aduertised, he was wonderfully mooued: for he did much support Pope
Benedict, a Cattelan by nation, and therefore sent to Salamanca before the kings departure;
his ambassadours were Vidal of Blagues, and Raymond of France, to complaine of
this vnion which the king of Castile had made with him of France, without communicating
any thing vnto him: to whom an answer was made in friendly tearmes, which did satisfie
them.
In the assembly of Salamanca it was aduised, that the two Popes should reuoke all the
proceedings made one against another, and should haue an enterview in some place of
assurance, where they should deuise betwixt themselues how to free the church of this
Schisme, the which they should declare within a certaine time: and during the delay they
should giue a certaine pastor vnto the church, but if they could not, or would not agree,

that then they should both giue ouer their pretended dignities: but this aduice was of no
force, for D. Pedro de Luna, or Pope Benedict, would by no meanes leaue it, saying, that
he would hold his Popedome, whereupon he was much afflicted by the French, yet by the
meanes of the king Don Henry, he had some rest for a time, and the French king seemed
neither to acknowledge, nor obey him, the which continued not long.
At that time there sprung vp a Sect of white coates: their author was a Priest of theBeginning of the white cote
mountaines of Sauoy. They were men moued with deuotion, who began to runne ouer
Italy, as it were in procession, attired in white shirts, and wearing their haire long ouer
their faces, demanding pardon of God, and mercie for their sinnes, with great and lamentable
cries: and moreouer in going they sung Hymnes, as that which begins, Stabat mater dolorosa, and other such suffrages. Their troupe in the beginning beeing but small, they
grew to so great a number, there ioyning with them at all the townes where they past,
men, women, children, Clergi-men, secular men, Gentlemen, pesants, poore and rich, so
as they were forced to diuide themselues into bands, which somtimes were not lesse then
ten, twelue, or fifteen thousand persons: which made many Princes and Potentates of Italy
to suspect, that vnder a shew of religion they had some hidden enterprize to the preiudice
of their Estates. The towne of Luca gaue them most credit. They ranne vntill that
land fayled them, which was to the farthest point of Calabria, and then returned backe.
Their captaine with a great multitude of his sectaries being come to Viterbo, Pope Boniface
found meanes to draw him to Rome, where being examined of his intention, they
found nothing in him but meere ignorance and superstition, whereby all the townes and
families in Italy had beene troubled: many men leauing their houses, wiues, children, parents,
with all publike and priuate affaires, to follow this poore ideot, who for all the pain
he had taken, was by the Popes sentence condemned to the fire, who being burnt, euery
one retired to his home, and his followers were dispersed into diuers parts.
About the yeare 1399. died D. Pedro of Tenorio, Archb. of Toledo, beeing sorrie heeAn. 1399.
could not attaine vnto the yeare 1400. to the end he might depart this world in the yeare 
of Iubile. The Spaniards speake much good of this Prelate: that he had beene employed
during the raigne of three kings,Death of the Arch-bishop of Toledo. in the waightiest affaires of Spain, with opinion to haue
beene a wise and discreet Councellor, a learned man, and a louer of learned men: but he
was wilfull, and that which he himselfe bragged of, not very liberall (for the great reuenues
which he enioyed) especially to his kindred, who neuer receiued any aduancement
from him, nor by his fauour, from the king of Castile. His house was ancient issued from
Galicia, but growne greater in Portugall: he himselfe was borne at Tauira, the sonne of a
simple Gentleman, and but poore. He left many remembrances of him in his buildings
in diuers parts of Spaine, as S. Martins bridge in the citie of Toledo, and the castle of S.
Seruant towards the port called Alcantara, the Monasterie of S. Catherine of the Order of
S. Ierome, and the Collegiall church of Chanoins in the towne of Talauera, the chappell
where his bodie lyes in the great church at Toledo, and the cloyster thereof, a stately and
royall worke. Besides these buildings, he repaired the castles of Canales, Alhamin and
Almonacid. He caused strong castle to be built neere vnto Alcala the royall, to serue
for a refuge for Christian slaues, which escaped the Moores that were nere vnto the fronter,
and ordayned a certaine rent for the entertainment of a wonderfull great lampe, the
which should be a direction in the night for poore fugitiues, giuing light three great
leagues round about. The towne of Villafranca, the church and the bridge vppon Tayo,
betwixt Talauera and Guadalupe, were his worke, it beeing called at this day, the Archbishops
bridge. By the death of this Prelate, the sea of Toledo was void foure yeares,Sea of Toled^ void for foure yeares. the
Schisme in the Romish church being the cause thereof. In the meane time D. Iohn Bishop
of Siguenca had the gouernement of the Church, who gaue credit to the image of Saint
Marie of Nieua, and beganne to build the Church thereof, the which was afterwards
augmented by the Queene Donna Catherina. This image was sound by one Peter, who
for that cause was furnamed, Of good aduenture, who hauing found it, aduertised the bishop.
It is much reuerenced by the Spaniards, who hold, that shee doth wonderfull and
great miracles.
The yeare 1400. at what time the Iubile was, the Spaniards going about to set vp aAn. 1400.

great Bell in the Church at Seuile, all the people being assembled, and the King D. Henry
being in the tower, a sudden tempest with lightning slue many, scattered the rest and amazed
the whole citty.
In the yeare 1401.1401. there was some likelihood of an agreement betwixt the Kings of
France and Castile, and Pope Benedict, attending the determination of a general Councel.
The Christian Princes which did acknowledge him besides these, were the kings of
Arragon, Nauarre, Scotland, Cypres, and the Duke of Sauoy. The rest of the Potentats
did adhere vnto Pope Boniface residing at Rome: but Benedict was not long in quiet: for
the Cardinals and Clergie which were about him (whereof the chiefe was Iohn of Nouacastello,
Cardinall of Ostia, borne in Burgondy) rebelled against him, being fauoured and
sollicited by the French, yea there were sent to Auignon by the duke of Orleance brother
to king Charles, Robin of Bracamont, and William of Mollon, who set guards about the
Popes pallace,^^ards set a^out the Popes pallace. and kept him as it were prisoner, for that hee would not voluntarily relinquish
his Popedome. But the king of Arragon mediating for him, he sent Don Iames Prades
his Constable, who procured him his libertie, and that hee should be obeyed in the
Countie of Venice. In this tumult there were onely three Cardinals which shut themselues
vp with the Pope, which were Pampelona, Girone, and Saint Adrian: many men of
accompt endured much, especially Nauarrois, and aboue all Don Martin of Salua, Cardinall
of Pampelona, Don Bertrand of Gramont, Pronotarie and Master of the sacred
pallace, and others. This Pope aduanced to the Archbishoprick of Toledo a nephew of
his, sonne to his brother D. Iohn Martin of Luna, beeing Doctor of the Canon law, and
administrator of the church of Tarragone, he was also called D. Pedro de Luna, but he was
not so soone consecrated.
The affaires of Castile being reasonable quite, the Infant Don Fernand, the Kings brother
and Duke of Pegnafiel, was perswaded by some Noblemen, to take vppon him the
gouernement of the Realme, pretending that the king D. Henries infirmitie and continuall
paine, was the cause he could not intend it: so as many things succeeded not well: but
this was but a cloake to couer the enuie which they bare to D. Ruy Lopes of Aualos, Constable
of Castile, on whom the king relyed, giuing him great authority in all things thoroughout
 the Realme.Fami^y of Aua^ l^s issued ^ot of Nauarre. This Constable was borne at Vbeda, of meane parentage, but honest,
whose auncestors came out of Nauarre: he was a man of great courage, and singular
iudgement in matters of warre, or in any other charge that was committed vnto him. It
therefore grieued these Noblemen of great houses to be commanded by him, seeking to
thrust forward the Infant D. Fernand, to disturbe the State. But D. Fernand was no fit instrument
for their desseins: for if there were euer an obedient brother, and patient in all
things, it was he: besides, being of a slow spirit, affaires of great consequence did ouercharge
him, neither did he willingly vndertake them. Finally, he was a louer of peace, and
enemie to warre and tumults.
For these causes he reiected them that would haue him gouerne, shewing them the
inconueniences and scandals which would grow by such enterprises: exhorting them that
if his brother did not seeme vnto them very profitable, by reason of his infirmities, they
should attend the remedie from the prouidence of God with patience. This Prince Don
Fernand was, as we haue sayd, married to D. Leonora Countesse of Albuquerque, who
was heire to many Estates in Spaine. For besides the Earledome of Albuquerque, and the
fiue townes of Infantazgo, the townes of Haro, Biron^, Cerezo, Vilhorado, Ledesma,
Codesera, Azagala, Alconchel, Medellin, and Alconeta, were of her patrimony: besides
the which king Iohn had giuer her Villalon, and Vruegna in exchange of other places.
She was first called Vrraca, but she changed it: she was a vertuous Ladie and noble in all
her actions, hauing many children by her husband, as we will shew, treating of the affaires
of Arragon. In the yeare 1403. the riuer of Guadalquibir did so swell, as it came ouer
the wals of Seuile, and couered the houses in the lower parts, with great losse of men
and goods, To preuent which accident, the diligence of Alphonso of Toro, Gouernour
for the iustice of that city, is much commended.
The yeare 1405.1405. Genealogie of Castile. was happie and ioyful to the Castillans, by reason of the birth of the
Infant Don Iohn heire of those Realmes, in the towne of Toro, Queene Katherine

hauing had before D. Maria at Segobia, in the yeare 1401. who was Queene of Arragon.
A while after she brought the king another daughter, called Katherine by the mothers
name, and was future wife to D. Henry Master of Saint Iames, third sonne to the Infant
D. Fernand. Pope Boniface the ninth being dead a little before, seuen Cardinals did chuse
the Archb. of Rauenna called Cosmat, borne at Sulmona in the realme of Naples, being
Cardinal of S. Cruz,Innocent the 7. chosen Pope in the place of Boniface the 9 whom they named Innocent the 7. So as the schisme continued stil
in the Romish Church. His competitor Benedict passed the alpes, and came to Genoua,
to conferre with some Potentates of Italy of the meanes how to cease the schisme. Beeing
there he did consecrate his nephew D. Pedro de Luna Archb. of Toledo, and Primate of
Spaine: and moreouer, made another Archb, 9. Bishops, and 8. Abbots. Hee had in his
traine that famous Preacher Vincent of the house of Ferreres of Valencia, who then preached
in the citty of Genoua, and since in many other places, and especially in Spaine,
with a great opinion of holines. By the death of D. Diego Hurtado of Mendoca, high Admirall
of Castile, which happened the same yeare, there was aduanced to the place D. Alphonso
Henriques, younger brother to the Earle of Transtamara, and to his lands and
goods which were as great as any Noblemans in Castile, succeeded his sonne D. Inigo
Lopes of Mendoca, a famous personage.
D. Iohn of Castile one of the base sons of the king D. Pedro had secretly married himselfe
in prison, to the daugther of Bertrand Erillo his keeper, of whom he begat Peter and
Constance. Constance was a Nunne in the Monasterie of S. Dominicke the royall of Madrid.
Peter being condemned to perpetuall prison escaped, and as the king D. Henry caused
search to be made for him, Queene Catherine being newly brought in bed, begged his
pardon: at the same time when as she intreated the king her husband, hee was hidden in
her chamber, and hearing that the king had pardoned him, he came foorth presently in a
Priests habit, and obtained the Archdeaconship of Alaua: beeing an Archdeacon he had
two concubines, one an English woman called Izabel, and the other a Spaniard, whose
name was Mary Bernard, by these he had eight children, sons and daughters: from one of
which named Alphonso is descended the family called of Castile, reduced at this day to litle
About the end of this yeare the Moores of Granado began to stirre, hauing no cause
but onely the king D. Henries disability to war, by reason of his indisposition. They took 
the towne of Ayamonte,Moores. belonging to Don Aluar Peres of Guzman; whereat the
king D. Henry being displeased, he sent to king Mahumet Aben-Balua, to haue the place restored
in the estate it was, otherwise he would prouide by armes: the which the Moore
promised, giuing some excuses, but he did not performe it, but after some dayes entred
again by Quesada with a great army, and did ouer-runne the country about Bacca: for
suppressing of whom, the king D. Henry sent troupes of men at armes towards the fronter
vnder the leading of D. Pedro Manrique the Generall, with whom there ioyned many noblemen
and knights: and although the Christians forces were inferior to the Moores,Battel betwixt the Christians and Moores. yet
they offered them battell, in the which there was great slaughter of both parts, but no certaine
victory, in regard of the losse, but the Moores kept the field and the reputation. Of
Christians of accompt there dyed Alphonso of Aualos, the Constables nephew, Martin
of Rojas, Garci Aluares Osorio, and Iohn of Herrera, knights of valour.
The king D. Henry seeing that he must enter into warre,Castille. he assembled his Estates at Toledo,
to consult of the meanes to pursue it, and then he went to Madrid, where he receiued
newes of the battell. The Prelates, Noblemen, and Deputies of townes being assembled,
and hauing consulted freely what was to bee done (for the king had resolued to enter in
person into Granado, requiring their aduise and consent) he was forced, his infirmity increasing,
to giue the charge thereof to his brother D. Fernand, and to make him his Lieutenant
generall in this expedition, who spake vnto the Estates in the kings name, letting
them vnderstand, that his resolution was to make warre with all violence, and with his
greatest power against the king of Granado, for some reasons he gaue them: and therefore
he made accompt to put to field ten thousand men at armes, foure thousand genets
or light-horse, and fiftie thousand foot-men, besides the forces that were in Andalusia:
to entertayne which troupes with all necessarie prouision for sixe moneths, hee had need

of a hundred millions of Marauidis then currant, paying to euery horseman twenty Marauidis
a day, and to euery footeman tenne. He therefore intreated the estates, to prouide
and contribute that summe freely and speedily,D^m^nd of King Henry of (...) flates. seeing it must be imployed for the defence
and safety of all Spaine. The estates were amazed at so great a charge at that season and
besought the Infant to speake vnto the King for the moderating of the summe, seeing hee
had so great a treasure lying at Segobia, whereof a small portion might ease the Estates.
The Prelats and Clergy men aboue all others, made great difficulty for this contribution:
the which in the ende the King, after conference with his Brother, and other his familiars,
ordred in this manner.
That the Estates should presently furnish fourty fiue Millions of Marauidis,
which are valued at a Million of Crownes by the Authors of those times: and if the
King should neede any more, hee might impose it without calling of the Estates. The
condition to impose mony vpon the subiects without calling the States seemed hard, yet
they all consented for that time, so as it might not be a president. Matters standing thus,
the Kings infirmity increased in such sort, as foreseeing his approching death, he made
his will, and instituted for heire of his realmes his Sonne D. Iohn, beeing but twenty two
monethes old, leauing him for Tutors, vntill hee came to the age of fourteene yeares
compleate,Testament of the King D. Henry. the Queene D. Catherine his wife, and his brother the Duke of Pegnafiel.
And if his heire should die, hee did then substitute his daughter Catherine, and vnder the
same tutors, to whome also he left the gouernment of his realmes.
His will was to be buried in the habit of Saint Francis, and that his Sonne
should bee bred vp vnder the discipline of Deigo Lopes of Estuniga, chiefe iustice of
Castille, of D. Iohn Velasco his Lord Chamberlaine and of D. Pablo Bishop of Carthagena.Death of King Henry of Castille.
Hauing thus disposed of his last will, hee died soone after. Some Authors say, that
he was poysoned by a Phisition a Iew, the which was knowne afterwards by the confession
of other Iewes that were prisoners, for other disorders committed in derision of the
ceremonies vsed in the Christian Relligion, and were executed at Segobia. The King
D. Henry the third hauing rayned sixteene yeares and almost three months, dyed in the
yeare 1406. in December, in the Citty of Toledo, being not much aboue twenty seauen
yeares old: hee was interred in the Chappell of the last Kings in the Cathedrall Church
there. The same yeare dyed Pope Innocent the seauenth at Rome hauing rayned two
yeares, in whose place was chosen Angelo Carairo a Venetian, Patriarke of Constantinople,
and Cardinall of Saint Marke, by thirteen Cardinalls of his faction, and was named
Gregory the twelft by whome the Schisme was contynued.
After the returne of the Queene D. Leonora to the King of Nauarre her husband, shee
 was deliuered of a Sonne in the citty of Pampelone,Nauarre. who was called by his Fathers name,
but he lyued little. The peace of this realme was great vnder this King Charles, who liued
very contentedly with his wife, after her returne, and made her Regent when hee past
into France, which was in the yeare. 1397, for hee had many great affaiers to decyde
with King Charles the sixt, who detayned many places from him, which had beene seazed
on in his fathers time, and had often sollicited him in vaine by his Ambassadors to do him
reason: wherefore hee was forced to goe in person. Before his departure, hee ordayned
there should bee payed towards the building of the great Church of Pampelone, ruined
some yeares before, the forteth pennie of al the reuenues of his realme, for twelue yeares,
where-with it was built in the forme we now see it. Hereof there were letters giuen by
this King at Saint Iohn of Pie de Port this yeare 1397. in May. His voiage into France
did benefit him little, for besides that the French King was not counselled to yeeld vp
the places which he held, especially in Normandy; the friendshippe which the King of
Nauarre had with the English, was suspect and odious vnto him, although this amity
were not preiudiciall to the French, but rather a Neutrality (to the end they might
liue in peace) then a league. Seing therefore that hee was not wellcome, hee returned
presently into Nauarre, from whence soone after he sent the Cardinall of Pampelone,
who had retyred himselfe into Nauarre, after that hee had endured many miseries in
Auignon, for Pope Benedict.

He vsed such dilligence and fit meanes, as he made the French King and his councell willing
to giue recompence to the King of Nauarre for his lands, wherefore he was constrained
to repasse the Pyrenees againe. In the meane time died Iohn of Montfort duke
of Brittaine, husband to Ioane, sister to this King Charles of Nauarre, who had by her
husband foure children, Iohn who was duke, Richard, Arthur and Gyles. This Princesse
was afterwards married to Henry of Lancaster King of England, fourth of that name, he
who depriued his cousin Richard of the crowne: by him she had not any children. Charls
King of Nauarre, hauing caused his sonne Charles to be sworne his heire by the Estates
of his realme, he married D. Ioanne his eldest daughter to Iohn the eldest sonne of Archambaud,
who had succeeded in the county of Foix and Bearn, but the death of Mathew
of Castelbon: his second daughter called Donna Maria died a Virgin: and as for the
third, Mary Queene of Sicile, being a little before dead, who by her testament had left
this realme to D. Martin her husband, sonne to D. Martin King of Arragon, he thought
to make her Queene of Sicile, and to marry her to this young D. Martin being a widower.
He therefore sent his Ambassadors to the King of Arragon to this effect, who was
very well pleased, and yeelded to the marriage, although they had offred him many other
marches for his sonne D. Martin King of Sicile, and that the Sicilians did what they
could to make him incline to a marriage with Ioane sister to Ladislaus King of Naples.
The accord was made betwixt the King of Arragon,Marriage of D. Martin King of Sicile and D. B^anc^ of Nauarre. and the Ambassadors both of Nauarre
and Sicile (amongst which was Peter Serra, Cardinal of Cartanea) at a place called
Altu^a, in the Realme of Valencia, in the yeere of our Lord 1401. where it was concluded
that the King of Nauarre should giue in dowry with his daughter a hundred thousand
florins, of the stampe of Arragon: whereof forty thousand in hand, and threescore
thousand at a certaine time, for the which he should giue in pawne the townes and
castles of Arguedas, Santa Cato, Murillo, and Gallipienco: the King of Arragon should
binde for her dowry the townes and castles of Sos, Saluaterra, Vncastillo and Rueste.
And for that they were somewhat allied by affinity, there should be a dispensation procured
from Benedict. For confirmation and execution of these things, the Kings of Arragon
and Nauarre had an enterview vpon the confines of their Realmes, betwixt Cortes
and Mallen, where they did sweare what had beene concluded. With the King of Nauarre
did sweare D. Lionel of Nauarre his brother, D. Charles of Beaumont chiefe Standard-bearer,
D. Martin of Lacarra Marshal, D. Francis of Villa Especa, Chancellor of the
realme, Iohn Ruys of Ayuar, superintendant of the treasure, and D. Martin of Olloaqui
prior of Saint Iohn with others: In like manner did many noblemen and prelats for the
King of Arragon.
This don the King of Arragon was conducted to Cortes, where hauing beene royally
feasted by the King of Nauar, the Infanta D. Blanch was deliuered vnto him, a Princesse
of excellent beauty, whom he led into his country, and hauing prepared a fleet at Valencia,
he sent her into Sicile, to the King D. Martin his son vnder the charge of D. Martin of
Cabrera, a Knight of Cattelogne, in 1402. This Lady was in the end Queene of Nauarre:
for soone after the content of this marriage followed a discontent for the death of D.
Lewis the second son to the King of Nauar, being but sixe months old, and not long after
that of D. Charls his eldest,Death of the two sonnes of Nauarre. which two Infants are buried in the Cathedral church at Pampelone,
and D. Blanch suruiued her eldest sister D. Ioane. The crowne of Nauarre fell
then to the succession of daughters, and the King caused D. Ioane his eldest daughter, to
be againe sworne heire of the realme, with her husband D. Iohn of Foix. This same
yeere the Episcopal sea of Pampelone was voide, by the death of Cardinal Martin of
Salua, bishop of that city, who had past the age of 66. yeeres, in great trouble and
paine, to maintaine the party of Pope Benedict in Auignon. D. Michel of Salua his
Nephew obtained the Bishoprike after him, who was afterwards made Cardinal by
P^pe Benedict, in following of whom he died two yeeres after at Monaco. The King of
Nauarre being the third time called in France, his voiage was then more proffitable vnto
him, then at the precedent, for he obtained of king Charles the sixt the Lordship of
Ne^o^rs the which was erected to a Dutchy, and moreouer twelue hundred pounds
starling of yeerely rent, to be taken out of the reuenues of Bry and Champagne, with a

good summe of ready money for all pretensions and rights, the which he renounced, seeing
he could not doe otherwise:Title of Earle of Eureu^ ceaseth in the house of Naua^re, and taks that of duke of Nemours. in respect whereof the title of Earle of Eureux ceased
in the house of Nauarre, taking that of Duke of Nemours.
The towne of Cherbourg in Normandy, held in the King of Nauarres name, by the
Marshal D. Martin Henriques, was by this accord deliuered to the French: all letters and
expeditions being ended, the King D. Charles returned into Nauarre, an other way; for
he past by Languedoc and Cattelogne, where he visited the King D. Martin at Lerida,
with great content and pleasure to these two Princes allied. Passing from thence by
Sarragossa, he came into his country, where afterwards he gaue himselfe to building in
many places, yea two sumptuous pallaces, one in Tafalla, the other in Olite, the which
 now fall to ruine,Buildings of Charles the 3. King of Nauarre. for want of reparations, especially that of Olite, where the Marshalls
of Nauarre were accustomed to lodge: and the Spaniards say, that he had intent, to
make a paued causey and couered, to passe at all times without discommodity, from one
of these places to the other, being but a little league distant. The bridge of Estella vpon
the riuer of Ega, was this Kings worke, who for that he had liued in continuall peace, had
store of treasure, to imploy in such buildings. During his aboad in France, there had
beene some speech of marriage betwixt his youngest daughter D. Beatrix and D. Iames
sonne to the Earle of Vrgel, of the bloud royall of Arragon, the which by reason of certaine
lets, ^ooke no effect: wherefore the King being returned, he married her to Iames
of Bourbon Earle of March, one of the goodliest and actiue Princes of his time. The
marriage was celebrated in the city of Pamapelone, in the yeere 1406. with great solemnity,
and concourse of the nobility of Spaine and France, about the beginning of the
warre of Granado, and a little before the death of D. Henry King of Castile, the newes
whereof were greeuous to King Charles, a great friend and allie to the house of Castile.


D. Iohn the second of that name, 18. King
of Castile, 39. of Leon.
 THe heat of the warre against the Moores was somewhat quenched by the death of
King Henry,Castile. leauing his sonne and successor in his realmes, an Infant, in his swathling
clothes, being but two and twenty monthes old. For it behoued to haue a speedy
care of that which was necessary for the peace of the Realme, wherein the Queene D.
Catherine, and the Infant D. Fernand duke of Pegnafiel,Factions in Cast^^e after the Kings death. appointed Gouernors by the
testament of the deceased King, imployed all their care: but they could not keepe the
noblemen from entring into factions: and as the gouernment of two is neuer firme,
they were the first which diuided themselues. The prelats, noblemen and deputies of
townes which were in court, assembled againe in Toledo: Some perswaded the Infant
D. Fernand duke of Pegnafiel, to take vpon him the title of King, promising to maintaine
and defend him, alledging that it was no new thing in Spaine, when as the deceased
Kings children were young and not fit to gouerne, or they left none but daughters,
that the royall Scepter was put into the vncles hands, or of some other Prince of the
bloud, a man of fit age and endowed with wisdome, to gouerne the affaires of that
realme: producing many examples of D. Sancho the fourth, who had beene receiued for
King, and the children of his elder brother, being yet young reiected, and of the King D.
Henry his grandfather, who had raigned with the consent of the Spaniards, although he
were a bastard, to the prejudice of D. Constance Dutchesse of Lancaster, being then eldest
daughter to the King D. Pedro, with other examples more antient, as well of Castile
as of the first Kings of Leon, either well or ill reported; That the vrgent affaires of the
realme, and the warre of Granado which was begunne, required that he should reigne,
and the troubles which he had lately seene in his brothers time, did aduertise him to preuent
others, which were a breeding, if Castile should receiue an Infant of two and twenty
monthes for King. The Infant D. Fernand was not well pleased with these perswasions,
but the Constable D. Ruy Lopes of Aualos, hauing in a publike assembly, required

openly that they would raise him to the royall throne of Castile, being a plot laied among
the noblemen, thinking that most voices would choose D. Fernand, he made an
answere of rare example,The Iusant D. Fernand refuseth the realme of Castile. and persisted therein; and to whom the said he belongs the
realme, but to my Nephew D. Iohn sonne and onely heire to the King D. Henry my brother?
Thus by this conscientious Prince, the crowne of Castile and Leon was preserued
for the Infant, who was then at Segobia, with the Queene Donna Catherine his mother,
whether the duke of Pegnafiel went, with the other noblemen, after the funerals of the
deceased King. The breeding vp of the young King was left in the mothers charge,
who made great instance against D. Iohn of Velasco, and Diego Lopes of Estuniga, who
demanded it, according vnto the fathers will, to stop whose mouthes, and to giue them
some content there was presently giuen them twelue thousand florins of gold. The will
being read, and an oth taken, the Queene and the Duke charged themselues with the gouernment
of the King, swearing in the hands of D. Iohn of Illesca Bishop of Siguenca, and
promising the obseruation of the lawes, rights and preuiledges of the realme, Prouinces
and cities thereof: But within few daies of Queene and D. Fernand disagreed in their
commands. The Queene being a woman was gouerned by an other woman of Cordoua,
called Leonora Lopes, without whose aduice she did not any thing, no not that
which was resolued in councell; so as without the dukes great modesty and patience, the
realme had beene full of seditions and great confusion. It was ordained that the King
should haue three hundred launces for his gard, and the Duke two hundred, the which
did much displease euery man of iudgement. And for that the souldiars which were
vpon the frontier were not paied, and endured much, there was drawne out of the Kings
cofers twenty millions of Marauidies, vpon condition it should be repaied out of the
first of the Kings reuenues that should be receiued, or others that should be leauied.
Whilest they were attentiue about these affaires at Segobia, the Marshal of Castile
Fernando Garcia of Herrera, being in Lorca, entred into the country of Granado, to surprise
some moores, who had their retreat at Vera, but for want of ladders he could not
effect it. Some daies after he incountred with other troupes neere vnto Xurena, where
hauing defeated them, he entred into the towne, but he could not take the castle; wherefore
the Christians retired, hearing that a great number of Moores came to charge
them. These petty exploits did somewhat kindle the warre of Granado, wherein the Infant
D. Fernand desired to imploy himselfe.
Difficulties increasing in Segobia,Gouernment Castile diuided betwixt the Queene mother and the Duke of Pegnafiel. in respect of the gouernment, it was thought fit
Donna Catherine the Queene mother, and D. Fernand duke of Pegnafiel should diuide
it betwixt them: so as the places remoat from all tumults of warre, and within the country,
should be at the Queenes disposition; which were the dioceses of St. Iames, Tuy, Astorga,
Ouiedo, Leon, Zamora, Salamanca, Ciudad Roderigo, Auila, Segobia, Osma,
Burgos and Calaorra. And vnder the dukes charge, should remaine the Archbishopriks
of Toledo and Seuile, and the Bishoprikes of Cuenca, Siguenca, Carthagena, Caliz,
Cordoua, Iaen, Badajos, Coria, Plaisance, Lugo, Mondonedo, Palence and Orence, with
certaine conditions vpon the iudgement of suits, and other things.
The King of Granado hauing for his allies and assistants in this warre the petty Kings
of Tunes and Tremessen, he caused his army to march towards Priego. And at the
same time the Duke of Pegnafiel went towards the frontier, and came to Seuile. There
were many light incounters, sometimes with gaine, sometimes with losse: the towne of
Zaara, the castle of Andito, Priego, Cagnete, Las Cueuas and Ortexica were taken from
the Moores. The strength of the Moores army was about Iaen, and yet they durst not
giue battaile to the Christians, who went and camped before Septenil, hauing in
their campe some peeces of ordinance, whereof the Spaniards were in those daies very
vnskilfull, the inuention of that deuilish Engine being then new. At sea thirteene 
gallies of Castile did fight against three and twenty of the Moores,First vse of Artillery in Spaine. D. Alphonso Henriques
being Admiral of Castile, who tooke eight of the enemies gallies, the rest soone
perished, and some fled.
The seege of Septenil was long, during the which D. Pedro of Estuniga tooke Ayamont:
and in the end through the valour of the Moores which were within Septenil,

they were forced to raise the seege. The Moores after this retreat recouered Priego
and Las Cueuas, and burnt them: they attempted Cagnette, but they found it well
manned.
The duke of Pegnafiel going from Seuile, had carried in this warre the sword of King
Fernand surnamed the holy, who tooke that city from the Moores, attributing some
vertue and happinesse therevnto: and for that hee had promised to bring it backe, and
leaue it in its place, hee did it at this returne, and then past into Castile, leauing good
order vpon the frontier:An. 1407. this is all was done in the yeere of our Lord 1407. in the warre
of Granado;Death of D. Pero Lopes of Ayala, a valiant and learned Knight. at what time died Don Pedro Lopes of Ayala great Chamberlaine of Castile,
being threescore and fifteene yeeres of age, a Knight endowed with two principall
quallities which adorne nobility; for besides his learning, which was great, he had made
proofe of his valour in the two battailes of Nagera, betwixt the two Kings D. Pedro and
D. Henry brethren, and in that of Aljubarote, betwixt D. Iohn King of Castile and D. Iohn
of Portugal. He hath left in writing the History of Castile, of his time; a treatise of hunting,
wherevnto he was much giuen, and other Bookes.
The yeere 1408. being come,An. 1408. the Estates of Castile and Leon, assembled at Guadalajara,
whether came the King, the Queene-mother and the Infanta. The duke of Pegnafiel
came also, whereas the deputies of the Estates hauing had diuerse conferences touching
the continuance of the warre of Granado, they agreed and offred money for the furnishing
thereof, yet with some delaies and difficulties. D. Pedro de Luna Archbishop of Toledo,
who had beene at this assembly, had led a young man of eighteene yeeres of age
with him, whom he aduowed to be his kinsman, and was called Aluaro de Luna, whom he
brought into the Kings house,Aluaro de Luna and his beginning. and made his Page of the chamber, by the meanes of
Gomes Carillo the Kings Gouernor. He was held to be sonne of Aluaro of Luna, Lord
of Cagnette, who was chiefe cup-bearer to the King D. Henry: but he who was held to
be his father, did not avow him for his sonne, for he was borne of a dishonest woman,
called Mary of Cagnette, who had beene common to others, and had brought them
children: wherefore Aluaro de Luna did not thinke that this was his sonne, and for that
he should not inherit his great possessions, hee sould all in his life time, leauing to this
child only eight hundred florins, and that at the intreaty of his friends. Aluaro the father
being dead, the child retired to Auignon, to the court of Pope Benedict, where hauing
remained some time, he came into Castile to the Archbishop, by whose meanes
he was receiued into the Kings house, and in time grew so great, as he was made Constable
of the realme, and yet it was not very successfull for him. His mother Mary of
Cagnette, had also by a captaine of Cagnette, D. Iohn of Crezuela, who was Bishop of
Osma, and afterwards Archbishop of Seuile, and in the end of Toledo.
Whilest they ramained at Guadalajara, the King of Granado came to the seege of
Alcaudete,Exploits of warre betwixt the Castillans and Moores. hauing seuen thousand horse and 26000. foote in his army: yet through the
valour of Martin Alphonso of Montemajor and others, which were within the place, it
was preserued. The Moores victuals were many times cut off by the garrisons of Andalusia,
and many light victories gotten one of an othe^ wheras Garci Fernandes Manrique
captaine of Xeres, and Fernand Rodriques ofVallezillo, who held Zahara, and Fernand
Arias of Sahauedra, Gouernor of Cagnette, shewed themselues both valiant and vigilant,
carrying great spoiles out of the Moores country, euery one in his quarter. This
warre beeing more difficult to the King of Granado then hee had estemeed, hee sent
Ambassadors to the Gouernors at Guadalajara, to demaund a truce, the which was
graunted,Trust with the Moores. against the will of D. Fernand Duke of Pegnafiel, who desired the warre
should continue. Wherefore the Estates reduced the subuention which they had granted
of threescore millions of marauidies, to fiue and forty.



Ioseph the thirteenth King of
Granado.
DVring this cessation of armes,Moores. King Mahumet Aben Balua died, hauing put on a poisoned
shirt, the twelfth yeere of his reigne, and of the Arabians the 791. in whose
place came King Ioseph his eldest brother, a little before put in prison in Salobregne,
from whence he was drawne and led with great silence to Granado, to raigne ouer the
Moores, being loath presently to divulge Mahumets death, for feare of the Christians
enterprises. Seeing himselfe setled, he sent a messenger presently to D. Alphonso Fernandes
Gouernor of Alcala the royal, aduertising him of his aduancement, and withall
he sent vnto the King of Castile and to the Gouernors, a Moorish Knight called Abdalla
Alemin, to let them vnderstand what had past, intreating them to reioyce at his good
hap, and to continue the truce made with his predecessor Mahumet, the which the
Queene mother, and the duke D. Fernand did confirme for the said time, and sent a Secretary
to Granado to see it sworne. At his returne, he was accompanied with an other
Ambassador, who had charge to present vnto the King of Castile, horses, swords, some
peeces of veluet, raysins, dried figs, almonds and other presents, and to require a prolongation
of the truce for two yeeres, but he obtained it not; for the Queene mother
and the duke of Pegnafiel, would haue King Ioseph acknowledge himselfe vassall to
the King of Castile, whereof the Ambassador excused himselfe, saying that he had no
charge to treat of any such matter:An. 1409. yet all acts of hostility ceased that yeere 1409. notwithstanding
some tumult at Priego, the Moores contrary to their plighted faith, running
vpon them which did repaire it: but this was pacefied and satisfied, with excuses
from King Ioseph, and the truce prolonged for fiue monthes.
The court being at Vailedolit,Castile. was then in some combustion, for that many imagining
that D. Iohn Velasco and D. Diego Lopes of Estuniga, did entertaine the Queene mother
in quarrel with the duke of Pegnafiel, D. Frederic the young Earle of Transtamara,
sonne to D. Pedro, did presse him to punish them, offring to lay hold of them, if he pleased:
whereof they hauing some intelligence, retired from court, whereat the Queene
was much discontented, and was not quiet vntill she had caused them returne, hauing
obtained a safe conduit from the duke D. Fernand. At Vailledolit there arriued Ambassadors
from the French King, and from Lewis Duke of Orleans his brother, who offred
the King of Castile and his Gouernors to come to the war against the Moores, with a
thousand launces entertained: with them were Ambassadors from the Dukes of Austria
and Luxemburg, making the like offers: and more ouer the Duke of Orleans demaunded
Queene Beatrix, widow to King Iohn the first to wife. There were great thankes giuen
vnto them all, and the truce made with the new King of Granado made knowne vnto
them. As for the marriage the widow Queene would giue no eare vnto it, contenting
herselfe to liue a widowes life, in her house of Villa real, from whence she did not part.
The French Ambassadors confirmed the ancient league betwixt the houses of France
and Castile.
At Vailledolit there was an assembly, in the which was ratefied the marriage of the 
Infanta Donna Maria the Kings sister with her cousin Germain D.Marriage betwixt D. Alphonso eldest sonne to the Duke of Pegnafiel, and D. Maria the Kings sister. Alphonso eldest sonne
to the Duke of Pegnafiel, to her was assigned for dowrie the Marquisate of Villena, Aranda
and Portillo: and for an earnest penny of the marriage, there were thirty thousand
doublons of gold deliuered. This yeere D. Laurence Suarez of Figueroa, maister of
Saint Iames being dead, there was substituted in his place D. Henry the third, sonne to
the Infant D. Fernand Duke of Pegnafiel, notwithstanding all the labouring of Garcia
Hernandes, Lord of Villagarcia, great Commander of Castile.
About that time there was set vp (as a most holy thing in Spaine) an Image of the
Virgin Mary, found by a relligious Frenchman, in the mountaine which is betwixt Salamanca,
and Cite Roderigue, called La Pegna of France, where afterwards there was a

monastery built, in honour of this Image, whereof the Spaniards report many Prodigies
and miracles, of the which they haue made whole bookes and treaties. This age was
fertile (during the Schisme of the church) of sects and new monasticall institutions. For
besides the reformation of the regular Chanoins of Saint Augustin, by the dilligence of
Leon of Carrate Prior of Frigionaja of Santa Maria in the fields of Luca; the Order
of White Monkes of Mount Oliuet had its beginning neere vnto Siena, by Bernard and
other Monkes of Siena, and that of Saint George of Alaga, by Laurence Iustinian a Venetian
otherwise called blue Celestins.
The same yeere the Schisme in the church did produce a third head in the church of
Rome:Three Popes at one time in the church of Rome. for many Princes hauing insisted much for the revnion of the church, that the
two Popes Benedict of Auignon, and Gregory of Rome, should meet at Sauona, and take
some good course for the quiet of Christendome, these good fathers, zealous of their
glory, did so contemne one an other, as there was no meanes to draw them together:
wherefore many Cardinals being disbanded, as well from the sea of Rome, as from that
of Auignon, there was a councell celebrated by them at Pisa in Tuscany, by the which
Benedict and Gregory being deposed from their papal dignity, Peter Philarge, a friar,
borne in Candy, Archbishop of Milan, and Cardinal of the title of the twelue Apostles,
was chosen, and named Alexander the fifth, who liued but teene monthes: wherefore
the Cardinals were forced to meet againe at Bolonia in Lombardy, whereas Balthasar
Cosse a Neapolitaine, Cardinal of the title of Saint Eustace, and Legat of Bolonia, was
chosen, and named by them Iohn the three and twentith. This was a triepling of the
Schisme, and confusion in the church of Rome: for the two first Popes did still hold
their dignities, and had their followers, to the contempt one of an other, namely Castile
and Nauarre held for Benedict resyding in Auignon, holding the other two for
false Popes.
Aboue all others D. Martin King of Arragon did reuerence and support Pope Benedict,Arragon.
who at that time had many crosses both within and without his realme: for the King
of Sicile his sonne, being young and gouerned by young men, had so discontented the
Noblemen of the country, both Sicilians and Arragonois, as finding himselfe plonged
againe in very great difficulties, the King his father was forced to send him succors both
of gallies and souldiars, whereby in the end he became maister of all Sicile, but with great
paine: and being better councelled he did gouerne it with more honour and authority,
but not without continuall iealousie and distrust: Yet hee had meanes to imploy himselfe
in the warre of Sardynia, and to preserue that Island to the crowne of Arragon:
 In the which Brancaleon of Oria,VVarre in Sardynia. had made such attempts against the Arragonois, as
they were in a manner ready to abandon it, hee hauing ioyned vnto his forces those of
Americ Vicont of Narbone, who had married Beatrix sister to his wife Leonora of Arborea;
these two brothers in law, being strong and also faoured by the common-weale of
Genoua, it was needfull to haue the forces of Sicile and Arragon vnited to suppresse
them. D. Martin King of Sicile came thether in person with tenne gallies, with a resolution
not to leaue the Island, vntill he had wholy subdued it, whereof he did aduertise
the King his father, who soone after sent D. Pedro Torellia into Sardynia with an hundred
and fifty saile, which transported good numbers of foote and horse with many Noblemen
and Knights of fame.
During this preparation D. Raymond Boil, Viceroy of Valencia, was murthered in Easter
weeke,Viceroy of Valencia slaine by the treachery of his owne brother. going out of the castle, whereof his owne brother was a practiser, whereof
being conuicted, he lost his life, with the rest that had committed the murther. Within
a while after there was a marriage in the same city, betwixt D. Iames of Arragon Ea^^e
of Vrgel, sonne to D. Pedro, and D. Isabella the Kings sister, and daughter to the deceased
King D. Pedro, and of Sibille of Sforza, his last wife, an vnfortunate marriage, as we will
shew. And for that a son which D. Martin King of Sicile had had by D. Blanche of Nauarre,
was dead about that time, D. Martin King of Arragon the grandfather, conceiued
so great a griefe, as retyring himselfe from all affaires, he shut himselfe vp in the Monastery
of Val de Christus, which hee had caused to bee built, and left the whole charge of
the warre of Sardynia to his sonne Don Martin King ofSicile, who (with the forces

of Arragon, led by D. Pedro Torellia) charged the enemies campe about Sauluri, and
put them to ro^t with great slaughter, forcing the Vicont of Narbona to saue himselfe
in Montreal: he tooke Sauluri and the castle, with the towne of Eglise, and laied seege
to Oristagno, the chiefe fort of Brancaleon of Oria, and of the Sardinians rebelled: but
the King being surprized with sicknesse in this fortunat victory, hee caused himselfe to
be carried to Caillery, where he died, to the great griefe of all the Sicilians and Arragonois,Death of Don Martin King of Sicile.
and extreame sorrow of the King of Arragon his father, who liued not long after
him. By his death without any lawfull children, the realme of Sicile fell to the King of
Arragon, and was for euer after vnited to that crowne. Blanche of Nauarre, the widow
Queene, remained Regent of the Island, by the will of the King her husband, confirmed
by her father in law. A base sonne of his called D. Frederic, had for his portion the
Earledome of Luna. At that time there grew great troubles in Arragon, whereof D.
Iames Earle of Vrgel was the chiefe author, a turbulent Prince, who made no difficulty
to challenge the crowne euen in the life time of the King Don Martin: and for that it
was a tickle point, and did not succeed well, he aspired to the ordinary Regency, which
was a dignity wherewith the eldest sonnes of Arragon, and the presumptiue heires,
were wont to bee honoured, the which hee obtained, and was moreouer made Constable:
but vnderhand the King gaue order that he should not be receiued in his Regency,
and caused an appeale to be made by the factions of Vrrea, Heredia and other, before the
Iustice Major of Arragon.
This was in the yeere 1409. when as the King desirous to see if he might haue a child
to succeed him in his great Estates,Marriage of D. Martin King of Arragon and Donna Ioane of Pradez. married with Donna Ioane of Prades, or Marguerite,
as some write, a faire young virgin of the bloud royall, the which hastened his end: and
in the meane time hee was much sollicited by Lewis duke of Aniou, who had married
Donna Violant, daughter to D. Iohn King of Arragon, and by the Duke of Pegnafiel,
borne of Donna Leonora of Arragon, daughter to the King Don Pedro, and sister to this
King D. Martin, that he would declare his successor, the which he refused to doe, at their
requests, but tired with their importunities, he was ready to name by his testament, for
heire of the realmes of Arragon, Sicile and other lands, Don Frederic de Luna, basta^^
to his deceased sonne. This King being thus distracted with passions in his age, (...)
faires of Sicile and Sardynia were more troubled then before.
In the yeere 1410. beganne the warre in Castile against the Moores,Castille. the truce beeing 
expired, and the Moores army hauing surprised Zahara with great slaughter of the inhabitants
and souldiars, and great spoile of them that remained. That Infant Don Fernand
comming for this occasion to Cordoua, hee caused the ruines of Zahara to bee
repaired, and went to beseege Antequera, hauing in his army tenne thousand foote and
three thousand fiue hundred horse. Neere vnto the towne were two hils, the approches
whereof beeing kept, the army might bee safe from all attempts of the Moores, who
were in field with fiue thousand horse and 80000. foote, led by Cidi Ali and Cidi Amet
brethren to Ioseph King of Granado. These passages were garded, the lower part of
the hill with sixe hundred Launces and two thousand foote vnder the commaund of
Don Sancho of Rojas Bishop of Palenca, Don Diego Fernandes of Quignones Gouernor
of the Asturia's, D. Aluar Peres of Guzman, and Don Iohn Hurtado of Mendoca.
And at the other hill of harder accesse, being higher and easier to bee kept, there were
set foure hundred Launces and one thousand foote, commanded by Don Martin Vasques,
D. Fernand Peres of Ayala, Gouernor of Guipuscoa, D. Raymond of Guzman and
Iohn of Soto Major great commander of Alcantara. The Duke of Pegnafiel had caus^^many
ladders to bee brought from Seuile, with other Engines of warre to assaile
townes.
The Moores beeing desirous for to raise the seege from before Antequera, came to
assaile the Bishop of Palenca and his troupes in this passage of strength, from whence
they were not onely repulst, but the skirmish growing very hot, in the end, beyond
the Moores expectation, there was a great incounter, the Bishoppe beeing fortefied
with new bands, which came from the campe, so as the Moores fighting without
order, and rather hindered then fauoured by their numbers of rascally footemen,

they were forced to turne their backes with great losse; for authors write that there were
aboue fifteene thousand of them slaine vpon the field, and onely twelue hundred
Christians.
After this victory the seege was continued, and the place battred by all meanes, the
which in like manner was valiantly defended, where as the Christians lost more in the
sallies of the beseeged, then they had done in the battaile. There died Martin Ruis of
Aben Dagno,Defeat of Christians neere to Montexicar. of a poisoned arrow. On the other side three hundred christians horsemen,
going out of their garison of Iaen, were incountred, and cut in peeces by the
Moores about Montexicar. But the Moores garrison of Archidona within two leagues
of Antiquera, were happely defeated by the Christians that were at the seege, for they
did much annoy them, by their continuall courses, and cutting off their victualers and
for^agers that came to the campe. The riuer of Gorza was their common watring
place whether they could not go without a gard. The Christians being aduertised of an
enterprise made vpon their men, hauing set a sentinell vpon an high eminent place, called
the rocke of two Louers, they found themselues so strong, when as the Moores came
to charge them, as they repulst them, and pursued them beating and killing euen vnto
the gates of their for^: there were two thousand slaine vpon the field, and many carried
away prisoners. The rocke of two Louers was so called from the deed of a Christian
slaue,Rocke of two Louers. and his Maisters daughter being a Moore, whom he had perswaded to flie with
him from Granado, to enioy their desired loues, and to liue freely together in Castile:
they being pursued by her father, who was well accompanied, and ouertaken vpon this
rocke, which is midde-way betwixt Archidona and Antiquera, after that they had long
defended themselues against them that would take them, and seeing no meanes to escape,
they cast themselues downe head-long from the top of the rocke, imbrasing one
an other, and so slue themselues. To diuert the seege of Antiquera, the Moores sent
some to burne the Engines of battery that were before it with wilde fire, vnder collour of
treating of a truce. The treason being descouered and punished, the Infant caused a
trench to be cast and a rampar to be made round about the place, setting good gards,
and then he pursued the seege, hauing fortefied his army with the companies of Seuile
and Cordoua, who haue alwaies done great seruice in these Moorish warres, the which
kept King Ioseph for aduenturing of a battaile.
The towne of Antiquera being prest with all violence, it was taken, there going first
vnto the assault,Antequera taken. the companies of D. Garci Fernandes Manrique, of D. Charles of Areillan
Lord of Los Cameros, and Roderigo of Narbaez. The first which died in fighting,
was Iuancho a Biscain, and the first which entred were Guttiere of Torres and Sancho
Goncales Cherino. The castle did hold out eight daies longer, and then was yeelded
by the Moores, to haue their liues saued and their goods, who were safely conducted
to Archidona. There entred into it, Don Frederic Earle of Transtamara, and the Bishop
of Palencia: the garde of the towne and castle was giuen to Roderigo of Narbaez.
In the meane time the Moores did forrage the territorie of Alcala the royall,
and the Christians after the taking of Antiquera, did ouerrunne the country of Aznalmara,
Cabecha and Y^har, small townes which were taken by force, through the wisdome
and valour chiefely of the Constable D. Ruy Lopes of Aualos: after which exploits
the Infant Don Fernand returned a victor to Seuile, where he had messengers from the
King of Granado,Truce with the King of Granado. soliciting him to make a truce, wherevnto hee yeelded, being prest to
attend the affaires of Arragon: wherefore there was a truce concluded betwixt Castile
and Granado for seuenteene monthes.
 Wee haue before left Don Martin King of Arragon, beeing without children ^^
succeed him,Arragon. importuned by many Princes, pretending to bee his heires, troubled with
the seditions and rebellions of the Sardynians and Sicilians, beeing old and broken,
and yet newly married to a young Princesse, with hope to raise his house: But beeing
weake both in bodie and minde, griefe and care made the way to pestilent feuer, the
which seized on him this yeere 1410. in the Monastery of Valdonzellas, neere to Barcelona,
hauing raigned about 14. yeeres, whose body was buried in the Monastery of
Problette.

There was no will of his found, or any heire instituted in his Realmes of Arragon,
Sicile etc. The reason thereof was thought to bee for that hee knew not to which hee
should incline amongst all the pretendants to that crowne, after his decease. Wherefore
the Arragonois, Valentlans, Cattelans and Sicilians were in great perplexity, for
Don Fernand Duke of Pegnafiel Infant of Castile pretended a right,Princes pretending to the realme of Arragon. beeing sonne to
Donna Leonora of Arragon, sister to the two last Kings decreased: Lewis Duke of Aniou
hauing married Donna Viol^nt, daughter to King Iohn the first, maintained the succession
to belong to him: the like pretension had Don Iames Earle of Vrgel, hauing
also married one of the daughters of the King Don Pedro: Don Frederic of Arragon,
Earle of Luna, base sonne to Martin King of Sicile, put forth himselfe, and so did Don
Alphonso Earle of Gandia: all these pretendants had their partisans within the Realme,
and euery one tried all meanes, with great contention, and likely-hood of sedition, to
attaine vnto that which hee pretended, so as in these tumults Don Anthony of Luna
slue Don Garcia Archbishop of Saragossa treacherously.Murther of the Archbishop of Sarag^ssa. To preuent which disorders
in time, the Noblemen of the Realme agreed, that of the three Estates there should
be nine men chosen, by whose Iudgement the Scepter of Arragon should bee giuen to
him of the pretendants whom they should thinke most profitable for the common-weale.
For Arragon there were named Don Dominike Bishop of Huesca, Francis of
Aranda and Don Berenger of Bardaxi a great Lawier. For the principality of Cattelog.
D. Pedro Zagariga Archbishop of Tarragona, William of Vallesca and Bernard of Gualues.
And for the Realme of Valencia were chosen Vincent Ferrier,Nine arbitrators to choose the King of Arragon. of the Order of
the preaching friars, who was afterwards connonized, his brother Boniface Ferrier
a Lawier, a Monke of the Order of the Carthusians, and Maister Peter Bertrand, this
last was substituted in the place of Gines of Rabeca who fell mad. These nine men beeing
assembled in the castle of Caspe which is in Arragon, all those which pretended any
right vnto the Realme, were sommoned to exhibit their reasons before them, whereof
some appeered personally, and others by their Ambassadours. In the meane time
in Castile the Infant D. Fernand, for himselfe and the King his Nephew, caused this businesse
to be consulted of by the learned of the country, who in the beginning were of
opinion that both of them had an interest, and that they must frame an opposition before
the Delegats, as well in the Kings name, beeing a pupill, as in his vncle and tutor
Don Fernand; yet hauing better considred, or being otherwise perswaded, they gaue
all the right of the succession, in the realme of Arragon, to the Infant D. Fernand, who
for this cause deputed Ambassadors, the Bishop of Palenca, and D. Diego Lopes of Estuniga,
chiefe Iustice of Castile,D. Fernand with his right vseth armes. and Lord of Bejar, with Doctor Pero Sanches of the Kings
councel, to send them into Arragon: and at the same time hee caused fifteene hundred
launces to draw neere vnto the frontier of Arragon: hee and the Queene-mother with
the young King comming to Aillon, a neere place to Arragon.
Whilest they are busie about these pursutes, the Duke of Benauent a prisoner in the 
castle of Mont-real,Castile. brake prison, and escaped, hauing slaine the captaine which had
him in gard, whereof they beeing aduertised at court, they prouided speedily for all the
passages, especially towards Portugal, thinking that hee would bend that way: but hee
went towards Nauarre, where hee was kindely entertained by the King D. Charles, and
by the Queene Dionna Leonora his sister: who notwithstanding hauing receiued letters
from the Queene-mother, the Infant Don Fernand, and the councell of Castile, iutreating
them to set a gard vpon the Dukes person, vntill they had further newes, they caused
him to bee put into a strong castle, yet intreating him with all honour and respect,
and then they sent an Ambassador into Castile, to make their excuse, for that they
had receiued this fugitiue Prince, and intreated him as their brother, but they kept him
in sure garde, that he should not attempt any thing against the crowne of Castile. This
Ambassadour found the court at Aillon, where he was well receiued, and his excuses allowed.
There arriued also Ambassadors from the French King, with very rich presents,
the which were required with others of no lesse value, being sent by an expresse Ambassage
some monthes after.

This yeere of our Lord 1411.An. 1411. Greene crosses the badge of the Knights of Alcantara. Pope Benedict graunted that the Knights of Alcantara,
in steed of hoods which they did weare in signe of their profession, should from
thence forth carry greene crosses. During the courts aboade at Arllon, attending what
would bee the end of the troubles of Arragon, which increased daily, they sent the
horsemen of Castile to fauour the friends of the Archbishop of Saragosla that was
slaine, by the which the lands of D. Anthony de Luna were spoiled. And at that time
friar Vincent Ferrier, that great preacher, made a voiage to the court of Castile, who
made some sermons before the Queene mother, and some Noblemen; by whose aduice
there was an Order made, that all Iewes, dwelling in Castile, should carry for a
marke and distinction to bee knowne, a peece of red cloth vpon their cloakes, and the
Moores greene hattes with white moones. The affaires of Arragon growing tedious,
the King was carried backe to Vailledolit. The truce of Portugall being expired
it was treated by Ambassadours to make a perpetuall peace, the which was not then
concluded.
The arbitrators appointed to iudge to whom the Realme of Arragon did belong,Arragon.
hauing beene many daies in conference in the castle of Caspe, in the end they did all agree
to adiudge it to the Infant D. Fernand of Castile, whereof hee had notice giuen him
in Iune, in the yeere 1412. beeing at Cuenca: wherefore hauing made his election
knowne vnto King Iohn his Nephew, and to the Queene his mother, and giuen great
thankes for the fauour he had receiued in that respect by the forces and meanes of Castile,
he prepared himselfe to goe and take possession of his Realme. And first of all hee
declared for Tutors and Gouernors of the Realme in his place, D. Iohn of Illesca, Bishop
of Siguenca, D. Pablo bishop of Carthagena, D. Henry Manuel Earle of Montalegre,
and Pero Alfan of Ribera, Gouernor of Andalusia, with whom hee ioyned other men of
State and learning. This and other things beeing ordred hee went into Arragon,
where he found great resistance, especially of Don Iames Earle of Vrgel, who pretended
to reigne: him he sought by all friendly meanes to draw vnto his seruice, but in vaine:
for the Earle being obstinate, he drew the English into Spaine, notwithstanding whose
aide he yeelded.


D. Fernand the first of that name, the sixteenth
King of Arragon.
 DOn Fernand the first of that name, raigned in Arragon,Genealogie of Arragon. Cattelogne, Valencia, Sicile,
Majorca, Minorca etc. By the consent of all the Estates: and for his good parts
was surnamed the honest, whose posterity was famous: Before hee came to the crowne
of Arragon, he had by his wife the Countesse of Albuquerque, Don Alphonso, who was
heire of the Realmes, and was in his fathers life-time called Prince of Girone, in steed
of the title of Duke, vsurped vntill that time by the eldest sonnes of Arragon. He had also
by her the Infant Don Iohn, who was King of Nauarre, and afterwards of Arragon
and Sicile by the decease of his elder brother. Moreouer hee had Don Henry maister
of Saint Iames, Don Sancho maister of the Alcantara, and the Infant Don Pedro, who
died in the warres of Naples, beeing slaine with a great shot: all these fiue Princes
were borne in Castile. The daughters which issued from this marriage were Donna
Maria Queene of Castile, married to King Iohn the second her cousin germaine,
and Donna Leonora who was Queene of Portugal, wife to Don Edward. D. Fernand
was two and thirty yeeres old when hee beganne to reigne in Arragon, beeing Lord of
great possessions in Castile, whereof he gaue the Dutchy of Pegnafiel, and the Signeury
of Lara to Don Iohn his second sonne, all which Inheritance, both by father and mother
in Castile, his children enjoyed for a time, but beeing turbulent, and not able to entertaine
themselues with the Kings of Castile, they lost all.
In the yeere 1413. the King Don Fernand hauing beseeged the Earle of Vrgel,

Vrgel, in the towne of Balaquer, for that hee did still raise new troubles, hee prest him in
such sort, as his wife was perswaded to goe forth, and casting her selfe at the Kings feete
to demaund her husbands life. The King vsing his accustomed clemency, pardoned him
his life: but the Earle comming forth, and hauing kist the Kings hands, hee was shut
vp in the same castle. There were many Knights of Castile which serued the King in
this warre, and amongst other forces, there were sent vnto him by Donna Catherine
Queene of Castile, foure hundred launces with promise to furnish him with foure thousand,
if he had need; but the Earles yeelding freed him of that necessity. Hee seized vpon
Lerida, and other places, and in a short time made all within the Realme to bow,
and therefore hee sent away his souldiars of Castile well satisfied, Don Godfrey of Nauarre,
Earle of Cortes, and Marshall of Nauarre, the Kings base sonne, was at this warre,
with some men at armes.
The new King did afterwards cause the Earle of Vrgel to bee araigned, and condemned
him to perpetuall prison, depriuing him of his dignity and goods, and then he sent
him prisoner to Vruegna, a sort in Castile, from whence he was afterwards transported
to Mora. The Countesse his mother was also condemned to loose her goods, and
some men of base condition were put to death. These things being done, the King
came to Saragossa,Coronation of the King D. Fernand at Saragossa. where he was crowned by the Archbishop of Tarragone, in the presence
of many Noblemen of Arragon, Valencia, Sicile, Cattelog^e, Castile and Nauar,
at the which there were great and stately triumphes. To serue at this ceremony, the
Queene of Castile his sister in law had sent him a crowne of gold, weighing fifteene
markes, inricht with many stones of great value. He was armed Knight by the Duke of
Gandia, and then annointed and crowned in the great church of Saragossa: after which
act he was very bountiful to the Noblemen and Knights that assisted at his coronation.
From Nauarre came the Marshall D. Godfrey, Peter Martin of Peralta, with many others.
Going from Saragossa, he came to Morella, where he should meete with Pope Benedict,
who after his deposing had retired himselfe into Arragon, yet retayning still his
dignity,Pope Benedict in Arragon. as much as he might. There they had an enterview, whereas Pope Benedict
went in a sollemne procession, in his pontificall habit, with a white Miter on his head
set with stones of great price, to whom the King did all the honour hee could deuise:
Before his departure from thence there came Ambassadours from the Emperour Sigismond,
who perswaded the King of Arragon to fauour the councell, which was then
called at Constance, for the rooting out of the schisme. To treat whereof there was
an enterview concluded betwixt the two Princes at Nice, and the King was intreated
to perswade Benedict,Councel of Constance. willingly to renounce his dignity of Pope.An. 1414. The councell began
the fifth day of Nouember in the yeere 1414. and continued aboue three yeeres. There
were Ambassadors sent from Castile, by the aduice of King Fernand, D. Diego of Anaya
Maldonado Archbishop of Seuile, and D. Martin Fernandes of Cordoua, accompanied
with many great Doctors in Diuinity. This yeere died in Castile Vincent Arias a great
Doctor, and the first that did comment vpon the lawes of Castile.
The King D. Fernand hauing held the Estates of Cattelogne at Momblanc, he past to
Valencia, where he found Benedict held for Pope onely in Castile, Arragon and Nauarre.
In that court there were also many prelats,Marriage betwixt D. Alphonso of Arragon, and D. Maria of Castile. noblemen and knights, as well of the realme
as strangers, by reason of the marriage which was celebrated there, betwixt the Infant D.
Alphonso of Arragon, the Kings eldest sonne, and Mary of Castile, sister to the King
Don Iohn, by reason whereof there were great sports, so as some Bishops, according
to the manner of that age, carried the praise, namely Don Sancho of Roias Bishop of
Palence: to whom at the intreaty of the Queene of Castile, Benedict, the pretended
Pope, did conferre the Archbishoprike of Toledo, beeing voide by the decease of
Don Pedro de Luna. And for that in the contract of future marriage, there had beene
graunted in dowry to the Infanta, the Marquisate of Villena, when as there was no
likely-hood that the Infant should come to the crowne of Arragon, it was againe concluded,
for that it seemed by this meanes the Marquisate should bee alienated from the
crowne of Castile, that in lieu thereof there should bee giuen two hundred thousand
doublons of Castile.

During the Kings aboad at Valencia, hee fell sicke, which staied him from going to
Nice: wherefore the Emperour Sygismond resolued to come into Spaine, whereof the
King D. Fernand being aduertised, he caused himselfe to bee carried to Perpignan to
meet with this great Prince, who toiled himselfe for the revnion of the church: an example
of modesty in his traine which was small; in habits which were simple: and in
his seruice, for he was not serued but in peuter.
Their enterview was in September in the yeere of our Lord 1415.Entervew of the Emperors Sigismond and D. Fernand King of Arragon. after the foureteenth
Session of the councell of Constance, where Iohn the three and twentith, and Gregory
the twelfth, were deposed, who yeelded (though against their wills:) onely Benedict
held his Popedome by force, and would not allow of this councel, with whom neither
the intreaties nor threats of Princes, nor the acts and protestations of Ambassadors
from the councell could preuaile: after whose departure, the King Don Fernand laboured
what he could to induce this froward spirit to yeeld to the consent of all Christendome;
but there was no meanes; yea Benedict retired in great indignation to Pigniscola,
a sort vpon the sea in the Realme of Valencia: wherefore the King by the aduice
of Friar Vincent Ferrier, and other great Doctors, gaue him to vnderstand that hee retired
himselfe from his obedience. This did not amaze Benedict, but flying to his spirituall
armes, hee pronounced King Fernand to bee fallne from all regall authority in
Arragone, writing to all the townes and people that were subiect vnto him, that they
should not yeeld him obedience.
The King little regarding it, not onely persisted in his resolution, but also went
into Castile, to perswade the councell of King Iohn his Nephew, to submit him and
his Realmes to the authority of the councell: but being not fully recouered, he was forced
to stay at Igualada, where hauing newes of the death of his sonne, Don Sancho maister
of Alcantara,Death of D. Fernand King of Arragon. his sicknesse increased,An. 1416. so as hee died in the yeere of our Lord 1416.
hauing reigned onely three yeeres and tenne monthes, beeing about sixe and thirty
yeere of age, and was buried in the Monastery of Poblete. Hee did institute by his will
Don Alphonso his eldest sonne, to bee heire of his Estates, and for want of children
did substitute his brethren: and if they died without children, hee did substitute vnto
them the sonnes or nephewes of his daughters, excluding them. The authors of the
History of Sicile write, that this Prince beeing come to the crowne of Arragon, would
not sodainely intitle himselfe King of Sicile, for that the Island was full of tumults and
seditions, which grew presently after the death of King Martin, whereof the chiefe
motiue was Bernard of Cabrera Earle of Modica and chiefe Iustice, which is the principall
dignity in that Realme, who with other Noblemen his confederats, pretended
that the vnion of Sicile with the crowne of Arragon, plotted by the two
King Martins, father and sonne, had beene concluded against all right and custome:
and therefore they maintained that it was lawfull for the Sicilians to choose a King at
their pleasures.
Bernard of Cabrera had a conceite that this honour was due to him, and therefore
hee sought to seize vpon the person of the widow Queene Donna Blanche the Regent,
to the end that hee might marry her, were shee willing, or not, thinking by
this meanes to make his way more easie to the crowne: but shee being aduertised
of his intent, retired from Cattanea, and fortefied her selfe in Syracusa, where soone
after shee was beseeged by Bernard of Cabrera and his partisans, and without their
speedy and faithfull succours, which dissallowed of his enterprises, shee had beene taken.
Cabrera was repulst from this seege, and the Queene carried to Palermo, whereas
hee pursued her againe, hauing gathered all his forces againe together, and had
almost surprized her: Hee still laied ambushes for her, vntill at length hee
himselfe was betraied by his owne men, and drawne into his enemies snares, who
deliuered him into the hands of the Admirall Sancho Doriz, who kept him some daies
prisoner, in great miserie, in the castle of La Motte of Saint Anastase, and in the end
deliuered him to the Agents of King Fernand, by whom hee was sent to Barcelona,
there to receiue the punishment of his rashnesse at the Kings pleasure: but this milde
and generous Prince, mooued with his age, and the seruices which the Princes of

Arragon had receiued, after that he had reprehended him sharpely, he not onely set him
at libertie, but did assigne him an honorable ranke in his Court. The troubles of Sicile
being pacified by the taking of this Bernard of Cabrera, Don Fernand was acknowledged
for king, and obeyed, who gouerned it by his Lieutenants and Viceroys, as other Kings
of Arragon haue since done. The Maiesty of this Prince was such, together with his mildnesse
and wisedome, as without vsing the rigour of armes, or any other violent constraint,
he caused all rebellion to cease, as well in Sicile as Sardinia. As for Queene Blanche,
widow to Martin king of Sicily, who was also heire of Nauarre, shee was afterwards
married to the Infant Don Iohn of Arragon.


D. Alphonso the fifth of that name, the 17.
King of Arragon.
TO Fernand succeeded his sonne D. Alphonso, surnamed the Valiant, a Prince worthy
of that title, for his royall vertues, and the famous conquests and exploites of warre
done by him, and for that he did no lesse loue learning then armes. Eight and twenty
daies before the death of the King Don Fernand, dyed Donna Leonora Queene of Nauar
his Aunt, hauing beene married to King Charles her husband foureteene yeares, she was
buried in the Cathedrall church at Pampelona.
There was great mourning and heauinesse in Castile, at the newes of King Fernands
death,Castille. whose obsequies Queene Katherine caused to be celebrated, with a pompe worthy
of such a Prince, and afterwards by the aduice of the Nobility, shee tooke vppon her the
sole gouernement of the realme, and the tutelage of King Iohn her sonne, whome shee
gaue in guard to Don Iohn of Velasco, D. Diego of Estuniga, and to D. Sancho of Rojas,
Archbishop of Toledo: whereat the Constable D. Ruy Lopes of Aualos, D. Pedro Manrique,
and D. Alphonso Henriques grew very iealous, whereupon there grew quarrels and
troubles after the accustomed manner during the minoritie of Kings. The Queene and
the Councell did prolong the truce with the King of Granado, for two yeares. In yere
1417.Truce with Granado. sending Lewis Goncal of Luna,1417. Secretary of the Kings chamber to Granado to that
end. By this treatie the king of Granado set an hundred prisoners at libertie, whose ransomes
would haue mounted to a great summe of money. D. Iohn Rodrigue of Castagneda,
Lord of Fouente Duegna, and D. Inigo Ortiz of Estuniga, sonne to Diego Lopes, being
in quarrell, and demanding the combate, the Queene would not grant it them in Castile,
but commanded them to retire into Granado,Combats sheld not be allowed among Christians. where as king Ioseph would giue them the
field: These Knights were put into the field by the Moorish king, but he presently forbad
them to fight, declaring that they were both good Knights, and reconciling them together,
he sent them home honored with Iewels and rich presents. This hee did at the intreaty
of the Queene-mother of Castile, who had writ earnestly vnto him, shewing therin
to haue a mild and Christian-like heart. For these combats are proofes of mad men,
which should not be suffered in the place of iustice, seeing thereby all controuersies, how
great soeuer, may be compounded and ended.
The Emperour Sigismond grieuing for the death of the king of Arragon,Pope Benedict condemned by the Councell. after that he
had laboured in vaine to reconcile the kings of France and England, who were continually
in warre, he passed to Constance, whereas the Councell in the two and thirtith Session,
delcared Benedict to be periured, contumacious, a rebell, Schismaticke, and Hereticke,
depriuing him of his papacie, which he had held almost two and thirty yeares: yet
he played the Pope still in Pegniscola: but the Princes of Christendome in generall yeelded
to the Councell, notwithstanding Benedicts exclamations, that seeing it was called
without his authoritie,Councel condemned by Pope Benedict. it was not lawfull. The Cardinals which were at Constance, being
two and twenty, with thirty Electors deputed by the Councell, did chuse Othon Colonne,
a Romane, Cardinall of the title of Saint George in Velabro, and named him Martin the
fifth. Benedict although he were abandoned by the Princes, yet he continued still in his
purpose, keeping some Prelates vnder his obedience, among which were the Cardinals

Tholousa, Rasan, S. Angelo, S. Eustace, S. George, and Montarragon, the Archb. of Tarragone,
and the Bishops of Barcelona, Vic, Elne, Girone, Huesca, and Tarrassone, with many
Abbots, and other Clergimen, who held him for true and lawfull Pope.
 This yeare Iohn of Betancourt, a knight of France, by gift from Queene Catherine, conquered
the Ilands of the Canaries,Conquest of the Canaries by Iohn of Betancourt. and intitled himselfe King. He could not take the great
Canarie, for all the Inhabitants of the Iland had retired themselues thither: wherefore
finding too great resistance, he retired himselfe, hauing built a fort in that of Lancerot,
from whence he did trafficke, and drew profit form the neighbor places, of lether, tallow,
slaues, and other such commodities: he being dead, one Menault succeeded him, in whose
time Pope Martin instituted an Episcopall sea in those Ilands, to the which there was a
certaine Monke called Friar Mendo aduanced: but this king Menault hauing no great regard,
when there was question of profit, to the soules health of the Ilanders, he sold them
indifferently, as well the Pagans, as those which had receiued Baptisme: whereof the new
Bishop did complaine to Queene Katherine,Menault the 2 King of the Canari^s, sels the Ilands to them of Seuile. requiring her to free them of that Lord:
whereupon she sent Peter Barna de Campos with three ships of warre, with whom Menault
hauing long contended, in the end by the Queenes sufferance, he sold these Ilands to a
Knight of Seuile, called Fernando Peres, in whose hands, and his successors of Seuile, they
haue remained vnto the time of the king D. Fernand the 5. and of the Queen D. Izabella.
 D. Diego Lopes of Estuniga, Iustice maior of Castile, hauing long serued King Henry
the 3.Family of Estuniga comes out of Nauarre. and Iohn now raigning dyed this yeare. His house came out of Nauarre, and was of
the bloud royall, as some Authors haue left in writing. The yeare 1418. Queene Catherine
dyed suddenly,An. 1418. being fifty yeares old, she was buried at Toledo in the chappell of the
last kings. By her death King Iohn was freed from tutors, and there was a Councell established,
with the which he should gouerne his Realmes, whose letters and expeditions
should be signed on the back-side, by two of his Councellors. This yeare there came ambassadors
to him from France, to demand ayde against the English, to whom they gaue
hope of an army at Sea. The king of Portugal did also send to confirm a perpetuall peace
betwixt Castile and Portugall, but there was nothing concluded at that time. The English
proclaimed warre against Castile, whereupon the truce with Granado was prolonged
for two yeares. King Iohn beeing at Medina del campo, was betrothed to D. Maria
of Arragon his cousin, daughter to the deceased king D. Fernand: then hee held a Parlament,
when for his new accord of marriage, they granted him a great subuention. The
same yeare mention is made of the death of Friar Vincent Ferrier of Valencia, afterwards
canonized a Saint by Pope Calixtus, who was also of Valencia. Hee that most gouerned
the king at that time entring into his maioritie, was Don Sancho of Rojas, Arch-bishop
of Toledo, whereat they did murmure, from which time the Estate of Castile was very
turbulent.
The Guipuscoans and Biscayens fell to theeuing at sea, without any subiect of warre,
euen vppon the coast of Brittany, whereof D. Iohn then liuing complayned much by his
ambassadours, to the King of Castile, who desirous to liue in peace with Christian
Princes, sent Fernando Peres of Ayala, Gouernour of Guipuscoa, to bee an arbitrator.
Hee with another chosen by the Duke of Brittanie, caused all disorders to bee reformed,
and restitution to be made. The Councell of King Iohn, was then reduced to fifteene
Prelates and Knights, whereof fiue should assist and serue, and they should change euery
foure moneths.
 Don Iohn King of Portugall laboured to quench and qualifie all occasions of new trobles,
betwixt his Realme and that of Castile,Portugal. by a firme peace: Wherefore hauing sent
backe his ambassadours in the yeare 1419. to Don Iohn King of Castile, they were returned
with good hope and promise, to send ambassadours into Portugall, expressely to
that end. This king D. Iohn the first of that name then raigning in Portugall, hauing
made a long truce with D. Henry King of Castile, during that time he gaue himselfe to gouerne
his Realme with iustice, to repaire the ruines which had growne by the precedent
warres, and to adorne it with new buildings: wherein employing himselfe with iudgement,
bountie, and wisedome, hee was beloued and respected both of his owne subiects,
and of strangers.

In remembrance of the victorie which he had gotten at Aljubarote, he did build neere
vnto it a sumptuous Monasterie, which he dedicated to the Virgin Mary, and did call it
Saint Mary the royall of the battell, or victorie, which is a Conuent of Iacobin Friars.
And for that he had a better iudgement then many other Princes, knowing that most of
the relligious Monkes, and other persons did not vnderstand the Latin tongue,Booke of the ^oly Scripture translated into Portugall. in the
which the houres and suffrages were sung in churches, he caused them to be translated into
the Portugall tongue, and in like manner many bookes of the holy Scripture, and the
interpretation thereof, namely, the foure Euangelists, the which did afterwards much
displease our Doctors in Diuinity. Hee was so zealous of the honor of his house, as a
Groome of his chamber called Don Fernand Alphonso of Saint Iren, hauing so much forgotten
himselfe as to defloure one of the Queenes maides, daughter to D. Aluar Peres of
Castro, Earle of Arroyoles, he caused him to be burnt in the place of Rusio in Lisbon, and
as for her, he chased her shamefully from Court, sending her to her parents, neither could
the Queenes intercession preuaile any thing. He did also punish with great seuerity, the
other insolencies of his Courtiers, and aboue all things he shewed himselfe a louer of iustice,
onely he did forget to do reason to D. Beatrix Queene of Castile, pretending to be
right heire of the Realme, which he enioyed whilest that she liued (as it were) in a priuate
estate in Castile, an example of rare patience and chastitie: for shee would neuer heare
speake of a second mariage, although she were sought vnto by Princes of great state, who
happily might haue setled her in her fathers kingdome.
Besides the aboue^named buildings, he built the towne of Almerin vpon the riuer of
Tayo the pallace of Sintra, the castle at Lisbon, those of Sierra Balada, neere to S. Iren,
and other. Seeing himselfe in peace with all Christian Princes, and well obeyed of his subiects,
he passed the sea with an armie, and tooke Ceuta from the Moores of Affricke, hauing
in his company the Infant D. Edward, holding then the place of the eldest, for Don
Alphonso was dead, the Infant Don Pedro Duke of Coimbra, and Lord of Montmajor the
old, and of Auero, Don Pedro of Meneses, Earle of Viana, standard bearer of the realm,
who was the first Gouernor of Ceuta, which victorie was intermixt with mourning for
the death of the Queene D. Philippe his wife, which happened in the yeares 1415. at what
time the king D. Iohn did take a way the vse of accompting the yeares, by the Aera of Caesar,
the which had beene till that time obserued in Portugall, ordaining, that from that
time the yeare should begin from the Natiuity of Christ* and that it should bee so dated
in all publike and priuate writings, to the end to conforme himselfe to that which was
brought into Castile, Arragon and Nauarre, and to auoyd the confusion which fell our
in contracts and bargains, betwixt the subiects of the Realmes of Spaine.
In the yeare 1419.1419. the Infant Don Henry his sonne, who was Master of the Order of
Christ, mooued with an honest emulation, by the conquest which his father had made
vpon the Barbarians, hauing conferred with some men of knowledge and experience in
Cosmographie, resolued to runne ouer the Ocean sea, and to discouer the shoare and
Ilands thereof. Going from Lisbon with some ships, hee came to the Iland of Madera in
the yeare 1420. the which he found desert and full of wood,An. 1420. whereof it carries the name:M adera discouered.
for Madera is that which the Latins call Materia, and we timber. He set fire to this wood,
so as hauing cleansed it, they found the soyle good and fruitfull for all things, especially
for sugar canes, which grow in such aboundance, as both Spaine and all Europe make
great vse of it.
The Infant did afterwards continue this and other nauigations,D. Henry Master of Christus the first discouerer at sea. and was the first spurre
to the Portugals, which came after, to discouer the coasts of Affricke and Asia, and the Ilands
of the South, and Easterne seas, with great honor to their nation, and infinit profite
to the whole world. These things were attempted by the Portugals, when as the peace
betwixt them and the Castillans was doubtfull: for the Councell of Castile delayed it, by
reason of the kings minority, yet they liued quietly one with another.
About that time the ambassadors of Castile,Castile. which had beene sent to the Councell of
Constance, returned into Spaine, bringing home the re-union of the church of Rome
vnder Pope Martin the fift. Among them was Don Diego of Anaya Maldonado Archb.
of Seuile, who built the Colledge of Saint Bartholomew at Salamanca, this yeare 1420.

beeing called the great Colledge, the most auncient of all Castile, where many learned
men haue beene bred. In that Vniuersitie of Salamanca are many other Colledges, built
and endowed with good liuings, where there is good exercise of Diuinity, arts, and tongs,
as also in other townes of Spaine, by the care of Bishops and good Prelates, labouring
chiefly to maintaine learning which are the grounds of pietie and vertue.
 The same yeare a marriage was made betwixt D. Blanche of Nauarre, the widdow-Queene
of Sicile,Nauarre. and the Infant D. Iohn of Arragon, second sonne to the King Don Fernand
deceased. By the treatie concluded the yeare before, it was sayd: That if the Infanta,
the presumptiue heire of Nauarre (for the elder sister the Countesse of Foix, was already
dead without children should die before her husband, hauing children or not, that hee
should raigne during his life in Nauarre, after the decease of King Charles his father-in-law.
From this condition and promise being sworne, there grew many troubles in Nauar.
Besides the expectation of the Realme, there was giuen to the Infant Don Iohn by king
Charles, in dowry with D. Blanche his daughter, foure hundred twenty thousand, a hundred
and twelue florens of gold, of the coyne of Arragon, sixe solz, and eight deniers: a notable
summe for a King of Nauarre, an argument of the great tresure which hee had gathered
together during the long peace of his raigne. It was also agreed, that the lands and forts
which the Infant did hold in Castile and Arragon, shold descend to the heire which shold
be borne of that marriage, succeeding to the Crowne of Nauarre. The Infant did enioy
in Arragon the Dutchies of Gandia and Momblanc,Possessions D. Iohn Infant of Arragon. the Earledome of Ribagorca, and
the towne of Balaguer: and in Castile the Dutchie of Pegnafiel, Infantazgo, and the Segneurie
of Lara: and moreouer, the townes of Cuellar, Castro-Xeris, Villalon, and Haro:
afterwards he obtayned Alba de Tormes, Olmedo, Paredes of Naua, Majorga, Villerado,
Cerezo, Medina del campo, Aranda of Duego, Roa, Colmenar, and other places, all
which he afterwards lost by the wars he had against Castile, the titles and pattents whereof
are remayning in the records of Nauarre.
These articles of marriage were sworne by the three Estates of the Realme. And it was
long disputed betwixt the Infant Don Iohn, and the king of Castiles councell, where this
marriage should be celebrated. In the end he got fortie dayes libertie to go and perform
it in Nauarre, whither he went accompained with many of the Nobility of Castile: From
hencefoorth D. Iohn will entitle himselfe Infant of Nauarre and Arragon. The marriage
beeing ended, returning with his wife D. Blanche towards Castile, hee met with a messenger
from Don Sancho of Rojas, Archbishop of Toledo, who aduertised him of a great excesse
committed by his brother Don Henry, Master of Saint Iames, solliciting him to returne
with all speed to court: and thus it was.
 Don Henry the third sonne to the deceased Don Fernand king of Arragon, desired to
marrie Donna Catherine, king Iohns youngest sister,Castile. who had the Marquisate of Villena
for her dowrie, but fearing that he should neuer obtaine her by any due course, he resolued
to haue her by force* so as beeing rash and exceeding bold, he entred on a time into
Toledo with three hundred armed men, where he seized on the kings person, wherein he
was assisted and fauoured by Don Ruy Lopes of Aualos the Constable, and D. Pedro Manriques.
They tooke Iohn Hurtado of Mendoca Lord Steward of the king house, and others
who were opposite vnto them, and holding the King as it were a prisoner, they caused
many of his houshold seruants and Officers to be chased away: aboue all, they desired
to displace D. Aluaro de Luna, kinsman to the deceased Archbishop of Toledo, who of a
page of the chamber was come to be the kings great minion. But D. Henry held it now
the best to winne him by mildnesse and bountie, that hee might make vse of him in that
which he pretended.
The Infanta Donna Catherina, to whom this marriage with Don Henry was not pleasing
entred into the Monasterie of Saint Claire in that cittie, from whence she was afterwards
taken, for that Don Henry led the King to Segouia, and then to Auila, promising
not to vse any force concerning the marriage. Don Iohn Infant of Nauar and Arragon,
hearing of these newes, he much blamed the attempt of Don Henry his brother, and resolued
to oppose himselfe against him, wherefore he called all his friends to Olmedo, and
such Noblemen and Knights as disliked of his excesse: so as in few daies hee assembled

three thousand Lances, the Infant D. Henry preparing also for the warre, hee was in a
manner equall in strength to his aduersaries, beeing in the towne of Auila, whether hee
had led the King. The factious being ready to enter into a furious warre, D. Leonora the
widdow Queene of Arragon, and mother to these two Princes, laboured so betwixt
them as all these troups retyred except a thousand Lances, which remayned for the Kings
gard: then comming to the treaty of marriage, the Infanta D. Catherina being instantly
intreated by the King her brother (who was not free) to take D. Henry for her husband,
she would by noe meanes harken to it, D. Henry being the stronger about the King thinking
that D. Iohn was opposite to his dessines, he kept him from the king, and not respecting
him, nor them that followed him,Estates sorcea. he called an assembly of his partizans, in forme of a Parlament,
where he caused the fact of Tordesillas to be allowed, and ordained what he pleased:
yea he caused letters to be written in the Kings name to the Pope, by the which hee
intreated him to giue vnto the Infant D. Henry the Lands of the Maistershippe of Saint
Iames in ^ee simple, to him and his children for euer, with the title of a Dutchy: an impudent
demand, and so reiected by the Pope. The King married with D. Maria of Arragon,Deman^ of D. Henry m^^t impudent.
in Auila, without feasts or ceremony, and then they led him to Talauera: and the Infant
D. Henry neuer ceassed vntill he had celebrated his marriage with D. Catherina his
Cousin Germaine, causing the Marquisate of Villena to be assigned for her dowry with
the title of Dutchy, who was the third Duke of Castile: and the question being of marriages,Marriage forced betwixt D. Henry and D. Catherine of Castille.
where they doe vsually shew them-selues bountifull, Aluar de Luna the Kings Minnion,
had in guift the towne of Saint Stephen of Gormas, and other Knights were aduanced
to other lands, as it pleased D. Henry. The King being much discontented with his
restrayned Estate, hee conferred often with Aluar de Luna of the meanes how hee might
escape, but there appeared great difficulties on euery side, for the confederats which held
him watcht carrefully ouer him, notwithstanding going one day abroad vnder collour of
hunting,King escapes out of D Henries hands. he aduentured to runne to Villalua, and finding himselfe not safe there he past to
Montalban, which is betwixt Talauera and Toledo, some-what out of the way: whereof
the Infant D. Henry being aduertised, who had newly fynished his marriage he was wonderfully
troubled in mynde, drawing what forces he could to field, and then the Constable
and he followed the King, but in vaine, for he was in a place of safety, who sent some to
aduise them that they should not follow him, but returne to Talauera, which the Infant
D. Henry did, but the troupes which were in the poursute stayed not vntill they had some
newes, and came and lodged about the Castle of Montalban, yet they attempted not
any thing, for the reuerence they bare vnto the King, who seeing him-selfe as it were beseeged,
and without victualls in the place, he had means to aduertise the Infant D. Iohn,
D. Sancho of Roias, Archbishoppe of Toledo, the Admirall D. Alphonso Henriques, and
other Knights, intreating them to come and free him.
In the meane time D. Henry held a councell with his partisans at Talauera and prouided
for many things,Kings of Castile beseeged by his owne subiects. least the King should escape from him. Being intreated by his men, who
were in the forme of a Campe abot Mountalban, hee came thether, bringing with him
the Queene D. Maria his Sister and all the Nobility that was a Talauera, to repaire this
disorder in some sort. The King and such as were with him in the Castle, for want of
better foode, did eate their horses: D. Iohn of Torsillas Bishop of Segobia, being brought
in, hee sought to make an accord for the Infant D. Henry: but the King interrupted him,
saying, that D. Henry should come himselfe, and to hee sent him backe. D. Henry would
not aduenture to enter, but he procured that the Constable d' Aualos, and D. Aluar of
Luna conferred together, but they could not conclude any thing, nor yet the deputies of
the prouinces of the realme, who entring into the Castle, were intreated to moue the
King, but they could get noe other answer but that D. Henry must free his lodging from
seege: who indeed was forced to dislodge, for the Infant D. Iohn and other Noblemen,
being followed by good troupes of men at armes approched, and would haue taken him
from thence by force. Thus the King was deliuered from this seege, and the Castle furnished
with victualls: wherefore he sent a commandement to the Infant D. Iohn of Arragon,
that he should not aduance with his troupes, vntill he had other newes from him.
The Infant stayed at Fonsalida, where D. Alfonso Henriques the Admirall ioyned with

him, being well accompanied, and others which came from all parts, to deliuer the King
as they said, out of prison. This was at that time when as Villa-real beganne to be called
Citudad real, in recompence of the good seruice which the Inhabitants did vnto the
King in this tumult. Don Henry being retired to Ocagne, hee had commaundement
from the King to lay downe armes, but hee would not obay. The King parted from
Montalban to returne to Talauera, vpon the way hee was met by the Infant Don
Iohn, and Don Pedro his brother, with other Noblemen, who hauing kist the Kings
hands, dined with him at Villalua, and then they were sent backe to their troupes: for
Aluar de Luna, who gouerned the King, could not endure that any of the Infants should
stay in court, least it should impaire his credit and authority.
The King being come to Talauera, he sent a new commaundement to Don Henry
and his confederats to disarme, who were content, so as D. Iohn the Infant of Arragon,
did also disarme, whom the King commanded to send away his men, wherein he obaied:
after which the King hauing dispatched some businese in his fauour at Talauera, hee
went to Auila: by the way hee came to Pegnafiel, where hee ddi visit his cousin Donna
Blanche of Nauarre,D. Henry depri^ed of his g^ods and dig^ities Castile. wife to the Infant Don Iohn, making great demonstrations of
loue vnto her. Don Henry would not disarme, especially beeing degraded of the title
of Marquis of Villena, by a decree of the councell, and his lands beeing seized on, hee
would recouer them by force, if he might not otherwise, for proofe whereof hee assailed
Chinchilla, Alarcon and the castle of Garci Nugnes, where there was a garrison
for the King: causing on the other side his wife Donna Catherina (to whom the Marquisate
did belong) to bee a sutor vnto the King for his pardon: but the King was so incensed,
as he would not heare speake of it, and he reuoaked the title of Duke, which hee
had caused to bee giuen him, of the lands belonging to Order of Saint Iames, hoping
to make them hereditary. The King did also reuoake the guift of Castagneda in
the Asturia's of Santillana, which hee had made vnto Don Garci Fernandes Manrique,
for that hee was one of Don Henries faction: Don Garci refusing to yeeld, beeing in
possession, there were some companies of men at armes sent, who chased him, and
tooke some of his followers, of whom Iustice was done. Don Henry hoping for no
fauour from the King, marched towards Aguilar del Campo, as hee sayd, to kisse the
Kings hand; but the King dislodged from Aguilar, and came to Palencuela, sending
word to Don Henry that hee should not aduance, and that hee should dismisse his souldiars;
then hee came to Vailledolit, and from thence to Tordesillas, whereas Queene
Mary his wife was: yet Don Henry followed the King, leading with him fifteene hundred
launces, and came vnto Guardarama; so as the King was forced to draw companies
vnto him for his safety. Don Henry sent againe to beseech him to giue him accesse,
that he might discharge himselfe, causing the deputies of townes to make the like sute
from him; but they laboured in vaine, the King giuing them so many reasons, as they
laied all the blame vpon Don Henry and told him that he must obay, and leaue his armed
troupes, the which he promised to doe, but he did not performe it.
The Queene Donna Leonora mother to these Infants of Arragon, being in great
perplexitie to see this her Sonne in danger to be ruined, she laboured all shee could possibly
to pacifie the Kings wrath most iustly incensed against this rebell and rash vassall.
Don Lope de Mendoca Archbishop of Saint Iames did the like,Intercession for D. Henry Infant of Arragon. but they preuailed nothing,
the King reiecting all prayers and sutes, vntill hee had laid aside Armes: wherefore
Don Henry hauing made shew of two thousand Lances, and three hundred light
horse, hee dismist them, and returned to Ocagne with the Noblemen of his faction,
except Don Pedro of Velasco, who came to the Court. The King did also muster
his men, where there were found aboue sixe thousand men at Armes, whom hee also
discharged, beeing payed, except one thousand Lances which hee ratayned for his
guard.
In the meane time Donna Blanche Infanta of Nauarre,Nauarre. was deliuered of a Sonne
at Pegnafiell,An. 1421. in the yeare of our Lord, one thousand foure hundred twenty and one, the
which was Christened at Olmedo by the King of Castile, and was named Don Charles.
and Don Aluar de Luna was his other God-father: Don Iohn the Infants father, feasted

the King and whole court, with great bountie and state. Two yeares after this Infant
was carryed into Nauarre, at the instance of King Charles his Grand father, who at that
time made Viana ^ Principalitie, affected to the eldest sonne of Nauarre, annexing to
the towne and castle of Viana, those of Guarde, Saint Vincent, Bernedo, Aguilar, Vxeneuilla,
Pombation, San Pedro, Cambreda, val de Campeco, Maragnon, Toro, Her-rara
and Bura^oni and more-ouer he gaue vnto him cor^la, and Cin^ruenigo, Peralta
and Cadrieta, these foure last being distinct Siegneuries from the Principalitie: And at
the Estates at Oli^e, he caused him to be sworne heire of the realme of Nauarre, after the
decease of the Infant Don Iohn his father.
From Olmedo,Castille. the King of Castile came to Toledo, to the Estates, whether D. Henry,
the Constable and their confederates were cited, who appeared not, but sent their Ambassadors
to make their excuses* saying, that they held for their professed enemies Don
Sancho of Rojas Archbishop of Toledo, D. Iohn Hurtado of Mendoca, and many others,
and that they suspected the Infant D. Iohn: wherewith the King beeing more incensed
then before, resolued to pursue them by armes, wheresoeuer they were: but Don Henry
being aduertised and aduised, promised to present himselfe before the King at Madrid by
the fourteenth of May this yeare 1422. where he appeared a day before the Assignation.An. 1422.
Hauing kist the Kings hand, beginning to enter into a discourse, to excuse and iustifie
himselfe, the King would not heare him, but sent him back to his lodging. The day following,
there were produced in the Kings Councel, fourteene of the Constable d' Aualos
letters,D. R^y de Aualos the Constable charged with treason. by the which he was charged with treason, and practising with the King of Granado
against the King of Castile his Lord. They were openly read by Sancho Romero the
kings Secretary, who said, that D. Diego of Fuentesalida, Bish. of Zamora had giuen him
them. D. Henry and Garci Fernandes Manrique, thinking to defend the Constables innocie
and fidelitie, were committed to prison by the Kings commandement, and all the
horses and furniture they had in Court seazed on. The Constable and the Infanta D.
Catherina, being aduertised of what had past at Madrid, they left Castile, and retired to
Balueda, a castle in the realme of Valencia, and the Gouernor Don Pedro Manrique fled
to Tarassone: wherefore the King caused all their goods to bee seazed, commanding all
Gouernors and Magistrates to apprehend them. These letters did not seeme very certaine,
wherefore they of the Kings councell suspecting that they were counterfet, (as in
truth they were) they caused the Kings Attorney generall, to frame an accusation against
the Constable, for that he had beene a confederate and fauourer of D. Henry, when as
the King was detained in Tordesilla, and of the disorders which after followed: by reason
whereof his goods were seazed on, for it did appeare that the letters were counterfet, by
the confession of Iohn Gracia of Guadalajara the Constables Secretary, who betraying
his Maister, had himselfe counterfetted them, and sealed them with his seale at Toledo,
for which crime he was executed at Vailledolit. The King caused Goncala Mexia to bee
named Administrator of the Order of Saint Iames, whereof the Infant D. Henry, being
in prison, was Maister, and did aduertise the King of Arragon of his detention and the
causes. The Constable and the Infant D. Catherina being retired to Valencia, they were
well entertained by them that did gouerne those realmes in the absence of D. Alphonso
of Arragon, who was at Naples, whereat D. Iohn King of Castile was so much discontented
as he sent his Ambassadors into Italy to the K. of Arragon to complaine of this fact^
About the end of this yeare 1422. King Iohn had by Queene Mary his wife,Death of the Archb. of Toledo. a daughter
borne at Ilesca, who was named D. Catherina: and about that time D. Sancho of Rojas
Archbishop of Toledo, died at Alcala of Henares, in wose place was substituted Don
Iohn of Contreras Deane of the ^ame Church, and borne at Riaxa. The Infanta D. Catherina
was declared and sworne heire of the Realme of Castile, the yeare following
1423. at the Estate of Toledo, if the King her father should die without heires male: for
such was the custome of Spaine. There the truce betwixt Castille and Portugall was
renewed for twenty nine yeares, with a condition, that if hereafter the one should offer
to make warre against the other, hee should giue him warning 18. moneths before: A
sinceritie which is contemned in this age, whereas they seeke to surprise one another by
any secret and indirect meanes. This truce was proclamed the court being at Auila.

And sonne after the king Don Iohn beeing at Vailledolit, there came ambassadours from
D. Alphonso King of Arragon, to excuse the reception which had beene giuen at Valencia,
to the Infanta D. Catheri^n, and the Constable, Don Ruis Lopes of Alualos: and to
acquaint the king of Castile with the successe of the warre of Neples, whereas they king
of Arragon was busied.
 This Prince who was famous not onely among all them that had raigned in Arragon,Arragon.
but in all the rest of Christendome had this occasion to vndertake the warre of Naplees:
after the decease of king Ladis^a^s, his sister Ioane the second, window to the Duke of Esterlic,
hauing succeeded in the Realme, as shee was infamous, by reason of the familiatity
which was more then did befi^ the greatnesse of a Queene,Vnchastnesse of loane 2. Quene of Neples. which she had with Pandolfello
Alope, a Knight of Naples, being held to be one of the goodliest men of his time. Shee
to couer their loose life, contracted marriage with Iames of Bourbon, Earle of Marche, a
Prince of the bloud Royall of France, vppon condition that he should not intitle him selfe
king, nor should not meddle with the gouernement of the Realme, but as she pleased.
The Earle being come to Naples, he soone discouered what past betwixt the Queene
his wife, and Pandolfello: wherefore being mooued with a iust disdaine, hee caused the adulterer
to be slaine, and depriued the Queene of the gouernement, hauing punished
her onely with words and reproches. The Queene dissembling her discontent against the
Earle, watched a fit oportunity to be reuenged: wherein she wrought so by her practises
and intelligences, as she not onely recouered her liberty, but she put the Earle her husband
into prison, who beeing afterwards freed by the intercession of Pope Martin, retired
into France, leauing the Queene to liue after her owne appetite, Pope Martin who
was molested by the faction of Vrsins, the chiefe whereof was Braccio Fortebracci, hee
made a strict league with this Queene, by the which she promised to ayde him with three
thousand horse,Pope Martin euemy to Queene, calls in Lewis Duke of Aniou. and other things: but their friendship was soone dissolued: and Pope
Martin to annoy Queene Ioane, did inuest in the Realme of Naples, Lewis Duke of An-ion,
called the third, who was sonne to Lewis the second, and of the Infanta D. violant of Arragon, and declared Queene Ioane fallen from it, and depriued thereof: wherefore Lewis
began to league himselfe in Italy with many Princes and Potentates, namely, with
the Commonweale of Genoua, who were mighty at sea, from whom he was ayded to
conquer the Realme of Naples, with thirteene gallies, whereof Baptist Fregoso was Generall.
These things beeing come to the knowledge of King D. Alphonso, who was newly aduanced
to the Crowne of Arragon, beeing young, and desirous of glorie, considering
how much it might preiudice the Estate of Sicile, if the house of Aniou should settle it
selfe againe at Naples, he thought he should greatly disappoint Lewis his disseines, if he
should make warre against the Geneuois: wherefore hauing prepared an armie at sea, he
came and landed in the Iland of Corsica,Alphonso King of Arragon, leads an Armie into Corsica, against the Geneu^is. which was wholly in the power of that State,
and vnder colour of the right which the kings of Arragon did pretend, by reason of ancient
donations made vnto them by the Popes, of the two Ilands of Corsica and Sardinia:
at his first landing he tooke Calui, and then beseeged Boniface, pressing it in such sort, as
without speedie succors from Genoua it had beene taken, and the whole Iland. During
this seege Queene Ioane, who saw a great strome readie to fall vppon her, sent Anthony
Caraffa vnto him, intreating him to vndertake the defence of her and her Realme, against
Lewis of Aniou, the Pope and their allies, in requitall whereof she would adopt him for
her soone and successor in the Realme of Naples, and for an earnest-peny she would deliuer
him the two castles of Naples. King Alphonso was well pleased with these conditions,
who to make this accord authenticke, sent Raymond of Perillos to Naples with 18.
gallies, and 14. galliots, and D. Bernard of Centillas and D. Iohn of Moncado his ambassadors,
with authoritie and sufficient instructions, who agreed with Queene Ioane in the
Kings name, and receiued the aboue-named forts: and after the releefe of Boniface by the
Geneuois, whereas the king receiued some losse, he passed with the rest of his army into
Sicile, and from thence to Naples, where the accords and adoption was confirmed, the
Queene inuesting him then in the Dutchie of Calabria, as presumptiue heire of the
Realme: but the peace betwixt the mother and the sonne was not lasting: wherefore she

repenting to haue adopted Alphonso he dealing in her affaires, there fell out warre betwixt
them: so as after many incounters, and variable successe, the Queene left Naples,
and was forced to retire to Auerse, from whence she sent to call backe Lewis of Aniou,
beeing then at Rome, who in the yeare 1423. came to Auerse, where hee was receiued
with great ioy, and was adopted there by the Queene, and was made Duke of Calabria,
and Alphonso reiected as ingrate: at which time happened in Castile the imprisonment
of. Henry Master of Saint Iames, brother to the king D. Alphonso, and the retreat of
D. Catherine his wife, with the Constable to Valencia, and of other Noblemen into diuers
parts of Arragon, whose goods D. Iohn King of Castile had confisked, whereupon
grew many quarrels: by reason whereof the King D. Alphonso was forced to returne into
Spaine, leauing his brother D. Pedro at Naples, to make head against the Duke of Aniou,
with Iames Cadora, and many Noblemen Italians, of his faction to assist him. Sayling along
the coast of Prouence, he surprized Marseilles, a Towne belonging to the Duke of
Aniou,Marseilles surprized by the King of Arragon. being Earle of Prouence, the which he spoyled and burnt, carrying away for a
precious lewell the body of Lojs sometimes Bishop fo Tholousa, sonne to King Charles
the Lame, being held a Saint. It is noted for a noble and religious act in this Prince, that
at the taking of the towne hee would not suffer any iniurie to bee done vnto the women
that were retired into the Churches, nor any thing to be taken from them. It was taken
in the night at a second assault: Alphonso being rich with spoiles landed at Valencia.
In the meane time in Castile they made the processe of all the fugitiues,Castile. and degraded 
D. Ruis Lopes of Aualos, of his Estate and dignitie of Constable, depriued him of the gouernement
of Murcia, and did confiscate all his lands and goods. He had enioyed Xodar,
Ximens, the tower of Alaquin, Arcos, Arjone, Arjonilla, Figuiera and Colmenar, in
the countrie of Auila, and Osorno and Ribadeo in Galicia, and other places, which were
all forfeited to the King, who gaue the office of Constable to Don Aluar de Luna, who
was afterwards created Earle of Saint Stephen de Gormas,D Aluar de Luna made Constable fo Castile. and receiued with great solemnitie.
Alphonso Iames Faiardo was made Gouernor of the fronter of Murcia, and his lands
were distributed to others: so as the house of Aualos remained very poore in Castile.
The King decreed, that D. Iohn of Tordesilla Bishop of Segobia, who had beene Superintendant
of the treasor, in the time of the deceasesd King Henry, should be apprehended,
to make him giue an account of his charge: but the bishop of Zamora who had this
charge, shewed hmselfe a friend, and suffred him to escape into Portugal, from whence he
past to Valencia. About the end of this yeere 1423. D. Leonora king Iohns 2. daughter was
borne: as soone as he had intelligence that the king of Arragon was arriued at Valencia,
he sent him an Ambassage, to congratulat his arriual, and to intreat him to send him D.
Cath erina the wife of D. Henry and the fugitiues of Castile, or else to chase them out of
his country: whereof the king D. Alphonso excused himselfe, as wel to these Ambassadors of
Castile, as by others whom he sent expresly to K. Iohn, who intreated him for an enterview,
wherewith the king was willing, but such as were enricht with the constables spoils,
disswaded him, wherewith the king of Arragon was discontented, and afterwards more,
the refusing him to let him confer with the Queen of Castile his sister. In the yere 1424.
the Infant D. Catherina died at Madrigal, wherevpon the King caused the Princesse Leonora
to be sworne for heire of those realms, in case he died without any issue masle. In
which yere there also died at Pegniscola, Benedict, being 90. yeeres old; hauing held the
Popedome 31. yeers 2. months and 10. daies, from his election made at Auignon, and after
that hee had bin deposed by the councel of Constance, 7. yeers and 4. months, his body
was interred in Illueca, in vnhallowed ground (as they say:) a man to violent in al his actions,
obstinate and indomptable: of so strong a constitution of body, as they could not attribute
the cause of his death but to poison, the which they found had bin giuen him in
certaine sweet meats, by a Monke, called Thomas, set on by the Cardinal of Pisa, who was
sent into Spaine to that end. The crime being auerred, the Monke Thomas was taken
and quartered, the Cardinal who remained at Tortosa fled, fearing that Don Roderigo
and Don Alaur de Luna Benedicts Nephewas should reuenge his death vpon him.
After his decease the Cardinals which were of his faction, and were retired with him,
to Pegniscola, would haue continued the Schisme, and entring into the Conclaue

with the accustomed ceremonies, they did choose a Chanon of Barcelona, named Gil
Mugnos,Don Alphonso King of Arragona fa^^urer of a new Schisme. borne at Teruel, whom they called Clement of eight, wherevnto Don Alphonso
King of Arragon consented, beeing in bad termes with Pope Martin at Rome. This
Clement created Cardinals, gaue Benefices and Dispensations, and did all acts of a
Pope as well as martin, and by him the Church of Rome continued diuided.
In the yeare one thousand foure hundred twenty and fiue,1425. D. Henry sonne to D. Iohn
King of Castille, was borne at Vailledolit, who succeeded him in the Realmes. Hee was
baptized by Don Aluaro of Osorno Bishop of Cuenca,Birth of the Infant Don Henry of Castile. and God-fathers were Aluar de
Luna, the Constable, and Don Alphonso Henriques Admirall of Castile: and the Godmothers
Donna Eluira Porto-carrero the Constables wife, and Donna Ioane of Mendoca
the Admirals: and within few moneths after this Infant was sworne Prince and heire of
the realmes in that Towne, in the Monaflerie of Saint Pablo, the Infant Don Iohn of
Arragon, as Lord of Lara, being the first that swore him fealtie and future homage.
The offences betwixt the Kings of Castile and Arragon were such,Nauarre. as they attended
nothing but open warre, not onely in these towo realmes, but also in Nauarre, the successor
thereof, Don Iohn, being much bound to either countrie: wherefore the King Don
Charles vsed all meanes possible to reconcile them. Notwithstanding the King Don
Alphonso
sent a letter open, by a Secretarie of his, to the Infant D. Iohn his brother, to come
into Arragon to assist at a Parlament which hee had called, vpon paine to bee declared
a rebell. Don Iohn not onely obtained leaue to goe to the King his Brother, but hee
had also full authoritie to make an accord with him. When he came to the Court of
Arragon at Tarassone, hee had newes of the death of the King of Nauarre, his father
in lawe, which happened sodenly at Olite, in September, beeing buise about his buildings.
A Prince much lamented both of his subiects and strangers,Death of Charles King of Nauarre. for his vertues and
milde dispositions: who besides other remarkable things, setled a perpetuall peace in
Pampelone, the which before his time had beene deuided into three regions or coun-tries,
called Bourg, Peuplement, and Nauarriere, gouerned by three diuers Iudges,
with seuerall Iurisdictions,Pamp^lona vni^d into one body. so as there oftentimes fell out great contentions and mutinies
among them, the which hee did abolish, reducing all the Inhabitants of the
Towne vnder one Iustice, taking away for euer the factious names of parts and quarters,
placing one Gouernour or Magistrate ouer them, with ten I^rates to assist him.
Hee was threescore and foure yeeres old when hee dyed, and had raigned thirtie nine
yeares and nine moneths. His body was laide in the Cathedrall Church at Pampelone,
with Queene Leonora his wife.


Don Iohn, first of that name, thirty three
King of Nauarre.
DOn Iohn his sonne in lawe succeeded him, in the right of Donna Blanche his wife,
the Crown of Nauarre passing from the house of France, to the house of Castile
and Arragon, for want of heyres male, the which continued not long: Hee was
about eight and twenty yeares old when hee began to raigne in Nauarre: when as
King Charles dyed, hee was in the campe of King Don Alphonso, who being incensed against the King of Castile, for his brother Don Henryes imprisonment, was gone to
Armes, and had his forces on the confines of Arragon and Nauarre, about Tarassone,
the which hee caused to enter into Nauarre, as soone as the news came of the Kings
death. After which they vsed this ceremonie: Don Iohn,Ceremonie in taking poby ssession of the realme of Nauarre. who should succede, kept
his chamber three dayes, after which hee went to horse-back, accompanied with the
King his brother, and causing the Standard of Nauarre to be carried before him, by
a Knight called Nugno Vaca, and a Herald to march before with a coate of the
armes of Nauarre, crying our alowd, Nauarre, Nauarre, for the King Don Iohn and
Donna Blanche his wife: going often about the field, the Trumpets sounding, and being

followed by many Knights and Gentlemen of Castile and Arragon, on foote, but there
was not one Nauarrois, for the Nobilitie of Nauarre had done the like at Olite, for the
Queene Donna Blanche their naturall Princesse, and not without a misterie.
Whilest that these things past vpon the frontiers, the King of Castile hauing made a 
great assembly at Palence, and gathered together much money,Castile. in the end hee was
aduised to free Don Henry out of prison, beeing the cause of all this tumult, and for
the which the King of Arragon had taken Armes. The King of Castile would first
haue the King of Arragon disarmed, which difficulties being debated, it was agreed that
Don Henry should bee deliuered in the hands of Don Iohn King of Nauarre, who
should bee answerable vntill that the King of Arragon his brother had laide downe
Armes. Wherefore Pero Garcia of Herrera, Marshall of Castile, followed by fiue hundred
men at Armes,Don Henry brother to the Kings of Arragon and Nauarre, deliuered. came to the Castle of Mora, whereas the infant Don Henry was
deliuered vnto him, hee Swearing to conduct him and deliuer him into the hands of Don
Iohn King of Nauarre.
The two Kings Brethren being come to Saint Vincent of Nauarre, hearing that they
brought Don Henry, they returned, and going to meete him, the King Don Iohn receiued
him at Agreda, and then ledde him to Tarassone, whereas the King of Arragon
embraced him with great content. Beeing there, Don Lewis de Guzman Maister of
Calatraua, and Don Iohn of Soto maior, Maister of Alcantara, sent to offer him their
friendship and meanes, against them of the Kings Councell, and against his Mignions,
which had beene opposite against him. The which the King of Castile did
not doubt, but sent Fernande of Robles, and Doctor Periagnez of his Councell, to
Cascante a Towne of Nauarre, to treate with the King Don Iohn touching his returne
into Castile to end that which remained to doe touching Don Henry, the which hee
yeelded vnto, and came to the King of Castile beeing at Roa, who entertained him
kindly, and hauing beene there some dayes together, without speaking of any affaires,
the King of Castile went to Segobia, and hee of Nauarre to Medina del Campo*
Soone after, in the beginning of the yeare one thousand foure hundred twenty and six,
hee came to Toro to the King of Castile, where hee gaue him an accompt of that
which hee had negotiated with the King of Arragon his Brother, wherewith the
King seemed to bee very well satisfied. The Estates were held there, by the which the
King was let vnderstand of the superfluous charge of a thousand Lances which hee led
for his garde,Estates at Toro, and their remonstrances. the which cost eight Millions of Marauidis, wherevpon they were reduced
to a hundred, vnder the Constables charge, who was in such authoritie and fauour,
as euery man feared him penly, or hated him secretly. The Estates requiring also that
the Kings excessiue gifts should bee cut off, it was ordained, that all that had or should
be giuen by the King before the age of twenty fiue yeares, should bee reputed voide:
Many other good decrees were made, but they lasted little,
The King of Nauarre staied in Castile, where he had great possessions, and was much
fauoured, yea for his sake many Noblemen Castillans were aduanced to Offices in the
Kings house, as Ruy Dias of Mendoca, was made Lord Steward, and Ihon Aluaro of Gadillo
Standard-bearer. As for himselfe hee was wholy gouerned by Diego Gomes of
Sandoual, whom he made Earle of Castro Xeris, a place which was of his patrimonie.
There were three Leagues beginning in Court, one for the king of Nauarre, the second
for Henry his brother, and the third for the Constable Don Aluar de Luna, who increased
dayly in authoritie. The king spent the rest of that yeare one thousand foure hundred
twenty and sixe, at Fuente del Sauco, at Vailledolit and at Zamora, where he caused some
pettie mutiniers and rebels to bee punished by Iustice, whilest that great, men which
troubled the realme, liued in all assurance.
In the beginning of the yeare one thousand foure hundred twenty and seauen, the Infant
Don Henry and his wife Donna Catherina came from Valencia to Ocagne, where
the hatred burst forth betwixt the King of Nauarre, and the Constable Don Aluar de
Luna being much fauoured and highly supported by the fauor of the King, who desired
also to entertaine the King of Nauarre. Don Henry aduancing towards the Court,
came to Vailledolit, accompanied by the Maisters of Calatraua and Alcantara,

and others of the faction opposite to the Constable, it auailing nothing that the King.
who was at Simanca, did write vnto him, and commanded him by many messages, that
he should not come to Court, but returne to Ocagne. The two Brethren entring into
Vailledolit,Leagu^ against the Constable Alu^^ de Luna. being confederate with Don Pedro of Velasco, who was Earle of Haro, and
Lord Chamberlaine to the King, Don I^igo Lopes of Mendoca, Lord of Hita and Buitrago,
who afterwards was the first Marquis of Sentillana, Don Fernand Aluares of Toledo
Lord of the Vallee of Corneia, who afterwards was the first Earle of Alba, and his
Vncle Don Guttiere Gomes of Tolledo Bishop of Palence, the Maisters of Calatraua and
Alcantara, with other noble men of Castille, sent to beseech the King, that for some good
respects he would command the Constable to retire from Court, for that the absolute
power which he did vsurpe In the gouernment of affaires, was the cause of many inconueniences.
The King would haue it put to Compromise, and that the King of Nauarre
on the one side, and Don Aluar on the other, should deliuer their reasons before Arbitrators:
of which aduice Francisco of Soria, a Franciscan Friar* was the Author. The Iudges
named for the confederates, were don Lewis of Guzman Maister of the Calatraua,
and the Gouernour Don Pedro Manrique, and for the Constable, Don Alphonso
Henriques high Admirall of Castille,D. Aluar de Luna (...) from Court. and Fernand Alphonso of Robles, of the Kings
Councell, and his chiefe Treasurer: and for an Vmper the Abbot of Saint Benets in
Vailledolit. All which gaue sentence, that Don Aluaro de Luna the Constable, should
absent himselfe from Court, for the space of eighteene moneths next ensuing, and not
come within fifteene Leagues of it, and so should they doe whom hee had put into
the Kings Chamber.
The Constable yeelding to this sentence, hee retired himselfe to his house at Aillon,
and the King of Nauarre with his brother Don Henrie, came to Cigales, where the
King was, of whom they tooke their leaues with reasonable good shewes of loue: yet
Don Henry had a better countenance of him then the King of Nauarre, to whom they
imputed the whole cause of the Constables dismission, which made the King the more
desirous to see him againe. And for that Fernando Alphonso de Robles, one of the Kings
Counsell, had beene one of the principall Instruments of all these alterations, hee was
shut vp in the Castle of Segobia.
After all this, they treated of Don Henries affaires, and of his confederates. The accord
which the King made there with Don Henry,Accord made by the King with Don Henry. besides the restitution of his goods,
and the dignitie of the maistership of Saint Iames, was, that for the Marquisate of Villena,
hee should enioy Trugillo and Alcaras, with their appurtenances, and other lands in
the country of Guadalajara: Moreouer they gaue him two hundred thousand Florens
of gold in ready money, and a Million and two hundred thousand small Marauidis of
yeerely pension during his life. To the King of Nauarre for his charges during the
troubles, hee gaue a hundred thousand Florins to bee payde by a certaine time.
There was then present Inigo Ortiz of Estuniga, Marshall of Nauarre, who had married
Donna Ioane base Sister to the Queene Donna Blanche.
The King discharged and sent home to their houses a great number of vnnecessarie
men which followed the court without cause, who were but a burthen to him and
the country: and to take away all occasion of distrust and new troubles, hee granted
a generall pardon to all men, of what Estate, quality, or condition soeuer they were,
that had medled with the precedent troubles.D. Ruy Lopes of Analos restored to his honor and good name, but not to his goods. Hee restored Don Ruy Lopes of Aualos
the Constable (beeing accused to haue had Intelligence with the Moores, by letters
produced to the Kings Councell) to his honour and fame, but hee neither restored
him to his Office nor goods. Amidest these treaties the Constable Aluaro de Luna
was called backe againe to the court, his verie enemies consenting therevnto, yea
the King of Nauarre, and his brother Don Henry, who grew after so iealous one of
an other, who should bee in the Constables fauour, as they entred into factions: wherefore
the King of Castile imploying therein the Queene of Nauar, and the Estates also of
Nauarre, they perswaded their King to returne into his realme. D. Henry went in pilgrimage
to Saint Iames, and then was sent to the Moores frontier, who began to raise some
tumults, as we will hereafter shew.

The King of Castile being at Vailledolit, D. Leonora Infanta of Arragon, sister to the
King of Nauarre, past thereby going into Portugal, to be married to prince, Edward, the
heire of that Realme, to whom the King her cousin gaue the best reception he could, honouring
her with rich presents, money and men to accompany her. Soone after the
King being at Arando of Duero, her receiued D. Pedro Infant of Portugal, and Duke of
Coimbra, very gratiously, being also his cousin germaine: for D. Philippe mother to D.
Pedro, and Donna Constance mother to the King D. Iohn, were sisters daugthers to the
duke of Lancaster, but by diuers ventures. This Prince came from trauailling ouer
Christendome: and it is he of whom it is said in Portugal, that hee had seene the seuen
parts of the world, that is to say all: from thence he past much honoured into Portugal.D. Pedro of Portugal a great traueller.
In like manner there came the same yeere into Castile, D. Pedro Infant of Arragon, in his
returne from Naples, whereas the affaires had not beene very succesfull for the Arragonois:
where he went to see the Queene Donna Leonora his mother, at Medina del Campo.
The King freed D. Garci Fernandes Manrique out of prison, who had beene committed
with the Infant D. Henry. Thus past the gouernment of Castile vnto the end of
the yeere 1428.
In the which the King of Arragon hauing made an accord with Pope Martin,Arragon. he forced
the Antipope Gil Mugnos, resyding in the castle of pegniscola to renounce the
Popedome, hauing held it foure yeeres; whereby the Schisme in the church of Rome
ended, hauing continued foure and forty yeeres. Ths Gil Mugnos had in recompence
the Bishoprike of Majorca, and was receiued into the bo^some of the church, and in fauor
with the Apostolike sea of Rome. The Cardinals created by him gaue ouer their hats,
and Martin remained sole Pope.
This yeere beganne an other sect of Monkes of Saint Ierosme, springing out of that of 
Saint Bartlemew of Lupiana,Castile. wherevnto Friar Lopes of Olmedo, a Doctor of the lawes,
and a religious man in that Monastery, gaue the beginning. Hauing beene chosen by
the Monkes of Saint Bartlemew to be generall of their Order, being desirous to reforme
them, he gathered out of the Bookes of Saint Ierosme, and others, a cetaine rule and
manner of lyuing, which hee said, had beene held in Bethelem, wherevpon that great
Doctor, and his Monkes prescribed that monacall weed, which he said was vsed by them,
and hauing presented all vnto Pope Martin, hee caused his order to be allowed, vnder
the name of friars hermits of Saint Ierosme, of the obseruance of Bethelem, and then
he sought to haue it receiued in Spaine, by the religious of his Order, and to reforme
them to bee more perfect, according to the same: but they told him plainely, that they
would none of it, wherefore he was forced to finde out other followers. He therefore
erected a conuent vnder that title neere vnto Seuile, called of Saint Isidro, name which
hath remained to this new sect, so as there haue beene since in Spaine two sorts of
Monkes of Saint Ierosme, the one of Lupiana, and the other of Saint Isidro, or of friar
Lope. This Order of Monkes makes the fourth of them that liue vnder the Romish
church in Spaine, numbred with the Bernadins,Foure Orders of Monkes which beg not. Benedictins and Carthusians. These
Isidres haue multiplied in such sort, as since they haue extended themselues farre into Italy,
and other Regions. And althought that their beginning be from Spaine, and that
in the beginning the chiefe of their order was a Spaniard, yet in succession of time, and
through the negligence of the Spaniards, the Italians haue gotten it: and whereas they
sent vice-generals of this Order out of Spaine into Italy, now it is otherwise. Such were
the effects of the doctrine of that age.
Whilest that D. Iohn King of Nauarre,Nauarre. and his wife D. Blanche were in Castile, the Estates
of Nauarre assembled, and tooke a new oth to D. Charles Prince of Viana. Queene
Blanch went first into Nauarre, and soone after the King her husband arriued, hauing
made a renuntiation of certaine lands of Castile, in fauour of his sonne D. Charles, being
then seuen yeeres old, where the leagues were renued betwixt Castile, Nauarre and Arragon,
King Iohn hauing full power from King D. Alphonso his brother. And on Whitsonday
1429. the King D. Iohn and Queene Blanche his wife were crowned at Pampelone,
the three Estates of the realme being assembled, and the rights, preuiledges and liberties
of the country sworne by them. D. Martin of Peralta Bishop of Pampelone did the

ceremony of the vnction, and others accustomed in such cases. There were present the
Ambassadors of forraine Princes, the Bishops of Calaorra, Tarrassone and Bayone, with
many Noblemen and Knights of Nauarre, Castile and Arragon. At this coronation
there was againe sworne and confirmed the matrimoniall conuentions betwixt the King
D. Iohn, and D. Blanche the heire, made in the time of King Charles her father.
The Estate of the Moores of Granado, during these tumults in Castile, had beene quiet,
by prorogation of the truce with the King of Castile, and his councell, in consideration
of a certaine tribute, which was paied by King Ioseph vntill his death, the which
was in the yeere 1423. being very old, and hauing enioyed the realme fifteene yeeres.


Mahumet the Left-handed, called Aben-Azar the
foureteenth King of Granado.
AFter Ioseph reigned his sonne Mahumet,Moores. called Aben-Azar, the Scepter of Granado
continuing by him in the succession of Ferrachen, who was Gouernor of Malaga.
This King who was left-handed of his person, had also a sinister reigne: for he was thrice
chased from his throne, after great miseries, and twice restored. These seditious changes
were ordinary, and haue alwaies beene amongst the Arabians, who are inconstant,
treacherous, rauishing and ambitious, if there be any liuing. King Mahumet did maintaine
the truce, and entertaine himselfe in the fauour and friendship of the King of Castile,
for some yeeres, and in like manner with Muley Aben Ferriz King of Tunes: but he
could not get the loue of his owne subiects. In the beginning of his reigne, he made a
Knight whose name was Ioseph, of the family of Aben Sarraces (which was great and
much esteemed amongst that nation) Alg^azil Major or chiefe Marshall of Granado.
The troubles of Castile, whereas many Noblemen, yea D. Henry Maister of Saint Iames,
banded against their King, was a president for the Moores, who conspired against this
Left-handed Mahumet, in fauour of an other of the same name, surnamed the Little: so
as they made him King, and forced Mahumet to flie to Tunes, to King Muley Aben Ferriz
his friend:Mahumet Aben-Azar expelled. in which exile he was followed by about fiue hundred Moores of his faction,
as well horse as foote, who were all well entertained, and afterwards assisted to recouer
the lost Kingdome in Spaine.


Mahumet the Little, the fifteenth
King of Granado.
MAhumet called the Little, reigned then about the yeere 1427. the eleuenth of that
name, and fifteenth King of the Moores at Granado. The surname of Little, was
giuen him, to distinguish him from his predecessor, who raigned before him. This King
entring by tyrany, thought that rigour and cruelty was the best means to maintaine him
in his Estate, as commonly tyrants doe; wherefore he beganne to persecute the Officers,
friends and partisans of his predecessor (whom he had expelled) by imprisonments,Tyrants care not to bee hated, so they bee feared. banishments,
confiscations and cruell deaths, whereas many were ruined, and many also
escaped, amongst the which was the Alguazil Ioseph Aben Sarrax, who fled to Lorca a
towne in the realme of Murcia, submitting himselfe to the mercy of the King of Castile,
and of the Gouernor of Lorca, who was Lope Alphonso of Lorca, who afterwards led him
to court, and presented him to the King D. Iohn at Illesca, a towne belonging to the
Archbishop of Toledo, seated betwixt Madrid and Toledo. The King gaue good entertainment
to this Moore, from whom he vnderstood the resolutions of Granado, Lope
Alphonso being truchman betwixt them. The King being intreated by Ioseph Aben Sarrax,
to aide his maister to recouer his realme, hee yeelded vnto it, and hauing giuen him
many presents, and shewed him all fauour, he sent him with Lope Alphonso in Ambassage

to Tunes, to let King Mahumet vnderstand how much hee desired to doe him good, and
to exhort him of Tunes, to aide and fauour his guest. The businesse, succeeded so well,
as Mahumet Aben Azar, receiuing money, and all other kinde of aide, from the King of
Tunes, he past from Tunes to Oran, and then crossing the sea, hee came and landed at
Vera in Granado, whose comming being divulged through the country, the towns thereabouts,
yea that of Almery, opened their gates vnto him. Mahumet the Little, who held
the Realme, resolued to make head against him, thinking that his forces were yet but
weake, sending about eight hundred horse and some foote before to incounter him, most
of which ioyned with Mahumet Aben Azar, who pursuing his good fortune, entred
with the like facility into Guadix, yea hee was receiued into the city of Granado: so as
Mahumet the Little, his competitor was forced to shut and fortefie himselfe, in the Alhambra
of Granado;Mahumet Aben-Azar recouers his realme of Granado. where he was presently beseeged, Aben Azar lodging his campe at
a place called Alcabicar, neere to the fort of Alhambra: to whose obedience there presently
yeelded the townes of Malaga, Gibraltar, Ronde, and in the end the whole realme:
wherefore Mahumet the Little, being hated and abandoned of all men, and fainting, hee
was forced, and taken in the castle of Alhambra, with his children,Mahumet the vsurper taken and put to death.. where hee ended his
daies miserably, and his children were kept prisoners. Thus Mahumet Aben Azar recocouered
the realme, two yeeres after he had beene expelled, in the yeere 1429. and of the
Arabians 812.An. 1429.
The King of Nauarre at his departure out of Castile* left Deigo Gomes of Sandoual,
Earle of Castro Xeris,Castille. his familiar friend there, who presently caused the townes o Pegnafiel,
Portillo and Casto Xeris to bee repaired, which made D. Iohn King of Castile
conceiue, that there was some enterprise in hand to his preiudice, and that the King of
Nauarre was gone away discontented with him. In which opinion he was confirmed
by the newes which he receiued, that they leauied both foote and horse in Nauarre and
Arragon, the which they couered with a Pretext to send them into France, to succour
King Charles against the English: Moreouer that hauing treated an accord and pacification
betwixt Castile, Nauarre and Aragon, although the King of Nauarre had signed
it, yet he of Arragon would not heare of it. For these causes the King of Castile sent
friar Francis of Soria his confessor, and Peter of Boccanegra Deane of Cuenca, Ambassadors
into Nauarre, to know what the King of Nauarres intention was, and to complaine
of the Earle of Castros doings, and of other things, whereof hee was aduertised,
which were practised against him, and the Estate of Castile. To whom answer was
made, that they did not practise any thing against him, and that the souldiars which
were leauied, were not to bee sent into Castile, and if they should, it were not for any
thing that might offend the King their maister.
But in effect D. Iohn King of Nauarre, hee of Arragon, and D. Henry their brother,Cer^mo^^ in taking possession the realme of Nauarre.
were conspired against the gouernment of Castile, and they had an intent to trouble the
State, to pull downe them that were great, and to aduance others, who were kept vnder
or chased away; aboue all the King of Nauarre was furiously iealous of the Constables
D. Aluaro de Lunas greatnesse, and other things that were managed in that court contrary
to his liking: and as he was of a turbulent spirit, hee did not cease to seeke occasion
of quarrels, entertaining his brother D. Alphonso king of Arragon in the hatred which he
had conceiued against the king of Castile, for the imprisonment of D. Henry. These
two Princes being thus disposed, all things prepared to warre, the which did much trouble
the Queene Donna Blanche, and the Estates of Nauarre, who intreated him that hee
would forbeare, and enioy his realme in peace, and those goodly Estates which hee had
in Castile, whereas the Queenes dowry was assigned, and the reuenues of many Lordships
affected to Prince Charles his sonne: but they were not heard, and much lesse a second
Ambassage from the King of Castile, in which were D. Alphonso Tenorio, Notary or Secretary
of the realme of Toledo, and Doctor Fernand Goncales of Auila councellor of
State to the King of Castile, with two deputies of townes: wherefore the King of Castile
made preparation, and leauied men of all sides, to resist the kings of Nauarre and
Arragon, and he tooke a new oth of fealty of all the Noblemen of this realme, especially
of the Infant D. Henry.

Herevpon the King of Nauarre sent to excuse himselfe, and to require an enterview of
the King of Castile, but his excuses were not credited, yet the enterview was graunted.
At this time there being dead D.Death of D. Alp^onso Henriques Admiral of Castile. Alphonso Henriques high Admiral of Castile, base sonne
to D. Frederic maister of Saint Iames and grand-child to King D. Alphonso the twelfth,
there was substituted in his place his sonne D. Frederic; his body was interred at Saint
Clara in Palence, founded by him. The Kings troupes being ready to march, the constable
went towards the frontier of Arragon with two hundred launces, and the King
led the rest of his forces towards Pegnafiel, whereas the Earle of Castro and the Infant
D. Pedro, brother to the Kings of Arragon and Nauarre, had fortefied themselues. Their
other brother, D. Henry, sought in the meane time to leauy men about Toledo, but the
Inhabitants hindred him.Warre of the Castillan against Arragon and Nauarre. The King sommoned D. Pedro and the Earle to yeeld vp the
towne of Pegnafiel, vpon paine to be proclaimed traitors, and to be so condemned; so
as the Earle yeelded vp the towne, vpon honorable conditions, and amongst others, not
to be bound to carry armes against the King of Nauarre. The castle which was commanded
by Goncalo Gomes Sumel, held some daies. On the other side the Kings of
Arragon and Nauarre, entred into Castile, with two thousand fiue hundred men at
armes, and some few foote, whose entry the constable could not stop, with whom Don
Henry ioyned with two hundred and twenty horse, againt the promises made. They
ranne neere vnto Cogollado, and beeing come to Xadraque, the Constable following
them, they presented him battails, the which he would not accept, for Peter Cardinal of
Foix sonne to Archambaud, and Mary Queene of Arragon, sister to the King of Castile,
came by great iourneies out of Arragon, and put themselues betwixtthem, making an
entrance to an accord, which was, that the two Kings should returne into their realmes,
and that the constable and other noblemen of the King of Castiles army, should intreat
him to restore vnto the King of Nauarre, and to the Infant D. Henry their lands: for as
soone as the army of Arragon and Nauarre had entred into Castile, the King did caused
all that the house ofArragon did hold in Castile, to bee seized on. By this meanes the
armies parted, and the two brethren Kings came to Huerta and Haria, in Arragon, and
the Infant D. Henry to Ocagne; but the indignation of D. Iohn King of Castile, was so
greta, as he did not regard that which had beene capitulated but sent to all his subiects,
that they should hold the Arragonois and Nauarrois for enemies, and make vioent
warre against them, and comming himselfe in person to the campe at Piquera, hee resolued
to goe and charge his enemies in their fort at Hariza. Queene mary and the Cardinall
Foix returned againe to the King of Castile, propounding many meanes of peace,
but all in vaine: wherevpon they returned, very much discontented. D. Frederic of Castile
Earle of Arjone, was aprehended in the army, vpon suspition that he fauored the
Arragonois: war being proclaimed throughout al Castile, the inhabitants of the country
of Biscay, Guipuscoa, Alaua, and Rioja, entred sodainely into Nauarre, where they
committed infinit spoiles. Thus an innocent Realme suffred for a nocent King, whom
they had earnestly intreated to entertaine peace with Castile.
The King of Castiles army being strong and ready to enter into Arragon, hee sent
word to D. Alphonso King of Arragon, that he would spare his country, if hee would forsake
the king of Nauarre, the which he refused: wherevpon the constable of Castile beeing
followed by fiue hundred horse, marcht to Monreal, tooke it, spoiled Cetiua, and
finding no resistance,Army of the King of Castile. returned to the army, which consisted of 7000. men at armes,
3600. genets or light horse, and 60000. foot, with the which King Iohn entred into Arragon,
where he tooke and burnt the towne of Hariza, but hee attempted not the castle,
which was very strong: this was all the exploit was done with that mighty army: for the
two brethren Kings ont presenting themselues to battaile, and victuals fayling for so
great an army, he was forced to retire into Castile, towards Medina Celi, from whence
he sent for the gard of the frontier, D. Pedro of Velasco his Lord Chamberlain, with 600.
launces to lie with them in Alfaro, Calaorra, or Logrogno: against whom the King of
Nauarre did fortefie Tudele, Viana and La Garde.
In the meane time D. Henry and D. Pedro brethren to the kings, ouerran the country
of Estremadura, hauing to incounter them Don Roderigo Alonso Pimentel, Earle of

Benauent, who finding himselfe weake, had the Constable sent to him, with sufficient
forces. The king being returned to Pegnafiel, wrought so as the captaine of the castle
yeelded it vnto him, fearing to be put in the ranke of rebells and traitors to their Prince.
The king of Arragon slept not, but imploying his forces (his enemy being farre of) hee
tooke in Castile,Exploits of the King of Arragon. in the country of Soria, Deca, and the castles of Ciria, Boronia and
Bozmediano, carrying away an infinite number of prisoners, aboue forty thousand
charges of corne, and great store of cattle and other spoiles. The king of Castile was
much mooued with these newes, and gaue all the lands which the king of Nauarre, his
soone D. Charles, the Queene Donna Blanche, and the Infant D. Henry held in Castile, to
D. Henry his sonne, Prince of the Asturia's, and he sent D. Pedro of Velasco to make most
violent warres in Nauarre: and being resolued to enter himselfe in person the next yeere
with a great army, he called the Estates to Burgos, to haue money, demaunding a hundred
millions of Marauidis to entertaine it sixe monthes: and for that their was some
difficulty to draw together so great a summe he borrowed of rich men, and of churches,
all their plate and siluer vessel, and sent it to bee coined at Seuile. During the assembly
at Burgos, there came Ambassadors from the kings of Nauarre and Arragon, which
were, Peter of Peralta, the Abbot of Ronceuaux, Doctor Iohn of Lezana, D. Iohn of Luna,
and Berenguel of Bardaxi, to treat of a peace, to whom answere was made, that the king
of Castile would send Ambassadors expresly to giue them a conuenient answere: and
to them of Nauarre, shewing particularly in the name of Queene Blanch and of her sonne
D. Charles, that they had not done any thing, for the which they should seize their rents
and pensions, yea the Queenes dowry, who had neuer consented to these quarrels, the
like answere was made. The Ambassadors of Castile were D. Sancho of Rojas Bishop
of Astorga, Pero Lope of Ayala Marshall of the kings body, and D. Fernando Goncales of
Auila, of the Kings councell. Who being come into Nauarre, made great complaints
of D. Iohn King of Nauarre, accusing him of great faults, wherein they did also comprehend
the Queene, saying, that she was a confederate in the warre, seeing that she had sold
her iewels to furnish her husband with money; and made other demonstrations of an
enemy. From Nauarre they past into Arragon, where they gaue as little hope of peace:
wherefore King D. Alphonso sent Ambassadors to Rome, to Pope Martin, to complaine
of the King of Castile, who refused all honest meanes of an accord. The Constable being
come into Extremadura, he made the Infants D. Henry and D. Pedro retire towards
Albuquerque, vpon the frontier of Portugal, whether they sent great store of cattle, hoping
they should serue to victual them, for the which the King of Portugal was glad to
excuse himselfe to the King of Castile, who complained. The Constable tooke Trugillo,
and hauing seized also of the castle by the meanes of one of the captaines of the
garrison, he deliuered it into the Kings hands: hee attempted Montanches, and hauing
taken D. Roderigo Alphonso Pimentel Earle of Benauent with him, he came and camped
before Albuquerque, an impregnable fort, but hee desired to draw the Infants to fight
Knight to Knight, but they would not vouchsafe to accept it: wherefore he retired his army
towards Pierrebonne, from whence hauing aduertsed the King of the Estate of his
affaires, he came presently to the campe, and then the castle of Montarches yeelded, by
intelligence which the constable had with the captaine. The Prouinces and townes of
Castile did furnish the King with fiue and forty millions of Marauidies for the warre:
and there was an Ambassage sent to Rome to Pope Martin to free the King of Castile
of the imputations which were saied vpon him by him of Arragon. The King of Nauarre
making shew to enter into Castile by Briones, D. Pedro of Velasco went to field,
with all the troupes he could gather together, hauing drawne out of Biscay three thousand
men, led by Iohn of Abendagno, Ordogno Garcia Arrega, Goncalo Gomes of Butron,
and his sonne Gomes Goncalo of Muxica,Biscains deseated by them whom they had vanquished for want of discipline. Lord of the house of Muxica, and finding no
man to make head against him hee went to beseege the towne of Saint Vincent, the
which was taken by assault, but whilest the Biscains were busie at the pillage, not caring
to keepe any order, nor martiall discipline, entring confusedly into the houses, without
any gards vpon the approches: being entred into the houses, the Inhabitants who were
armed, and retired into the castles, seeing this confused multitude in their towne, they

brake out vpon them, and incountring Gomes Goncales in the street, with a small company
they tooke him, hauing slain most of his souldiers: whose father Goncalo Gomes of Butron,
running to succour him, beeing as ill accompanied as his sonne, was slaine with
some of his men, and could not be releeued. D. Pedro of Velasco, seeing that the castle
could not be forced with a long and painefull seege, he set fire on the suburbes, and of
some houses in the towne, and then returned to Haro, carrying with him many of his
Knights and good souldiers wounded.Towne of Saint Vincent obtaines new preuiledges. The towne of Saint Vincent, for the losse it sustained
then, and for the good seruice it did in the warre betwixt Nauarre and Castile, obtayned
many priuiledges and freedomes for the inhabitants thereof. He among the Nauarrois
which did most harme to the Castillans, was a Knight called Sancho of Londogno
the kings Marshall, issued from the house of Londogno, neere to Ordugna, a member
of Biscay; he running one day into Rioja, was surprized by the ambushes which Diego
Peres Sarmiento captaine of Bastide had layed for him, who carried him prisoner to that
fort: but this losse was soone recompenced by Ruy Dias of Mendoca the bald, borne at
Seuile, and yet he did serue the king of Nauarre faithfully, and was gone foorth of Tudele
with foure hundred ho^se and fiue hundred foot, ouer-running the countrie of Agreda,
against whom D. Inigo Lope of Mendoca Lord of Hita and Buitrago (who kept a
garrison there for the king of Castile) sallying foorth, and comming to fight in the field
of Arauiana, he was there vanquished, with the death and imprisonment of many Castillans.
At that time the Infanta D. Izabella of Portugall, daughter to the king D. Iohn,
was married to Philip Duke of Bourgondie, Earle of Flanders, and Lord of many other
Seigneuries, who had two wiues without any children. Of this mariage was born Charles
whose daughter and onely heire was afterwards married to Maximilian of Austria. The
very day that this marriage betwixt D. Philip, and the Infanta Izabella was celebrated
with great pompe at Bruges,Institution of the Order of the golden fleece. the Order of Bourgondie of the golden fleece was instituted
by him, the tenth yeare after his comming to it, vppon a vow which he had made to
go and make warre against the Infidels of Syria, and to conquer the countrie of Iurie: but
his great affaires made his vow fruitlesse. His Order had for head and patron (I know not
by what diuinity) S. Andrew, and the solemnitie of the Order was to be celebrated euery
yeare three dayes together, whose knights should be the first day attired in red, in signe
that heauen is purchased by the effusion of bloud and by Martyrdome:Ceremonie of the order of the Fleece. the second day in
blacke, representing mourning for the dead: and the third in white, in honour of the purity
of the Virgin Mary: and they should carry for a marke of their knight-hood, a chaine
made in fashion of fuzils, with a rams skin and fleece hanging at it: a deuise taken, not from
the Pagan Iason, but from the faithfull Gedeon, as some say. The first knights of this Order
were foure and twenty in number, of the Noblest and most renouned of his Estates
of Burgondy, Flanders and the Netherlands: wherewith since many Princes and great
Noblemen of Spaine and other places, haue held themselues much honoured. This was
that Duke Philip, who to reuenge the death of his father Iohn, murthered at Montreaufaut-Yoone
by the Dauphin Charles, drew the English into France, to the ruine of his
naturall country, as you may read at large in the History of France.
The yeere 1430. being come,1430. D. Iohn King of Castile prepared to make warre against
the King of Nauarre, against whom he had the greatest spleene; and forgetting no kinde
of rigour, he resolued to depriue him and his of all the lands which they held in Castile,
 without euer hoping to re-enter into them: and therefore he gaue to D. Guttiere of Toledo
Bishop of Palence,King of Nauarres lands in Castile confisked and giuen away. and afterwards Archbishop of Toledo, the towne of Alua de
Tormes, to D. Pedro Manrique Gouernor of Leon, the towne of Paredes de Naua: to
D. Roderigo Alphonso Pimentel, Earle of Benauent, Majorga: to the Marshall Inigo Ortiz
of Estuniga, Cerezo: he would haue giuen to Fernand Diaz of Toledo, fiue hundred
vassals in the lands which did belong to D. Iohn King of Nauarre, but hee refused them:
He gaue to D. Frederic of Arragon Earle of Luna, base sonne to Martin King of Sicile,
Villalon and Cuellar: to Queene Mary his wife Olmedo; and other places to other
Knights. The king being come to field, before the fort of Albuquerque, hee caused the
Infants D. Henry and D. Pedro to bee sommoned, to yeeld him the place, promising that
the Infants should be herd in Iustice, and that all the rest should haue a generall pardon:

giuing the Infants thirty daies time to resolue, and the rest forty: but their answers were
arrowes and bullets, with great daunger to the Kings person, who being in a great rage
at their obstinacy, he caused D. Henries processe to be made, and gaue the administration
of the maister-ship of Saint Iames to the constable, diuiding his lands to diuerse
Knights, very prodigally, as hee had done the King of Nauarres. In the meane time D.
Diego of Estuniga, or Suniga, Bishop of Calaorra, and Calcada and his vncle D. Pedro of
Estuniga, Earle of Ledesma, Iustice Major of Castile, and an other D. Diego of Estuniga
his counsin, wiht the forces of the frontier, tooke the towne of La Garde in Nauarre, by
Scalado, being two leagues from Logrogno, the castle held out, and cost many good
mens liues, on either side, and beeing fortefied with new succors, sent from the King of
Nauarre, they made furious and bloudy sallies vpon their enemies, who held the towne,
but in the end they were so prest by the Bishop and the Earle of Ledesma, as they did capitulate
to yeeld, if by a day prefixt they were not releeued by the King their Lord; during
the which there should be a cessation of armes; and if there came any succors, the
beseeged should bee bound to aduertise the Bishop that hee might doe as hee pleased.
This accord being made, the captaine of the place beseeged made a mine vnder ground,
by the which he drew into the castle a great number of souldiars, which the King of Nauarre
had sent him, vpon the aduertisment of the capitulation. The time beeing ready
to expire, the captaine aduertised the Bishop, that the succors were arriued, and at that
instant he opened the mine in the midest of the place, from whence issued great numbers
of souldiars of Nauarre, who beganne to charge the Castillans, which caused a
great confusion amongst them, and did much trouble the Bishop; yet beeing madde
with this treachery, they put themselues in defence, and repulst the Nauarrois into the
castle ditch, hauing lost many good men of either side. This hauing not succeeded so
happely as the Nauarrois expected and their victuals fayling them, by little and little they
abandoned the fort: So La Garde both towne and castle remained in the King of Castiles
power. The Queene D. Leonora mother to the Princes of Arragon, sorrowful for so
many ruines, being old, and wholy giuen to deuotion, lyuing at Medina del Campo,Garde taken by the Castillans. in
her Monastery of St. Iohn de las Duegnas, was not exempt from the discommodities of
this war: for the King of Castile suspecting that she fauored her children, caused her to be
shut vp in Santa Clara of Tordisillas,L^onora Queene of Arragon restr^ined by the King of Castile. and put garrisons in her houses of Montalban, Vruegna,
and Tyedra: and would haue done as much at Castro Xeris, and Saldagne, but the
Earle found meanes to exempt himselfe, and yet the King was not very well pleased with
him. The court being in Astudillo, there came an Ambassador from Iohn Earle of Foix,
father to Gaston, who afterwards married Leonara the heire of Nauarre, who b^sought
the King of Castile, that he would bee pleased that the Earle his master might imploy
himselfe, to make a peace betwixt him and the Kings of Nauar and Arragon: to whom
the King of Castile answered, that he did thanke the Earle of Foix for his good will, but
there was no meanes of a peace. On the other side the Earle of Armaignac, an enemy to
the King of Nauarre and the Earle of Foix, hauing giuen all the hindrance hee could towards
Gascony, that no succors should passe out of France to the King of Nauarre, for
the which he had beene at great charge, hee sent to intreat the King of Castile, to re^bourse
him, to whom were paied ten thousand florins of gold. This yeere D. Pedro of
Velasco, Generall vpon the frontier of Nauarre, was created Earle of Haro. The King
being at Burgos, had newes that the Infant D. Pedro ouerrunnning the country about
Zamora, had taken the castle of Alua de Lista: and passing afterwards to Osma, which
was the Rendezvous for the army of Castile, there came vnto him a Franciscan friar,
confessor to Donna Blanch Queene of Nauarre, whom they called Archbishop of Tyre:
Peter of Perault chiefe Steward to the King of Nauarre, and Ramir Deane of Tudelo,
councellor to the King, Ambassadors for the King of Nauarre; and for him of Arragon,
D. Dominike Bishop of Lerida D. Raymond of Perillos, and William of Vigue, Knights,
sent to treat and conclude a peace, at what price soeuer.
The difficulties were ver great, and they were forced to send backe some of the
Ambassadors to the two brethren Kings, and in the meane time the army marched:
but the reasons, and propositions of the Ambassadors were in the end admitted, and a

truce was accorded at Majano, for fiue yeeres, both by sea and land, betwixt the King of
Castile, and D. Henry his sonne Prince of Asturia's,Truce betwixt the King of (...) and the King of Arragon and Nauarre. on the one part; and D. Alphonso
King of Arragon, D. Iohn King of Nauarre, D. Blanch his wife, and D. Charles Prince of
Viana, their sonne on the other part: into which truce there entred for the King of Castile,
the Earle of Armaignac; and for the two Kings brethren, the Earle of Foix. It was
also agreed, that D. Godfrey of Nauarre, Earle of Cortes, brother in law to King Iohn,
who had followed the party of Castile, should not be troubled nor molested in the perception
of his goods, nor otherwise. This Knight staied long in Castile, and did the
King good seruice in his warres against the Moores: the like assurance was graunted in
regard of the Infants D. Henry and D. Pedro: and to iudge of the differences during the
truce, there were seuen persons named for Nauarre and Arragon, and seuen for Castile,
whose seat should be at Tarassone and Agreda, alernatiuely. Thus ended the warre betwixt
Castile, Nauarre and Arragon, to the great preiudice of the King of Nauarre: for
he was dispossest of all the lands he had in Castile, and moreouer of the towne of Garde
in Nauar. During these treaties, D. Frederic Duke of Arjone died a prisoner at Pegnafiel,
whose Dutchy and Estates were giuen to D. Frederic of Arragon,Death of the Duke of Ario^e. Earle of Luna. There
were also restored vnto Queen Leonora her houses and castles, and she was set liberty, and
freed from the Monastery of Santa Clara of Tordesillas, at the intreaty of the King of
Portugal, to whom the King of Castile sent the proceedings against her foure sonnes,
the King and Infants of Arragon, and their offences, to the end that she might see what
reason he had to confiscate their lands. The same yeere King Iohn of Castile, was sollicited
to make a league of friendship with the English, but he excused himselfe touching
the league, beeing loath to doe any thing to the preiudice of the King and Realme of
France, an ancient friend and confederate to the crowne of Castile, sending backe the
Ambassadors with a discreet and friendly answere: and soone after hauing sent D. Sancho
of Rojas Bishop of Astorgo to the King of England, hee concluded a truce betwixt
Spaine and England for one yeere. At the same time beeing sought vnto by the King
of Granado to continue peace and friendship betwixt them, the said Moorish King offring
him all the force of Granado to serue him at his will, he gaue him thankes for the
offer, and by an Ambassador which hee sent expresly to Granado, to conclude some
truce, he descouered the Estate of that realme. The Ambassador, who was Lewis Goncales
of Luna, Gouernor of Cordoua, found King Mahumet averse to those conditions
which the King of Castile demaunded: wherefore he returned without any conclusion,
reporting how little assurance there was of the Moores faith; which made the King of
Castile to thinke vpon the affaires of that frontier, and to man it well, sending some presents
to the King of Tunes, by Lopes Alphonso of Lorca, his Ambassador, with complaints
against the King of Granado, intreating him that he would not succor him in the warre
which he was resolued to make against him.
Mahumet Aben-Azar King of Granado, was, as we haue said, restored to his regal seat,
in the yeere 1429.Moores. two yeeres after his exile, who shewed himselfe thankefull to the King
of Castile, for the fauour and aide which he had giuen him in the recouery of his realme,
sending sundry Ambassages vnto him, with offers and thankes: but refusing this yeere to
pay the tribute and pensions to the King of Castile, which he demaunded, of friends they
became enemies, and the warre was begunne by Diego of Riuera, Gouernor of the frontier,
who running through the plaine of Granado, tooke aboue two hundred horse, and
towards Ronda, D. Fernando Aluares of Toledo, Lord of Val de Corneja, did great
spoiles vpon the Moores. The King of Castile meaning to imploy D. Diego Gomes of
Sandoual, Earle of Castro Xeris, in this warre, hee sent for him to court; but the Earle
distrusting the King, retired to Briones a place belonging to Nauarre, from whence
hee sent to maek his excuse, but it was not allowed. Wherevpon the King caused
his processe to bee made, and by a sentence giuen at Zamora hee was condemned
by contumacy, as a rebell, his castle of Castro Xeris was confisked, and deliuered
by the Captaine thereof to Iohn of Luxan,Castro Xeris confisked. Ramir of Tamojo, and to Doctor Fernand
Di^s of Toledo, whom the King had sent thether. The Earle hauing many great men, and
of the Kings fauorits which hated him, durst neuer more appeare in his presence.

Before he entred into Granado, Don Iohn King of Castile,Portugal. keeping his Court at Medina 
del Campo, was sollicited by the Ambassadors of Portugal, to make a perpetuall
p^ace betwixt the two realmes, wherevnto hee consented, and it was sworne in the yeare
one thousand foure hundred thirty and one, by the two Kings, and their eldest sonnes,
and next successors to the Crowne, Don Henry of Castile Prince of the Asturiaes, and
Don Edward of Portugall.Peace betwixt Portugal and Cast^^e. This peace did end all quarrels betwixt Portugal and Castile,
and continued fortie three yeares, to the great good of both realmes. This yeare
dyed Don Nugno Aluares Pereira, first Constable of Portugal, by vertue whereof Don
Iohn, from being Maister of Auiz, came to the royall dignity. This great personage towards
the end of his dayes, possest with a superfluous deuotion, left the affaires of the
world, whereas hee mought haue serued God well, and beene profitable to the common-weale,
retyring himselfe into the Monasterie of the Carmelites in the citty of Lisbone,
which he had built, and there he liued very solitarie and simply almost nine yeares.
The Portugals speake wonders of the almes-deeds, fastings, prayers, and other workes
tending to piety of this Noble man, as well in his Monasticall life, as before. Besides the
Carmelites at Lisbone, he caused S. Georges Church to bee built in the place of battaile
at Aljubarote,Religious buildings of the Constable Don Nugno Aluares Pereira. that of Saint Mary of Villa viciosa; the great Chappell of the religious
of Saint Augustin in the same place, the Church of Saint Mary de Monte, Saint
Mary of Portel, and Saint Mary of Sonsel, and others. Before hee retired himselfe, hee
distributed his goods after this manner. To Don Diego his grand-child, borne of Donna
Beatrix his daughter, and of Don Alphonso Earle of Barcellos, her husband, hee gaue
the Earldome of Oren, with all the lands which hee held in Extremadura, at Lisbone
and there-abouts. To Don Ferdinand his other grand-child, borne of the aboue named,
heire afer his father of the Duchie of Bragance, and who succeeded in the Earledome
of Arroyolos, with all the rents hee had on this side Tayo and Vdiana. To Don Isabella
sister to his two grand-children, maried to the Infant D. Iohn Maister of Saint Iames of
Portugal, the Kings Sonne, who was the second Constable of that realme, hee gaue the
lands of Lonsada Payua and Tendanes, and the Towne of Almadaan, with the rents of
Loule: and to his familiar vassalls and houshold seruants, he diuided his money, horses,
armes, apparrell and moueables. And thus naked, and discharged of all temporall goods
hee entred into the Monasterie, where hee was possest with so strong an opinion to merit
heauen by austoritie of life, trauell, and affliction of his body, as hee resolued to seperate
himselfe more from the company of men, and to liue alone in desarts, if the King
Don Iohn and Prince Edward his Sonne, had not diuerted him, shewing how much it
would hurt the estimation which all men had of him, and of his wisdome: wherefore
hee contained himselfe in his Monasterie vntill his death, which was in the yeare 1431.
and 71. of his age.
The end of the eighteenth Booke.




SEMPER EADEMTHE NINETEENTH BOOKE
of the Generall History of Spaine.

The Contents.
1 VVArre betwixt the Castillans and Moores: seditions among the Princes Moores.
2 Troubles in Castile.
3 D. Edward the first of that name, and 11. King of Portugal: his disposition: title of Prince
of Portugal first vsurped by the eldest etc.
4 Pursute of the warre of Naples, after the death of Queene Ioane the second, by the Kings of
Arragon.
5 Combats in Castile and else-where: warre of Granado.
6 Peace betwixt the Kings of Castile, Nauarre and Arragon, Alliance betwixt them by the
marriage of Prince Henry of Castile with D. Blanch Infanta of Nauarre.
7 Vnfortunate warre of the Portugals in Affrike.
8 Quarrell betwixt the Princes of Castile and the Constable D. Aluaro de Luna, with his
Insolencies.
9 D. Iohn of Pacheco mignion to Prince Henry of Castile comes to bee the greatest man of
the Realme.
10 Marriage of Prince Henry and the Infanta of Nauarre: the Princes dishability to consummate
the marriage. New troubles against the King.
11 D. Alphonso the fifth of that name and 12. King of Portugal, gouerned by his mother, and
the troubles which ensued.
12 Continuance of the quarrels and factions in the court of Castile.
13 Successe of the warre of Naples, made by D. Alphonso the fifth King of Naples.
14 Second marriage of D. Iohn King of Nauarre, with D. Ioane Henriques. Continuance of
the troubles.
15 Proceedings against the King of Nauarre, and them of his faction: Seazure of their goods
in Castile. Battaile of Olmedo, lost by the King of Nauarre. Condemnation of his confederats.
16 The Constable D. Aluaro de Luna restored to credit: beginning of the Kings hatred against
him.
17 The Constables furious enterprises against the Nobility.
18 Moores incited by the King of Nauarre against Castile: warre against Granado.
19 Excesse of D. Bertrand of Gueuara.
20 Exploits of warre betwixt the Nauarrois and Castillans.
21 Sedltions at Toledo: Concussions and rebellions of D. Pedro Sarmiento.
22 Birth of D. Isabella, who was Queene of Castile and Arragon.

23 Entry of the Castillan army into Nauarre, and their retreat through the modesty of D.
Charles Prince of Nauarre; the vertues and disposition of this prince.
24 Hatred betwixt Prince Charles of Nauarre, and his mother in law. D. Ioane.
25 Enterprises against the Constable D. Aluaro de Luna: his imprisonment, and miserable
end.
26 Last acts of D. Iohn of Castile and his death.
27 Troubles, emulations, and death of Princes in the house of Portugal: alliance of the Emperor
Frederic in that familie by marriage. Descouery of the country in Affrike by the
Portugals.

The Kings mentioned in this nineteenth
Booke, are of
PORTVGAL.

11. D. Edward. 1.
12. D. Alphonso. 5.

THe affaires of Castile beeing some-what pacefied, with the Christian
Princes of Spaine, made way for the warre which King Iohn had resolued
against the Moores of Granado,Hatred betwixt Courtiers cannot ^e^reconciled, but by the ruine of one party. notwithstanding that according
to the discipline brought in of late, hee had alwaies a spleene against
them which had presumed to resist him by armes: and therefore vpon
euery occasion he fell into new troubles within his realme: for he had
mignions by whom hee was wholy gouerned, who made him iealous of many great
men, and by their importune reports did estrange them, and in the end made them ill affected
to their Prince. For besides that which we haue related in the precedent Booke,
of the Earle of Castro Xeris, D. Iohn of Soto Major, maister of Alcantara, being sent
for by the King, he neuer durst with assurance present himselfe before him, nor come to
court, what promise soeuer he made him, neither could Don Guttiere Gomes of Toledo,
Bishop of Palence, his great friend perswade him: Yet did he performe whatsoeuer
they commanded him, that did concerne the Kings seruice, and the obedience which
hee ought him, excepting alwaies that he would not be bound to come to court against
his will. And moreouer, notwithstanding any peace concluded betwixt Castile and
Nauarre and Arragon, the King D. Iohn did still entertaine occasions of quarrels; and
maintained the Earle of Armaignac, a great enemy to the King of Nauarre, furnishing
him with money, to be end he might be as a thorne in his foote, to annoy him towards
France, so as hee might not attempt any thing against Castile. And for a greater proofe
of his hatred against this Prince, not satisfied to haue taken his lands from him in Castile,
he caused his castle of Pegnafiel to be raized.
The country of Galicia beeing in a manner all in armes through the quarrels of
N^gno Freire of Andrada, and his subiects, the King sent and pacefied them: then leauing
D. Pedro Manriques for Gouernor general in Castile, he went in person towards Cordoua:
for Roderigo of Pereira Gouernor of Gacorla hauing entred rashly with three hundred

horse,Castillans defeated by the Moores. and one thousand foot into the country of Granado, had beene defeated and
most of his men cut in peeces by the Moores: but this losse was at the same instant reco^penced
by the taking of the towne and castle of Ximena by scalado, through the dilligence
of the Marshal Garcia of Herrera: wherefore the King hearing that the warre began
to grow hot, he made hast to approch nere vnto that frontier: being vpo^ the way, and
passing by Ciudad Real, there was a great earthquake, ouer a great part of the country;
for euen the city of Granado was shaken therewith. The King being come to Cordoua,
he sent the constable D. Aluaro de Luna with three thousand horse, who forraged the territories
of Illora, Trajara, Loxa, Archidona and other places in the champian country of
Granado, and then he returned towards Eccia.
In the meane time a knight,Moores. called Gilaire, who was by birth a christian, and had beene
taken being but eight yeers old, and instructed in the law of Mahumet, came to the King
at Cordoua, letting him vnderstand that there was a Knight of the Moores, descended
from King Mahumet Aben Alhamar, called the Vermeil, the ninth King of Granado, hee
who had beene slaine by D. Pedro King of Castile, called Ioseph Aben Almao, who was in
no good termes with Mahumet Aben Azar then raigning, and desired some fit occasion
to reuolt from him; wherefore if the King would enter into the plaine of Granado, hee
did assure him, that this Moore would come and ioyne presently with his army and reuolt
the whole realme in his fauor. This businesse being propounded in councel, they
were of opinion, that King Iohn should aduance with his forces, which were 80000.
fighting men. On the other side Mahumet Aben Azar assembled al his forces of Granado,
which amounted to two hundred thousand foote, and fiue thousand horse, with the
which hee came to make head against King Iohns army, with whom Ioseph Aben Almao
the Moore, had ioyned, with some troupes of horse. The armies being neere, about the
mountaine of Eluira, there were many skirmishes: so as on a Sonday the first day of
Iuly,Battaile of Figuiere w^ere the Moores were defeated. both the armies were drawne forth to battaile, in the which the Christians had the
victory. This was called the battaile of Figuere, for that it was fought in a country full
of figs, and is very famous in Spaine; for there died aboue ten thousand Moores, King
Iohn remayning so maister of the field, as he spoiled and burnt all round about the city of
Granado, and yet the Moores durst neuer come without their walles to defend their
houses and fields. The King of Castile had greater enterprises, but by the councell and
importunity of the Constable, he retired: they say the King of Granado had corrupted
him with good store of gold, which he sent him in a present of figs and dried raysins, which
made him so presse the Kings retreat: who beeing returned to Cordoua, and hauing giuen
order for the safety of the frontier, he came to Toledo, and from thence to Escalone,
where he was wonderfully feasted by the constable. After which the Estates were called
at Medina del Campo, at the which the peace with Portugal was confirmed, and there
was granted to the King of Castile by the deputies of the Prouinces, 45. millions of Marauidis,
for the charge and continuance of the warre against the Moores of Granado
whereof Ioseph Aben-Almao intituled himselfe King, by the aduice of D. Iohn King of Castile,
who did assist and fauor him all hee could to dispossesse Mahumet Aben-Azar: and
therefore he sent commandement to the captaines and Gouernors of the frontier, to assist
him in any thing hee should vndertake. This Moore was so well followed in a short
time by a good number of Knights of his sect which hated King Mahumet, as hauing surprized
Montefrio, he made it his residence and storehouse for the warre, the which he did
mannage with wisdome, valour and iudgement: and beeing aided and fauored by Don
Lewis of G^^man, maister of Calarraua, D. Diego of Riuera, and other Noblemen and
Christian captaines, within few daies hee tooke the townes of Cambil, Alicum, Illora,
Ronda, Isnajar, Archidena, Cacarobonella, Setenil, Turon, Hardales, Castellar and Loxa,
all which yeelded willingly, except the castle of Loxa, which held for king Mahumet, into
the which the Algazil Ioseph Aben Sa^rax had put a good garrison:Defeat of king Mahumet and the taking of Granado, by Ioseph Aben-Almao. but soone after
he beeing dead, it was yeelded to Ioseph Aben Almao, through the fauour of a route
the which hee gaue to Mahumets troupes: which victorie was of such consequence,
as the cittie of Granado opened her gates: so as King Mahumet beeing out of hope
to bee able to resist, going out of Alhambra, with that which was most deere and

precious, hee led with him the two sonnes of Mahumet the little, who had beene vanquished
and slaine by him, with a Sister to Captaine Coxo his Neece, and so fled to Malaga.
By this euent Ioseph Aben Almao remained King of Granado, in the beginning of the
yeare 1432.1432. Mahumet hauing raigned since his returne three yeares, and it was in the
815. yeare of the Arabians raigne.

Ioseph Aben Almao, the sixteenth
King of Granado.
THis new King Ioseph beeing receiued of the whole realme without contradiction,
the Crowne of Granado returned by him into the family of Mahumet Aben Alhamar,
or the Vermeil, who presently made himselfe vassall to the King of Castile, by whose
fauour hee had gotten the realme, promising a certaine tribute of money and other
things, whereof there were letters past, sealed with his seale of Gold. He did aduertise King
Iohn of the successe of this warre, and did attribute all the happinesse thereof to God
and him: informing him more-ouer of the siege which hee went to lay before Malaga,
wherein the King did assist him, as he had done before, commanding D. Diego of Ribera,
Gouernor of that fronter, to furnish him with men, victualls, and all sorts of aide in that
enterprise. Whilest these things were acting, there came a Gene^ois to Court, an Ambassador
from Muley Aben Ferriz, King of Tunes, who had charge to intreate King Iohn
to spare King Mahumet Aben Azer, and to finde some expedient for peace: but finding
the realme already possest by Ioseph, hee complained in the name of the King of Tunes
his maister, of the misfortune of Mahumet his Kinsman: to whom the King of Castile
answered pertinently, saying, that he had made warre against him for good and iust reasons,
for that hee had beene dayly informed that hee had secret Intelligence with the
Kings of Nauarre and Arragon his enemies. This Ambassador staied some dayes in the
Court of Castile,Mahumet Aben Azer recouers the realme of Granado. being then at Vailledolit. The raigne of Ioseph Aben Almao lasted not
aboue sixe moneths: for being old and broken, hee dyed that same yeare 1432. whereby
Mahumet Aben Az^r came to raigne againe the third time, who being aduertised of the
death of his Competitor, tooke all fit courses to make the Granadins obey him againe,
wherein the King of Castile did not oppose himselfe, it may be mooued at the request
of the King of Tunes, by his Ambassador, who returned well satisfied into Affrick, being
accompanied by Lope Alphonso of Lorca, sent by the King of Castile, that hee might
take with the King of Tunes some friendly expedient for peace, betwixt Castile and
Granado: and in the meane time there was a short truce granted to Mahumet, who made
a Knight called Audilbar, who had beene faithfull vnto him, his Alguazil Maior, in the
place of the deceased Ioseph Aben Sarrax.
The warre of Granado being ended after this manner: there fell out new occasions 
of trouble in the Court of Castile by the Kings credulitie,Castile. who willingly gaue eare to
reports, giuing him to vnderstanding that the Kings of Nauarre and Arragon had secret
intelligences with D. Pedro Fernandes of Velasco,Troubles in Castile by false reports. Earle of Haro, Guttiere Gomes of Toledo,
Bishop of Palence, and his Nephew D. Fernando Aluares of Toledo, with other
great men of Castile: wherevpon he staied some, imprisoned others, and many seeking
to escape, were brought back to Court, being then at Zamorra, and others escaped: so as
it was full of amazement and tumult. Of the number of the prisoners were the aboue-named
D. Fernando Aluares of Toledo, Bishop of Palenza, and the Earle of Haro, who
had the Court giuen him for prison, putting in caution. The Bishop was committed to
the castle of Muzientes, and D. Fernando his Nephew to that of Vruegna. D. Ferdinand
of Velasco the Earles brother fled away, and being come into his brothers country, hee
assured himselfe of the towne and places of strength there. Don Inigo Lopes of Mendoca,
Lord of Hita and Buitrago, hearing what had beene done in Court, and how
his friends and kinsmen were persecuted, hee fortified himselfe in Hita. There was no
matter found to charge and conuict these Noblemen, so as they were deliuered one

after an other, but the Bishop and his Nephew were the last of all. Don Iohn of Soto
Maior, Maister of Alcantara remained, who beeing in disgrace with the King, and afterwards
reconciled, yet hee fell againe into dislike, so as Don Henry Infant of Portugal
was enforced to imploy himselfe to restore him to grace. The King gaue charge to
Doctor Franc to end all differences with him, who conferring with Diego of Manjarres
Treasurer of Alcantara, they ended all matters, so as the Maister had reason to bee contented:
but hee shewed himselfe so indiscreet, as hee reiected all that they had concluded:
and notwithstanding that the Doctor sought to satisfie him in all his demands, yet
he was so transported with his passions, as contemning the King, and all them that treated
in his name, he called D. Henry and D. Pedro Infant of Arragon, remaining at Albuquerque
to deliuer them Alcantara, and the forts which depended. The Maister going
from Alcantara to Valencia, before he had gone two leagues, he had a conceit that hee
should not be safe in that towne; wherefore he returned to Albuquerque, to the Infant
D. Henry: And for that he feared to be surprized in the towne, he desired to lodge in the
castle, whether also Doctor Franc was led prisoner. Wherevpon it was giuen out,
that the Infant Don Henry kept the Maister of Alcantara prisoner in the castle of Albuquerque:
wherewith Guttiere of Soto Maior, great Commander of Alcantara, nephew
to the Maister, being much discontented, he staied the Infant Don Pedro prisoner
at Alcantara, the whole people consenting therevnto. Don Frederic Admirall of Castile
being aduertised of these things, hee went post to Alcantara, with all his horsemen,
to the end this prisoner might bee deliuered vnto him, to conduct him vnto the King,
but the Commander would not yeeld him: The Admirall wisht him to keepe him in
safe gard, promising him a great recompence in the Kings name, and from thence hee
went and spoiled the country about Albuquerque.
The detention of the Infant Don Pedro, did much trouble Don Henry his brother,
who caused the Maister to goe to field, to let the world know that hee was no prisoner:
but for all this the Commander would not release Don Pedro: for the King
tempting the couetousnesse and ambition of this man,Nephew betrayes his vncle through ambition. promised to make him maister
of Alcantara in his Vncles place: so as it appeared to all men, that in retaining
Don Pedro, hee had more hope to aduance him-selfe, then charitie to his Vncle, who
indeed was depriued of his Maistership, the Commander aduanced vnto it, and the
Inhabitants of Alcantara, for their forwardnesse in the taking of the Infant, were
endowed with great priuiledges. Don Henry seeing his affaires in very bad estate, fearing
they should vse his brother vnworthily,Infants of Ar^agon loose all their lands in Castile. he had recourse vnto the King of Portugal,
to mediate his peace with the King, and his brothers deliuery: by whose meanes an accord
was made with this condition, that the sort of Albuquerque, and all others that the Infants
did hold, should bee deliuered into the Kings hands, and they depriued of all their
lands in Castile.
These things happened in the yeare 1432. when as King Iohn gaue the title of a Citty
to the towne of Victoria,Admirable Snow in Na^^r and Arrago^. the chief in the prouince of Alaua. About the end of this yeare
there fell such aboundance of Snow in Nauarre and Arragon, as the townes and bourroughs
were in a manner besieged, the Snow continuing forty dayes together, so as they
could not go from one place to another: and the long continuance thereof made many
beasts, yea the most sauage, and birds of all sorts, to come familiarly into their houses, being
prest with hunger, and suffer themselues to be taken, as if they had put off their naturall
wildnesse, and were become tame, a presage of future miserie.
The truce betwixt the King of Castile, and Mahumet Aben Azar King of Granado
being expired,An. 1433. in the yeare 1433. there were new supplies of men sent vnto the frontiers
of Andalusia, vnder the command of Don Fernand Aluares of Toledo, Lord of Val-decorneja,
who tooke Benamaruel and Bencalema from the Moores: and the Estates of
Castile were held at Madrid, where they treated to continue this holy warre.
This yeare D. Iohn King of Portugal,Portugal. Death of Don Iohn King of Portugal. dyed in the Castell of Lisbone, a Prince full of
yeares, leauing his realme in peace, and a happy memory of his gouernment, hee was
seauenty seauen yeares old when hee dyed, and had raigned forty nine yeares. His
body was layed in the Cathedrall Church at Lisbone, and afterwards buryed in the

royall Monasterie of S. Mary of the battell. Before he left this world, he saw a son borne
of D. Edward his sonne and successor of the Realme, and of Donna Leonora of Arragon
his wife, who was named Don Alphonso, and raigned after the father.


D. Edward the first of that name, and 11.
King of Portugall.
DOn Edward was presently after proclaymed king in the pallace of Alcacaua, in the
presence of his breethren D. Henry Master of the Order of Christ, and duke of Viseo,
the Infant Don Iohn, Maister of Saint Iames of Portugal, and Constable of the realm,
Don Pedro of Meneses Earle of Viana, the bishop of Ebora and many other Prelates and
Knights: whereas the bishop of Ebora did celebrate the ceremonie. They say, that the
Noblemen being assembled to celebrate this act, a Iew, Phisitian to the new king, and very
learned in astrologie, came and presented himself vnto the assembly, beseeching them
to deferre it vntill noone, with assurance that he had obserued some bad constellation,
threatning that Kings raigne, that should be receiued at that houre. The king (who was
better instructed, touching these prognostications) would haue them proceed without
delay, wherefore the Iew replyed, that the king should raigne little, and with great troble.
He was one and forty yeares old when he began to raigne, and had beene married
fiue yeares before, too late for a Prince that was heire to a great Estate. His wife Donna
Leonora was daughter to King Fernand, who of Duke of Pegnafiel had bene made king
of Arragon, by election of the arbitrators deputed by the Estates of the countrie, borne
of Donna Leonora of Albuquerque,Genealogie of Portugal. who was issued of the bdoud royall of Castile and
Portugall: for Donna Beatrix her mother was daughter to the king Don Pedro, and sister
to Don Iohn king of Portugal, borne of the faire and happie Agnes of Castro, and the
father was Don Sancho sonne to Don Alphonso king of Castile, the last. Of this Princesse
of Arragon king Edward had Don Alphonso, his eldest, and successor to the Crowne of
Portugall, borne in the pallace of Sintra, in the yeare 1432. then D. Fernand his second
sonne this yeare 1433, who was Duke of Viseo, and married Donna Beatrix his cousin
germaine* daughter to D. Iohn, Master of S. Iames, and the third Constable of Portugal:
of which marriage was borne Donna Leonora Queene of Portugall, wife to Don Iohn
the second: and also D. Izabella Dutchesse of Bragance, and Don Dominicke Duke of
Viseo, and Don Manuel who came to raigne in Portugal, from whome is descended the
last King Don Sebastian by the masculine line. Besides these two sonnes, Donna Leonora
brought king Edward, her husband, foure daughters, D. Philip who dyed being but eleuen
yeares old, stricken with the plague at Lisbon, D. Leonora married to the Emperour Fredericke
the third, father and mother to the Emperor Maximilian of Austria, the first of
that name, the third was D. Catherina, who was betrothed to Don Charles Prince of Viana,
heire of Nauar, and afterwards to Edward the fourth King of England, and yet married
neither of them, but dyed a mayd: the fourth was D. Ieanne, a very faire Princesse,
who married with Don Henry the fourth, king of Castile. This was the issue of king Edward,
who is numbred for the eleuenth king of Portugall, vnfortunate at the least in this,
that during his raigne the plague neuer ceased to consume his people: yet he was a louer
of iustice, for the administration wherof he deputed euery three moneths one of his brethren,
an Earle and a Bishop, commanding them to do Iustice to euery man, and to suppresse
all excesse: he was sober in speech, and in his manner of liuing, as much as any
Prince of his time: he did limit the expences of his Wardrobe to fiue hundred doublons
of gold by the yere, he caused both gold and siluer to be coyned of a good Standard. His
residence at his first comming to the crowne was at Belin: there his brother the Infant D.
Pedro the Traueller, duke of Coimbra, came and kist his hands, and sware vnto him fealty
and homage.
The first yeare of his raigne, and the second of the age of his sonne Don Alphonso, hee

caused him to be sworne the lawfull heire of the Crowne, by the assembled at Sintra, and
would haue him called Prince,Title of Prince first vsurped by the eldest sonne (...) Portugall. a title first vsurped by him in Portugall, following the
example of the eldest of other Christian kings, his neighbors in Spaine. After this solemnitie,
he caused the bodie of the king his father to be transported, whose obsequies
were the most royall and stately that euer were made for any king of Portugall. For two
moneths space that he lay in the cathedrall Church, there were thirtie Masses sayd euery
day, and an aniuersarie once a weeke, the bodie beeing accompanied, and watched euery
night by a great number of clerkes and religious men,Stately funerals of King Iohn of Portugal. singing diuers suffrages for the
soule of the deceased. The bodie beeing to be transported, it was layed vpon an high bed,
garnished with many banners and trophees, and it was watched in the night by the Infant
Don Pedro, beeing accompanied by a great number of gentlemen, Don Fernand
Arch-bishop of Braga the kings nephew, doing the seruice, who the next day sung Masse
in his pontificall habit, with great state and ceremonie, after which and the Sermon made
by Friar Giles Lobo the kings Confessor, the bodie was layed vpon a chariot, and conducted
by the new street, where there was another Sermon made, and a third in S. Domingo:
after which it was accompanied with a great procession out of the towne, and conducted
by the king and the Princes to the Monasterie of S. Denis of Oduiella, distant a league
and an halfe from Lisbon, where it rested that night, where as the Infant Don Henry,
Master of the Order of Christ, with his commanders watched: from thence it was carried
to Villafranca, where they made another pause: the Infant Don Iohn Master of Saint
Iames, with his Commanders, watching that night: Passing on the next day with the like
pompe, they came to Arcoentre; where it rested againe, and the bodie was watched by
the Infant D. Fernand Master of Auiz, with his commanders. Continuing the next day,
they came to Alcouaca, where they made the fourth pause, and there watched D. Alphonso
Earle of Barcellos, brother to the Infants aboue-named* accompanied by his two
sonnes, Don Diego Earle of Oren, and Marquis of Valencia, and Don Fernand Earle of
Arroyolos, and Marquis of Villavitiosa, in all which places there was Euensong and vigils
sayd at night when it arriued, and in the morning before it parted Masse being sung
pontifically by the abbot of Alcouaca, and the Bishops of Ebora and la Garde, in all
places: in the end they came to the Hermitage of Saint George in the place of battel, with
the like procession, pompe and ceremonie, as they came out of Lisbone. The Hermite
came foorth to meet it, and did accompanie it to the royall Monasterie of the battell,
where it was receiued, and layd in a royall sepulchre, with great and sollemne Masses, and
other ceremonies,Modesty of the Infant D. Pedro, and his ^^her vertues. and very rich offerings, where as aboue all others the pietie and filiall
duty of the Infant D. Pedro, was remarkable, in which good and kind offices hee continued
towards king Edward his brother, in the gouernement of the affaires of the realm
committed vnto him.
This Prince is much commended by the Portugals for his modestie, affirming, that he
would neuer suffer any one to kisse his hand, nor to speake to him kneeling, nor to vse any
other tearmes of submission accustomed to great men: Hee loued learning and learned
men greatly, and himselfe did write some Treaties of the gouernement of Princes, and
made some traductions out of the Latine tongue into the vulgar Portugal, not without
learning and iudgement: He had a particular deuotion to Michael the arch-angell, as he
was instructed by the Diuines of that age, wherefore he carried a ballance for his deuice,
and was a great builder of Temples and holy places: He caused Saint Michael of Penela,
and Auero to be built: and in the same towne he was the founder of the Monasterie of
Piety of the preaching Friars, and of the church of Tentuble: and of the hospitall of Saint
Eloy: he made a collegiall Monasterie, as it is at this present. Besides which buildings, hee
caused the Estates to be built in the city of Lisbon, to lodge Courtiers, to ease the inhabitants
of that troublesome, and many times preiudiciall subiection. This Prince was
husband to Donna Izabella of Arragon, daughter to Don Iames Earle of Vrgel, and of
D. Izabella Infanta of Arragon, daughter to Don Pedro the fourth of that name. Of D.
Iames, I say, who thinking to raigne in Arragon after the decease of D. Martin, rebelled
against the determination of the arbitrators, who had chosen Don Fernand of Castile
for King, the which cost him his libertie, and estates, goods, and dignities, whereof being

depriued, he dyed a prisoner. The Infant Don Pedro had by this Ladie Donna Izabella,
Don Pedro who was third Constable of Portugall, who in the warres which the Cattelans
had against Don Iohn king of Nauarre, heire to his brother Don Alphonso King of
Arragon, he was chosen King of Arragon, and dyed in that warre, with that title. Moreouer
he had Don Iohn future king of Cypres, husband to Donna Izabella, whome Don
Alphonso the fifth of that name, her cousin germaine married: a princesse hauing her deuotion
and hope directed to Saint Iohn the Euangelist, in whose honor shee caused the
Monasterie at Lisbon to be built, dedicated to him on the toppe of Euxobregas. With
these two sonnes he had D. Philippe, who liued a religious woman in the Monasterie of
Odiuelas, and was so giuen to studie, as she translated into the Portugal tongue, a worke
of Laurence Iustinians Patriarke of Venice and of Aquilea, founder of the Order of S.
George of Alaga, moreouer, Don Iames and Donna Beatrix, who were retired after their
fathers decease, by Donna Izabella, Dutchesse of Bourgondie, their aunt. Don Iames was
aduanced to spirituall liuings, afterwards made a Cardinall, and Arch-bishop of Lisbone,
and Donna Beatrix was married to the Lord of Rauestein, nephew to the Duke
of Bourgondie.Cardinall dyes a virgin. This Cardinall dyed a Virgin, as they say, at Florence, where he was buried,
in the time of Pius the second.
In the beginning of the yeare 1431. there had beene a generall councell called,Councel of Basil. the
which was continued by Pope Eugenius Successor to Martin the fifth, in the cittie of Basill,
this yeare 1433. but afterwards the fathers were diuided, and the Pope himselfe, finding
the councell not plyable to his affections, transferred it to Ferrara, and from thence
to Horence. In this councell of Basill, the Fathers beeing assembled, they were spectaters
of a combate betwixt a gentleman of a Portugal race, but borne in Castile, called
Iohn de Merle, and Henry of Rauestan a knight of Bourgondie, who fought on foot, and
the Bourgondian was vanquished. The same de Merle had a little before fought a combate
on horsebacke, with the like happinesse, in the cittie of Arras against Peter of Brecemont,
Lord of Charny, in the presence of D. Philip.
King Edward hauing finished his fathers funerals, and all solemnities, oaths, reception
of fealtie and homage, and other accustomed duties, at the first comming of Kings, hee
assembled the Estates of his Realme at S. Iren,An. 1434. in the yeare 1434. to consult concerning
the gouernement thereof: from thence there was an ambassador sent to the councell of
Basill, which was D. Diego Earle of Oren, beeing accompanied with many learned men
and Prelates of Portugal: and then the warre against the Moores was propounded, after
the example of Kings his Predecessors: It was also held conuenient to continue that
which King Iohn had begun in Affricke: for the execution whereof he obtained a Croisado
from the apostolike Sea of Rome, by the meanes of the Earle of Oren, who brought
the Bull into Portugall.
The King of Castile also sent many of his Prelates and Diuines to the Councell,Castile. during
the which Don Alphonso Carillo, Bishop of Siguenca and Cardinall, dyed, whose
Bishoppricke was giuen to his Nephew, carrying the same name, who in time came to
be Archbishop of Toledo. The ambassadors for the king of Castile at this councell were
D. Aluaro of Osorno, Bishop of Cuenca, D. Iohn de Sylua Lord of Cyfuentes, Standard-bearer
to the king, and Doctor Alphonso of Carthagena, Deane of S. Iames and Segobia,
sonne to D. Pablo Bishop of Burgos; which Bishoppricke Don Alphonso obtayned in his
life time,Controuersie betwixt England and Castile for precedencie. he being preferred to be Patriarke of Aquilea. There falling out a great question
in the councell betwixt the ambassadors of England and Castile for the precedence,
this Doctor Don Alphonso of Carthagena did so well defend the preheminence of the
crowne of Castile, and gaue such pertinent reasons for the dignity and prerogatiue therof,
as the fathers gaue the precedence to the ambassador of Castile, wherein the Doctor
was held to haue done great seruice to his countrie of Spaine, whereof he himselfe hath
made a treatise: notwithstanding Raphael Volaterran, in his third booke, and last chapter,
sayth. That in the time of D. Fernand the 5. this cause was pleaded againe at Rome, and
ended in fauor of the king of England, who had giuen sentence by prouision, without
any great examination of the cause.
Returning to the politicke affaires of Castile, the King D. Iohn being aduertised that

Don Fredrick of Arragon,D. Frederick of Arragon Earle of Luna a prisoner in Castile. Earle of Luna, would haue seized vppon the citty of Seuile,
he caused him to be apprehended at Medina del campo, and to be carried to the Castle
of Bracuelos, which is neere vnto Olmedo, where he ended his dayes, and many of his
confederates were put to death, who for that cause were brought to Medina del campo.
The warre begun in Granado, continued with variable successe, for after the taking of
Benamaruel, by Don Diego of Ribera, Lord of Val de Corneja, Gouernor of the fronter
of Andalusia, attempting the towne of Alora, hee had beene slaine by the Inhabitants,
and them that defended it: after whose death, the King gaue the gouernement to D. Pedro
Alfan his sonne, a young man but fifteene yeares old. Don Roderigo Manriques somwhat
to ease this losse, tooke the towne of Huescar by scalado, and the castle afterwards
by ^ight: for the recouerie of which place, there were enterprises and incounters betwixt
the Christians and the Moores, all that yeare, 1434. in the which dyed D. Iohn of Contreras,
Arch-bishop of Toledo, and Primat of Spaine: and to him succeeded D. Iohn of
Crezuela, brother by the mothers side to the Constable D. Aluaro de Luna.
About that time the king of Castile gaue vnto the Earle of Armagnac (who had alwaies
shewed himself his great friend and partizan in the wars against Nauar) the towns
of Cangas and Tinco, with the title of an Earle: and there arriued at Madrid ambassadors
from Charles the 7. the French king, to renew the league betwixt France and Castile, to
whom the king gaue audience in great state, and sitting on a high throne he gaue them
a good and friendly answer, who after much feasting, were sent home well satisfied: there
they did see a tame lyon lying at the kings feet, a thing which is not ordinarie.
The same yeare dyed D. Henry of Villena,Death of Don Henry of Villena. the kings vncle, son to D. Pedro, and nephew
or grand-child to D. Alphonso of Arragon, who had beene Marquis of Villena, and first
Constable of Castile: a Prince abusing learning, wherein he had beene bred, giuing himselfe
to infamous Magicke arts, whereof he had written many treatises, the which by the
kings commandement, and by the censure of Friar Lopes of Barientos, then Schoole-master
to D. Henry Prince of the Asturia's, were for the most part burnt. The king beeing in
pilgrimage at Guadalupe,Defeate of the Master of Alcantara by the Moores. D. Guttiere of Soto maior, the new Master of Alcantara, being
entred into the Moores countrie with 800. horse and 400. foot, was surprized and compassed
in by the Moors in a streight passage, so as there hardly escaped an hundred of his
whole troupe. This crosse shold haue admonished him of the bad office he had done his
vncle, and the Infant D. Pedro: the which although they would couer with a colour of the
kings seruice, yet was it a plotted treason: D. Fernand Aluares of Toledo, Lord of Val de
Corneja, had bin also in danger, if he had not speedily retired from Huelma, which hee
sought to force, hauing failed to take it by scalado: for a great number of Moores marched
to fight with him, and hee had not sufficient forces to resist them. Hauing retyred
with his men to Taen, he entred by Guadix, scoured the country, and was sharply incountred
by the Moores, who notwithstanding were vanquished: D. Fernand Aluares spoiling
two leagues round about Guadix.
 The truce betwixt Castile, Nauarre and Arragon beeing expired in the yeare 1435.
there came ambassadors to the court of Castile,Arragon. from the Queenes of Arragon and Nauar,
to beseech the king for a propagation of the truce, in the absence of their husbands,
which the king granted them for some moneths: the which was the sooner obtained by
their sending of D. Iohn de Luna, the Constables cousin, who gouerned the king his Master.
These two kings, breethren, were gone into Italy, to poursue the realme of Naples,
where matters succeeded as followeth: After that king D. Alphonso (being called back into
Spaine, for matters which concerned him nere, namely, for the imprisonment of his brother
D. Henry) had left Naples, Queen Ioane and her adopted sonne Lewis of Anjou, had
some time of breathing, and means to recouer the city of Naples, and other places of the
realme; there only remained Iohn Anthony of Vrsins, Prince of Tarentum, a partisan to k.
D. Alphonso, who made head against Lewis duke of Aniou: the duke making war in Calabria,
was surprized with a burning feuer, whereof he died at Cosenza, in the yere 1434
not leauing any children:Death of Ioane Queen of Naples, and her will. and the same yeare dyed Queen Ioane also, leauing by her will
(whether it were true or counterfeit) Rene of Aniou, duke of Lorraine and Bar, brother to
Lewis deceased, heire of the realme of Naples, who was at that time a prisoner in the

hands of Philip Duke of Bourgondie, by reason of the warre betwixt the French and the
English: for whose libertie the Gouernors of the Realm, chosen after the Queens death,
sent ambassadors into France: but on the other side those that were affected to the house
of Arragon, as the Prince of Tarentum, Iohn Anthony of Marzan Duke of Sessa, Christopher
Gaetan,D. Alphonso (...) back to Napies. Earle of Fondy, and Roger his brother, with other Noblemen and knights
which held Capua, called backe King Alphonso, who a little before was come into Sicily,
hauing left the Queene D. Maria his wife, Regent in Arragon, and had led his breethren
with him. D. Iohn king of Nauarre, who had left the gouernement to D. Bla^che his wife,
Queene proprietarie of the Realme, D. Henry and D. Pedro, who being dispossessed of all
they held in Castile, had retired themselues vnder the fauor of the kings their breethren,
with them, and many Noblemen and Knights, as well Spaniards, as Sicilians, King Alphonso
past into the Realme of Naples, and came and landed at Gaye^e, in which place
were besides the Inhabitants, and other souldiers of the countrie 300. Geneuois, vnder
the command of Francis Spinola of Genoua, sent by Philippe Maria Angelo, Duke of Milan,
vnder whose protection the common-weale of Genoua was at that time, and who
held the partie of Rene Duke of Anjou. The beseeged seeing themselues prest, aduertised
the Duke of their extremity, and what need they had of succors: whereupon he presently
gaue order to prepare an armie at Genoua, of the which Blaise Araxeto was General,
beeing accompanied by Elisa Spinola, Iames Iustinian, Galiot Lomelin, and other famous
Captaines and expert at sea,Army sent (...) suecor Gaycte. who directed their course towards the Iland of Ponce, wherof
king Alphonso, who was before Gayete, beeing aduertised, hauing nineteene great
ships, and eleuen gallies, he left onely fiue to continue the seege, and resolued to go in
person with the rest to encounter the enemie: but he must first pacifie a question which
was growne betwixt the King of Nauar, for the generall conduct of the armie, with his
brother D. Henry, either of them aspiring to haue it, mooued with zeale to ayde their
brother.
Hauing set sayle, Don. Pedro hauing charge of the gallies, the Kings and the Infants
euery one apart, well appointed, came to incounter the Geneuois armie, the which did
consist of twelue great ships, three gallies, one galeasse, and a foist. Being in sight, and
within a league and a halfe one of another, the Geneuois seemed as if they would not
fight: the kings army kept it selfe together till noone, striuing to get the wind, that they
might fight with more aduantage: In the meane time the gallies of Arragon discouered
the enemies armie, which approched neere vnto them, finding that they had left three
great ships behind, as it were for a rereward. Before they came to joyne the Generall of
the Geneuois armie, sent a trumpet in a boate to let the king of Arragon vnderstand, that
their intent was not to hurt him, but they had onely put to sea to draw out of Gayete,
their souldiers, cittizens, and merchants of Genoua, with their goods and merchandize,
and to transport them to Genoua. The trumpet was detayned a good time, during their
consultation, but the conclusion was, that they must charge them: for it was likely, that
the Geneuois had sent this trumpet, for that they fainted, and feared the Arragonois army.
The captaines and souldiers, with great demonstrations of courage, cryed out for
battell, and presently discharged their artillerie, which the Geneuois did presently answer,
so as grapling ship to ship, and galley to galley, the fight was furious and cruell,
and continued long doubtfull, vntill that the three great ships left by the Geneuois in the
teereward, hauing gotten a full wind, came with great violence vppon the ships of Arragon,
and among others giuing the stemme to that in which King Alphonso was,
they made it lye on the one side, and had so shaken and shattered it, as it tooke in an aboundance
of water, and put the king and all them that were in it in great danger, so as
he was forced to yeeld to Iames Iustinian, Gouernor of the Iland of Scio, who took him
into Spinola's ship.
The shippe wherein King Iohn did fight,Prisoners taken in a battell at se^. hauing lost her maine-yard, yeelded, and was
taken by Galiot Lomalin. Don Henry was prisoner to Cyprian de Mare. With these Princes
there were taken D. Diego Gomes of Sandoual, Earle of Castro Xeris, and two of his
sons, D. Iohn of Sotomajor, who had beene Master of Alcantara, Ruy Diaz of Mendoca
the bald, Fernando Aualos Chamberlaine to D. Henry, and another Sonne of Don Ruy

Lopes d'Aualos, who had beene constable of Castile, with many other Noblemen and
Knights of Arragon, Nauarre, Cattelogne and Valencia, and aboue 600. souldiers and
marriners slaine. The Infant D. Pedro, leaping with the helpe of a cable from one galley
to another, escaped: there were 13. ships taken, and most of the gallies were burnt, or
sunke, after they had spoiled them. To conclude, the Geneuois victorie was great and memorable,
as well in regard of the prisoners, as of the rich spoyles who shewed all curtesie
and humanity, for after the end of the fight, they did set at liberty aboue 400. souldiers,
that were prisoners, besides marriners, retayning only the chiefe men: wherein they did
wisely, and like souldiers, for a multitude of prisoners of meane qualitie, are but an incumber:
and it is an vnprofitable charge, and doth many times make the vanquished take corage
to rebell, and to become Masters of them that hold them. Among the multitude
that were set at liberty, there were many Knights of great worth escaped vnknowne. That
which gaue the aduantage to the Geneuois army, was the 3. ships left in the rereward,
the abundance of scalding lime, and wild-fire which they cast, and finally, that they were
better sea-men then the Arragonois.
The victorious army approching neere to the Iland of Ischia,Magnanimity of king of Alphonso. King Don Alphonso being
a prisoner was prest to make it yeeld vnto the Geneuois, wherunto although he were
a captiue, he would not yeeld. By this defeate the seege was raysed at Gayete, and the prisoners
carryed to Sauona, from whence they were afterwards, by the Duke of Milans
commandement, distributed into diuers prisons: King Don Alphoso to Pauia, with
Don Henry and others: King Iohn, the Earle of Castro, and Ruy Diaz of Mendoca were
led to Milan.
These lamentable newes did wonderfully trouble the Queens of Arragon and Nauar,
and all the people of these two Kingdomes, especially Donna Leonora the widow-queen
of Arragon, who liued in her Monasterie of Saint Iohn de las Duegnas, without the
walles of Medina del campo, very simply and modestly, who conceiued so great a griefe
as shee dyed soone after: This did much afflict the King and Queene of Portugall, and al
the Noblemen of that Realme. The imprisonment of these Princes and Noblemen was
short, for Don Philip Maria beeing courteous, and visiting his prisoners often, hee
was so perswaded by king Alphonso, that both he and his Estates should reape more profit
in maintaining the partie of Arragon,Bounty of the duke of Milan then that of France, as vanquished with his
reasons, hee not onely let them all go free without ransome, but gaue them many
rich presents, after that he had entertayned them royally many dayes, suffering them to
go and come with all libertie, where they pleased. Hee caused Don Iohn, King of Nauarre,
and Don Henry his brother, to bee conducted to Porto Venere with sixe hundred
horse for their guard, where they were receiued by Don Pedro their brother, and moreouer
he would that the Neapolitane Knights which were then at Milan, and the ambassadors
of townes should take an oath of fealtie to King Alphonso, acknowledging him for
their king, making so great a change of all things, as of an enemie he became a partisan
and friend to the Arragonois: by reason whereof the Geneuois being incensed, rebelled
against the Duke.
If the newes of the defeat and taking of these Princes, caused great heauinesse in Arragon
and Nauarre, the ioy was so much the greater, when as they vnderstood of their deliuerie,
the which was carried into Castile, where as the king of Nauarre was much desired
of many, to whom the greatnesse of the Constable D. Aluaro de Luna, was offensiue
and hurtfull, Don Fredericke Admirall of Castile, who was one of them, sent a messenger
to Queene Blanche, aduertising her that her husbands absence was very preiudiciall
to himself and all his friends, for that his aduersaries grew great according to their owne
desires, and therefore she should do well to hasten his returne as soone as might be: The
like aduertisements were giuen her by many other knights of Castile, wherefore she sent
three knights of her houshold into Italy, to the king her husband: which were Iohn Henriques
of Lacarra, Sancho Ramires of Aualos her caruer, and the Seigneur of Vertiz, to hasten
his returne.
 D. Iohn king of Castile at the request of his sister Queen Mary of Arragon, continued
the truce fiue moneths longer,Castile. vpon the newes of the defeat of the two kings brethren.

Being at Segobia, there was a Germain knight called Robert presented himself vnto him,
who would make triall of armes, with D. Iohn Pimentel Earle of Majorga, by whom he
was vanquished. The like proofe being made by other twenty Germaine knights, which
came in the company of Robert; had in a manner the like issue, to the dishonour of strangers,
and great commendation of the Spanish nation. D. Fernand of Gneuara, a knight
of great valour, being at Vienna, the chiefe towne of Austria, he fought within a list on
foot, with a Germaine knight called Vourapach, in the presence of Duke Albert sonne-in-law
to the Emperor Sigismond, who casting his staffe, caused the combat to cease, and
put them out of the lists, to the great honour of the Spanish knight. Don Iohn of Pimentel
Earle of Majorga, desirous to trie his valour with strange Knights out of Castile, as he
practised to play with a battell-axe with a seruant of his called Lope de la Torre, hee was
strucke by him consideratly on the face, so as he dyed soone after; a due reward for this
quarrelling exercise, which was then in so great estimation, to go seeking honor, (without
cause or quarrell) in the force and dexterity of the body, more then in the gifts of the
mind, humanity and iustice.
Whilest that King Iohn was busie at Aleala of Henares to celebrate the funerals of his
deceased aunt Queene Leonora, there was hot warre made vpon the fronter of Granado,
where as D. Alphonso Ianes Fajardo, receiued the townes of Velez the white, and Velez
the red, which yeelded voluntarily to the king of Castile, the Inhabitants Moores promising
to pay him the same tribute which they payed to king Mahumet, wherewith the
King was satisfied: but he would not heare the ambassadours of Baca and Guadix, who
came to beseech him to giue them another king a Moore, then Mahumet, for that he did
intreat them ill: but k. Iohn knowing that this was but a deuice to free themselues from
the spoile which he intended against them, he sent them away, and commanded his captaines
to forrage and spoile their countrie, the which was executed by D. Fernand Aluares
of Toledo. The Moores of Galea and Castilegia yeelded to D. Roderigo Manriques,
vpon the same conditions like vnto them of Velez. It fell out vnfortunatly for D. Henry
of Guzman, the seege which he pretended to lay to Gibraltar: for being come by sea with
some barkes before the towne, whether his sonne Iohn of Guzman should come by land
with the rest of his forces to beseege it, he had no patience to attend, but landed, and began
to skirmish on the shoare, neere vnto the walles, with the Moores which sallyed out against
him, but the sea flowing, it forced him to retire to his barke, leauing many of his
Knights on land, in prey to the enemie, who began to cry out and to complaine, that he
had left them there to the slaughter, with such vehement words, as mooued to pittie, hee
caused his barke to approch to land to receiue them: but it was so ouer-laden as in sunke,
and there the Earle Don Henry,D. Henry of Guzman drowned neere Gibraltar. with about forty Knights were drowned, whose losse was
great. The bodies beeing cast vppon the shoare, were drawne to land by the Moores,
and the Earles was put into a coffer, and set vppon an high tower, to be a terriour to the
Christians, where it continued some yeares. By this pittifull successe, the sonne retired
from Gibraltar, and out of all Andalusia with teares and mourning: the bones of this
Earle are at this present in a most auncient Tower made of Bricke, in the highest part of
the castell of Gibraltar, which the common people beleeue was built and erected by
Hercules.
 Whilest that these things past in Spaine, in the yeare 1436.Nauarre. 1436. the Kings of Arragon and
Nauarre were deepely ingaged in the warre of Naples, whither the Dutchesse Izabell of
Lorraine, wife to Rene of Anjou a prisoner was come, and with the helpe of Pope Eugenius
defended her husbands right couragiously. The two breethren kings beeing aduertised
of the affaires of Spaine, by their friends and seruants, they resolued to send a ioynt
ambassage to the king of Castile, to treat a peace with him vppon some good conditions.
The ambassadors found the Court at Toledo, where hauing deliuered their charge
vnto the king, it pleased God that after many conferences and debates, a peace was concluded
vpon a promise of marriage betwixt D. Blanche Infanta of Nauarre, and Don
Henry of Castile, Prince of the Asturia's, with these conditions:
That the solemnization of this marriage should bee accomplished within the limite
of a certaine time, betwixt Henry heire of the Realmes of Castile, and Donna Blanche,

eldest daughter to D. Iohn king of Nauarre,Conditions of peace betwixt Castile, Nauar and Ar^agon. to whom should be assigned the Marquisat
of Villena, the townes of Medina del campo, Olmedo, Coca, Roa, and Aranda: the reuenues
of which lands, D. Iohn King of Nauarre should receiue the foure next following
yeares. That if there were no children borne of this marriage, the king of Nauarre should
haue ten thousand florins of gold of yearely rent assigned vpon the reuenues of Castile.
That to D. Blanche, Queene of Nauarre, and to her sonne D. Charles, should in like manner
be giuen an assignation of ten thousand florens of gold yearely, during their liues.
That all knights should be pardoned, which during the warres, and fore-passed quarrels,
had followed either partie, and they restored to their goods and dignities, except on the
part of Castile, D. Iohn of Soto-major, who had beene Master of Alcantara, and the
Earle of Castro Xeris: and on the behalfe of Nauar, D. Godfrey of Nauar, Earle of Cortes:
Item, that to the Infant D. Henry brother to the kings of Arragon and Nauar, should
be assigned 5000. florens of gold of yearely hereditarie rent: and to the Infanta D. Catherina
his wife should be giuen 50000. florens of gold in ready mony for her dowrie. These
articles beeing accorded, a peace was proclaimed in the Realmes of Castile, Arragon,
and Nauar, and D. Pedro of Acugna, son to Lopes Basques of Acugna, Lord of Buendia,
was sent to Azagna, with sufficient authority, to make the first promise in the name of
Prince Henry, and it was concluded the sollemne betrothing should be at Alfaro, whether
came at the time assigned, the Prince D. Henry accompanied by D. Aluaro de Luna,
constable of Castile, and many other Noblemen, Knights, and Prelates, who arriuing
two dayes before the Infanta: being aduertised that she was at Corella, he went to meete
her with all his traine. The Queen of Nauarre, mother to the Infanta, Prince Charles her
brother, the Bishop of Pampelone, with many other Prelates, Peter of Peralta, Lord Steward
of the kings house, Leon of Garro, and other knights, many Ladies and Gentlewomen
of Nauarre attended her, all in equipage worthy of such a solemnitie, the which was
celebrated in Alfaro, in the yeare 1437. D. Pedro of Castile, Bishop of Osma stipulating
and receiuing the promises, either of them being but 12. yeares old. The Prince D. Henry
gaue many goodly and rich Iewels to the Infanta, and vsed the like bountie to the Ladies
and Knights of her traine. Then hauing spent foure dayes at Alfaro in great feasting and
ioy, the parties separated themselues, euery one retiring into his country. By this peace
there was also restored vnto the king of Nauar, the town and castle of la Garde, and the castles
of Asaturuguen and Burandon: and towards Guipuscoa, there were yeelded the castles
and places of Gorriti, Cobono, Toro, Araciel, and Saragana, which the Guipuscoans
had taken during the wars. Moreouer, the towne of Briones was yeelded to the king
of Nauar, touching the Seigneurie and the reuenue, but the Soueraignty remayned to
the king of Castile. This peace was promised and sworne, vpon a penalty of 300000. florens
of gold, payable by him that should breake it: and it was confirmed by the chiefe officers
of either realme, both clergy and secular, and by the deputies of the chiefe townes.
For Nauar, there signed D. Martin of Peralta bishop of Pampelona, the archb. of Tyre,
the Queens confessor, the Prior of S. Iohn, and the Deane of Tudele, clergy-men: D. Lewis
of Beaumont, Tristan Lord of Luce, Peter of Peralta, Lord Steward, Philip Marshall of
Nauar, and Vicont of Ro, with other knights: moreouer, the deputies of the cities of Pampelona,
Estella, and Tudela* and of the towns of Sanguesse, Olite, Arcos, Biane, S. Vincent
and others. For Castile, besides the great officers of court, there did sweare all the Noblemen
of the fronter of Guipuscoa, Rioja, and others, yea they of the families of Lazcano,
Berastequi and Amezqueta: and these accords were written by Bartholomew of Renes,
Secretarie to D. Iohn King of Nauar, and of Queen Blanche his wife, and by Alphonso Peres
of Biuera, high Treasurer and Secretary to the king of Castile.
This ioy was crost according to the custom of humane things, with great griefe in the
court of Castile,Imprisonment of D. Pedro Manrique. the king hauing caused D. Pedro Manrique Gouernour of Leon to bee
committed to prison, where at euery man did shew himselfe discontented, so as the king
caused 2000. lances to come for his gard, which remayned continually about the court.
He sent the prisoner to the castle of Fuente Duegna, commanding that hee should haue
the liberty of the prison, and that somtimes they should suffer him to go on hunting, which
liberty was procured by the Admirall of Castile, who was discontented for his detention.

This yeare which was 1438. there were brought vnto the King stones,1438. which they
said,Stones fallen from heauen very light. were fallen from heauen in great abondance, at Maderuelo, a house belonging to
the Constable, very light: the which although they were reasonably big, yet were they
so light as they did not hurt any one they fell vpon, a strange thing, and which was held
prodigious. The Articles of the peace being brought into Italy, were allowed and confirmed
by King Don Alphonso, in the presence of Doctor Ferdinand Lopes of Burgos,
one of the Kings Councell.
The warre of Granado was managed with variable successe:Granado. many Knights among
the Moores disliking the gouernment of King Mahumet, reuolted, taking the party of
Castile, of the which one Aben Amar was Captaine, who soone after went with his
men to the King of Tunes, with leaue from the King of Castile, hauing receiued both
pay and presents from him: and moreouer 6000. pounds starling for the charge of
their voyage. Don ^nigo Lopes of Mendoca Gouernor of the Fronter, Lord of Hyta
and Buyttago, who was afterwards Marquis of Sentillana, tooke the towne of Huelma
from the Moores,Castillans defeated by the Moores. and had the castle afterwards by composition, causing the garrison of
Moores to be conducted in safety to Cambil and Halabar. But Roderigo of Perea, Gouernor
of Cacorla, being entred rashly into the Moores countrie, was surprized by a great
number of horse and foote, lead by Aben Sarrax, a wise and valiant man, among all them
of his nation, by whom he was cut in peeces, scarce twenty of his men escaping, being
in all foure hundred horse, and a thousand foote: yet this victory was not without losse
of bloud to the Moores, for their Captaine Aben Sarrax was slaine, and many Knights
of note.
The sacred warre of Affrick, which was led by D. Ferdinand Maister of Auis, and Don 
Henry Maister of the Order of Christ,Portugal. Infants of Portugal, had answerable successe, who
hauing obtained, by great importunity from the King their brother, leaue to passe the
sea, had besieged the towne of Tanger, hauing brought but 6000. fighting men out of
Portugal. The siege hauing continued thirty seauen dayes, being well assailed and well
defended,The Portugals forced to accept of dishonorable conditions. there came an infinite multitude of Moores, both horse and foote, to succour
the besieged, being lead by the Kings of Fez, Maroc, Velez, and other Princes in person.
Wherefore the Portugals sought to retire themselues, but beeing in a manner inuested
by this great armie, they were forced to fortifie themselues in their trenches, and changing
their condition of besiegers, they found themselues besieged, so as hauing no meanes
to escape, they must capitulate with the Moores for their liues and liberties, promising
to yeeld vp vnto them the towne of Ceuta, and all the captiue Moores that were in Portugall.
Vpon this accord D. Henry and his men were sent back, and came naked and stript
to Ceuta, the Infant D. Ferdinand remaining for hostage in the hands of the King of
Fez, vntill the accord were performed: But D. Henry being returned with this disarmed
armie into Portugall, when as King Edward had assembled the Estates of the realme at
Ebora, being much grieued at this vnhappy successe, to take some course for the deliuery
of D. Ferdinand, they would neuer yeeld that the towne of Ceuta should bee deliuered
vnto the Moores: but they consented to all other meanes to free D. Ferdinand: the difficulties
and delayes were such, together with the death of King Edward which happened,
as for want of execution of that which had beene promised vnto the Moores, the Infant
D. Ferdinand past the rest of his dayes in prison in the hands of Infidels,D. Ferdinand in captiuity in Barbaric. with great constancie,
and a rare example of patience and religion, comforting the other captiue Christians,
not onely for that they saw a Prince participate of their miseries, but he did also incourage
them by godly exhortations to continue constant in the faith of our Sauiour.
King Edward being very pensiue for this dishonorable losse, but especially for the captiuitie
of his brother, going out of Ebora, where as the plague was violent, hee retired to
Auiz: and to ease the court, and to spare charges, hee commanded the Infants his brethren
to retire to their houses. Hee came in person to Pont du Soleil, where hee caused
a strong wall to bee made,Death of King Edward. to assure that place from theeues, then going to the Monasterie
of Tomar, hee felt himselfe toucht with a sharpe and pestilent Ague, whereof hee
dyed in September this yeare 1438. beeing fortie seauen yeares old, and hauing raigned
onely fiue: his body was interred in the royall Monasterie of the Battaile.

By his will he left all his mooueables to the Queene Don Leonora, and made her Gouernesse
of their children, and Regent of the Realme.
About that time Don Pedro Manrique a prisoner in Castile at Fuente Duegnas,Castille. D. Pedro Manrique escap^s out of prison. slipding
downe with cordes from the castle wall, he fled to Enzinas, a fort belonging to his
sonne in lawe D. Aluaro of Estuniga sonne to D. Pedro Earle of Ledesma, whether presently
came the Admirall Don Frederic, his brother, Don Henry and his friends, with
great company. The King at one instant receiued this newes, and that of the death of
the Infant Don Pedro of Arragon,D. Pedro of Arragon slaine at Naples. who had beene slaine with a great shot, assayling the
cittie of Naples, whereat he was equally grieued, but with diuerse passions: the Infants
body was buried in the castle de l'Ouo. This sort de l'Ouo, and the new castle at Naples,
had alwaies held good for the Arragonois. King Rene was come a little before to Nap^es,
with twelue galleys of Genoua, and was there receiued with royall pompe and
state: after which hauing sent back his galleys, hee filled the citty and all places thereabouts
with his soldiars, hauing gathered together a great armie, he began to assaile the
neighbour places, but with small effect. There came a Herald in his name to King Don
Alphonso being at Castellucci in Abruzzo, with a gantlet dipt in bloud, challenging him
to a single combate: Don Alphonso receiued the gantlet, and demanded of the Herald,
if King Rene meant they should incounter in single fight, one against another, or with
all their forces: the Herald answered, that the King his Maister would present himselfe
with his armie. Wherevpon King Don Alphonso replyed, that seeing hee was the challenger,
it was in him to make choyse of the place, and day of battaile; and therefore he
did choose the fields which are betwixt Nola and la Cerra, whether hee would come
within eight dayes, with his whole armie, to fight as his aduersary would. At the day
assigned, Don Alphonso presented himselfe vpon the place, and attended Rene, who appeared
not, for that he had beene disswaded by his friends and seruants, who came to
lodge with his armie at that place, from whence Don Alphonso was parted, and tooke
Castelluccio. Alphonso on the other side tooke Arpaio in the valley of Gardano, and
so taking places, and ruining the country, hee marcht to Naples, hauing aboue 15000.
men in his armie, with which forces and ten galleys he held the towne besieged, where
happened the death of the Infant Don Pedro, as wee haue said. But soone after, Rene
comming with the like, or greater forces, hee not onely preserued the citty, but he forced
the garrisons of the new castle,Returne of D. Ihon King of Na^arre into Spaine. and of the fort de l'Ouo, to yeeld for want of victuals.
About which time the King of Nauarre returned into Spaine, to ouer-throw those
good accords which had beene made betwixt him and the King of Castile, and to trouble
all Spaine, being of an inconstant and turbulent disposition.
 The enemies of Don Aluaro de Luna the Constable, relying much vpon the King of
Nauarre,Castile. and his forces, had banded themselues openly against him: the chiefe whereof
were the Admirall Don Frederic, Don Pedro Manriques Gouernor of Leon, Don Iohn
Ramir of Ariellan, Lord of Los Cameros, Don Pedro of Quingnones Merin Maior of
the Asturia's, Don Diego of Estuniga sonne to the Earle of Ledesma. Don Roderigo of
Castagneda Lord of Fuente Duegna, and Don Pedro Mendoca, Lord of Almacan,
who drew many others vnto their league, namely the Earle of Ledesma, who had his
lands fronting vpon Eccia. The King called soldiars from all parts to suppresse this
tumult (among the rest hee was speedily serued by the Nobility of Andalusia) to
whom the confederates did write very dutifull and respectiue letters, intreating him to
cause the Constable to dislodge from Court, before that hee grew so powerfull, as hee
might be preiudiciall both to him and his realme. There was in truth some reason to suppresse
the boldnesse and greatnesse of this man, who was insolent, couetous, and not
very faithfull to his Prince, the which was well knowne to the King, and to many of his
Councell:D Aluaro de Luna the Constable, insolent, couetous and trecherous. but hee had them all so tyed vnto him, as not any one could attempt against
him, nor consent willingly to that which should displease him: wherefore an answer
was made vnto the letter, quite contrary to that which the Noblemen of the league demanded,
with whom there newly ioyned Don Lewis de la Cerde Earle of Medina Celi,
and Don Pedro of Castile Bishop of Osma, who had seazed vpon many places, as Don
Pedro of Quignones had done of the Citty of Leon, so as the whole realme was full

of seditions and tumults, all in generall imputing the fault vnto the constable, partly
with reason, and partly without. The King being at Roa, vsed all dilligence to assemble
forces, to be the stronger, writing letters to Toledo and other great townes, admonishing
them of their duties, and to be faithfull vnto him.
In the meane time the Marshall D. Intgo Ortiz of Estuniga, brother to the Earle of
Ledesma, entred into Vailledolit, with fiue hundred men at armes, and seized on the
towne in the name of the confederate Lords. On the other side the King was aduertised
that the King of Nauarre, and D. Henry his brother, were entred into Castile with
fiue hundred men at armes, and not knowing vpon what pretext, considering the accord
lately concluded betwixt them, he sent vnto them, intreating them to ioyne with him
and to come to court: the King of Nauarre consented, and came to the king to Cuellar,
with sixe horse onely, whereat the whole court did much reioyce. They came at the
instance of the confederate Lords, and also incited with a desire to recouer that which
they had lost in Castile, by meanes of the present troubles, in whose company was the
Earle of Castro. The King of Nauarre beeing seperated from the rest, and come vnto
the king, receiued great honour and good vsage: but the Infant D. Henry aduanced not,
but staied with the troupes, the which hee led to Pegnafiel, where they opened him the
gates, the King hauing so commanded, and soone after hee had conference with the
king of Nauarre his brother at Minquela, neere to Cuellar, there beeing good correspondency
betwixt them, although they made no shew of it: for the King of Nauarre
continued with the King of Castile, and hee retired to Vailledolit, to the Lords of the
League: there was much trouble, and many enterviewes of Noblemen of either part,
with great leauies of souldiars to the oppression of the people, and yet there was no
meanes to make an accord; the confederates insisting still that the constable should bee
banished from court, the which was a hard matter to effect. The Admirall and the Infant
D. Henry sent to challenge the constable, and he accepted the combate, but yet they
did not fight. The King did sollicit D. Henry, promising him that if he would bee of his
party he would make him maister of Saint Iames, and would giue him other things, for
the which the Infant gaue him thankes, letting him vnderstand, that whatsoeuer he did,
was for his seruice.
In these treaties of pacification the greatest difficulty was in the restitution of lands
forfeited,Lands of confiscation giuen away ^i^der the peace. the which had beene distributed to many: yea to some of the confederats,
who would not restore them, at the least without recompence. Being in these garboiles
and out of hope of any accord, they had newes, that D. Roderigo of Villandrado, first
Earle of Ribadeo, who had some yeeres before serued Charles the seuenth, the French
King, with great reputation and honour, was come into Castile, bringing with him three
thousand souldiars to serue and succor King Iohn his naturall Lord: wherefore all treaties
of accord ceasing, the Kings of Castile and Nauarre went as farre as Pegnafiel to
meet him with some troupes, to assure him from the surprises of the confederats, who
sent the Earle of Ledesma with fifteene hundred horse, to attend him at a passage. This
supply, and other occasions, together with the dilligence of certaine religious men,
who sought to reconcile these Noblemen, made the parties more tractable, so as in
October 1439. a peace was concluded,An. 1439. vpon these conditions. That the constable D.
Aluaro de Luna should absent himselfe from court for sixe monthes, and that the king
of Castile should recompence the king of Nauarre and D. Henry his brother, for the
lands he had taken from them: and the processe and proceedings made against them that
were in armes disanulled: that the townes and sorts held by the confederats should bee
restored. These things being concluded at Castro Nugno, the constable to fullfill the
Article which concerned him, parted from court, leauing most of the kings councell
which fauored him, discontented* The Noblemen dismist their souldiars, and the king
parted from Castro Nugno to goe vnto Toro. In the meane time the Infanta D. Catherina,
wife to D. Henry, died in child-bed.
There was no peace firmly setled by this accord, for the king being possest by a councel
made by the constable, was held in distrust, and the courtiers in continuall iealousie. He
caused some of them, which had followed the confederate Lords, to be imprisoned at Salamanca,

and to take Segobia from Ray Diaz of Mendoca, who held it, he gaue it to the
Prince of the Asturia's his sonne. The King of Nauarre and his brother D. Henry seeing
these proceedings, they went from Madrigal, towards the court, but the King sent to forbid
them to come there: and to the end they should not finde him at Salamanca, he dislodged
and went to Bonilla de la Serra, from whence hee sent to demaund a saufe-conduit
of the Noblemen for Don Guttiere Gomes of Toledo Archbishop of Seuile,
whom hee ment to send to treat with them, the which beeing willingly granted, the
Archbishop came to Madrigal, with some of the King councel, but they returned without
any conclusion: wherefore the King of Nauarre and the Infant his brother led some
troupes towards Auila, where by the meanes of Aluaro of Bracamont, and Fernando of
Aualos, who had taken vpon them to defend it, they became maisters, from thence the
King of Nauarre did write a letter vnto the King of Castile full of good councel, accusing
the constable of auarice,Insolemies of the Constable of Castile made knowne vnto the King. cruelty, tyranie, insolency, and contempt of the Princes and
Noblemen, yea of the King himselfe, hauing presumed to kil a squier in Areualo; and a
groome, to flie his fury, hauing cast himselfe at the Kings feet, as in a most assured Sanctury,
he had beaten him almost in his bosome, stretching his armes ouer the Kings shoulders,
without any respect to his dignity, whom euery man (to the great dishonor of his
royal person) said he had inchanted: and to conclude, if he did not chase him away and
punish him, he could not be honored nor serued by the Princes, and Noblemen of Castile,
who could not endure such indignities from an vpstart, whose beginning was scarce
knowne. The King knew well that many things contained in these letters were true, yet
being gouerned by such as fauored the constable, he made no answere: wherevpon the
confederats sent the Earles of Haro and Benauent vnto him, who after many Negotiations,
concluded with the Kings councel, that they should make an assembly of the Estates
at Vailledolit, whereas the deputies of the townes and Prouinces of Castile and Leon
should meet, and determine of that which should be held expedient for the quiet of the
realme, so as the Archbishop of Seuile, and his Nephew the Earle of Alba did remaine at
their houses. Before the execution of that which had beene concluded, the Infant D.
Henry entred Toledo with three hundred and fifty knights, through the fauor of D. Pedro
Lopes of Ayala the Gouernor, and made himselfe maister thereof, hauing good correspondency
with the King of Nuarre his brother, whose faction was very strong at that
time in Castile, his friends and confederats holding the chiefe townes of the realme: for
besides that he had vnder his command the towne of Auila, and his brother that of Toledo,
the Earle of Ledesma held Burgos and the castle: Pedro of Quignones was maister
of Leon: Ruy Diaz of Mendoca commanded Segobia, with the sort: D. Henry Henriques
the Admirals brother had Zamora, and the castle: Salamanca was in the hands of Iohn
Gomes of Anaya: Guadalajara of D. Inigo Lopes of Mendoca, Lord of Hita: Plaisance of
the Earle of Ledesma: Vailledolit of the Earle Pedro Nugnes: other places were held by
other Knights of that party, the which did much trouble the King, and his constable. To
make the assembly of Vailledolit more easie, the Earles of Haro and Benauent returned
to Bonille, where it was againe concluded that the Kings and the Noblemen should retire
their troupes; and there was a general pasport giuen to al them that should come to
Vailledolit, with assurance of their goods; yea to the constable, who remained in his
house at Escalano, where by an ill presage, the greatest part of the castle had some few
daies before beene burnt with lightning: notwithstanding the King would haue the pasport
serue also for the constables person. In this assembly it was decreed that the cities
and townes held by the confederats, should bee left free at the King of Castiles dispose,
but there was not any thing effected, and the more to trouble the realme, D. Henry
Prince of the Asturia's, perswaded by his spouse, and the confederat noblemen, began to
ioyne with the King of Nauarre, his future father in law, retyring himselfe vnto the Admiral
D. Frederics lodging, wherewith the court was much troubled; and the King sent
the Earle of Castro, and Ruy Diaz of Mendoca to the King of Nauar, to vnderstand the
cause of this alteration; who answered that he knew it not: and withal went with them
to the Admirals lodging, to vnderstand the reason. The Prince answered, that he had retired
himselfe thether, by reason of Doctor Perjine^ Alphonso P^res of Biuero and

Nicholas Fernandes of Villanicar, of the Kings councel, being vnworthy of that ranke,
and beseeching the King that he would chase them away, else he would retire himselfe.
The King promised to dismisse them, wherevpon the Prince was pacefied, and came to
the Kings palace,D. Iohn de Pache^o gouerns Prince Henry. after midnight, the King of Nauarre accompanying him. The Prince
D. Henry was gouerned by a yong gentleman called D. Iohn de Pacheco, sonne to Alphonso
Telies Giron, Lord of Beaumont, who was preferred to his seruice by the constable, and
was afterwards made Marquis of Villena, and maister of the Order of Saint Iames. The
King at the Estates of Vailledolit, setled some order for Iustice, which was but badly executed
in Castile, and some thing to pacefie the Princes and Noblemen that were mutined,
and to diuert their armes, hee thought it now time to celebrate the marriage of D.
Henry and the Infanta of Nauarre, being three yeeres since they were made sure, and either
of them being fifteene yeeres old: the bond of consanguinity, which might hinder
it, was dissolued by Pope Eugenius the fourth. The Infanta being sent for, she entred into
Castile,An. 1440. in the yeere 1440. beeing accompanied by Queene Blanch her mother, the
Prince of Viana her brother, and many noblemen, prelats and knights of Nauarre. Shee
was receiued in the towne of Logrogno, by D. Alphonso of Carthagena, Bishop of Burgos
D. Inigo Lopes of Mendoca Lord of Hita, and by D. Pedro of Velasco, Earle of Haro.
From thence the Prince D. Charles returned into Nauarre with his Gouernor. D. Iohn of
Beaumont, who in the Princes name gouerned the realme, the Queene mother being
absent.
The Princesse with all her traine being come to Vilhorado, a house belonging to the
Earle of Haro, she was entertained with sumptuous feasts, great sports and rare inuentions;
and much more at Birbiesca, by the Earle himselfe. D. Pedro of Acugna did the like
at Duegnas, whether the Prince D. Henry came to meet his spouse, whereas he presented
her with many rich iewels, and shee him: who hauing beene some foure and twenty
howers with the Ladies, he returned to Vailledolit, whether they went. There went forth
to meet them, the Kings, and al the principall Noblemen of the court, who made a stately
entry into the towne, and the Queene and Princesse went to the King of Nauarres
lodging, whose brother D. Henry came from Toledo to assist at the marriage, the which 
was celebrated with a royall pompe,Cardinal of Saint Peter. D. Pedro of Ceruantes Bishop of Auila, performing
the ceremony. But the vnfortunate hap of this Princesse was such, as the Prince D. Henry
proued vnable to consummate the marriage,Marriage of the Prince of Castile and the Inf^nta of Nauarre. the which she did vertuously conceale for
many yeeres. To honor the marriage, the noblemen ran at tilt with sharpe pointed lances,
but the sport was so dangerous, as the King was forced to forbid it, for Pedro Porto
Carrero a Knight of Torry, and Iohn of Salezar lost their liues, and others were sore
hurt in these incounters. This royall feast (which had continued many daies) being ended,
the Princes and Noblemen of the court being disperced, the Prince D. Henry was
conducted to Segobia by D. Iohn de Pacheco his great mignon, who through a courtears
Ingratitude, fortefied the King of Nauarres party, and that of the Noblemen confederated
to ruine the constable, by whom hee had beene aduanced working so, as the Prince
his maister ioyned with them, who reuiuing their old quarrels, sent to beseech the King,
that without any more delay he would cause the constables processe to be made, degrading
him of the honour and dignity which he held, and of the gouernment of the realme.
The King was much troubled to see new seditions which he thought had beene supprest,
and wonderfully incensed against his sonne, would not make any direct answere to
this demaund: besides he had still some of his councell which defended the constables
cause: wherefore in the yeere 1441. the troubles began more violent then before. Mary
Queene of Castile sister to the King of Nauarre tooke then his part, which she had not
done before.
The Infant D. Henry, brother to the King of Nauarre, being after the marriage returned
to Toledo, hee fortefied himselfe there, and receiued Pero Lopes of Ayala, contrary
to the Kings commandment: where contynuing in his accustomed rebellions, he
staied the Ambassadors which the King had sent vnto him, to perswade him to take a
better course, yea the King being in person to Saint Lazaro, without the walles of the city,
vpon the way to Madrid, onely with thirty horses of his houshold and traine, the

Infant sallied forth, and presented himselfe in battaile, vsing threats and proud speeches,
so as the King was forced to returne speedely. There was in his company D. Roderigo
of Villandrado Earle of Ribadeo,Preuiledges of the Earles of Ribadeo. who in this voiage obtained a goodly preuiledge for
him and his family, which was, that the roabe which the Kings of Castile put on the first
day of the new yeere, should belong to him, and that hee should that day eate at the
Kings table, leauing this preuiledge to his posterity in the King of Castiles court. As
soone as the King came to Torijos from Saint Lazaro, he beganne to proceed against the
Infant D. Henry, for the detention of his Ambassadors, and so he retired to Auila. The
constable and his brother D. Iohn of Crezuela Archbishop of Toledo (against whom
all this warre was intended) sent to beseech the King to send some of his councell vnto
them, to the end their might be some order taken for so many incoueniences, the which
being done, they concluded that the King should send vnto the confederate Lords, to aduise
them to obserue the accord made at Bonille de la Serra, and the more to ease the
country, they should dismisse their souldiars.
That to determine all quarrels betwixt them and the constable, they should choose
Iudges, who should examine where the fault was, and should appoint punishment for
them that were found coulpable: and that if they thought it fit, there should be a generall
assembly of the Estates called to that end. The Kings offred all these things to the
confederats, who were for the most part in Areualo: but they answered, that there was
no meanes of pacification, if the constable who was newly come to Auila, did not dislodge
from court. The King hearing this answere, sought to retire his sonne D. Henry,
who being councelled by the King of Nauarre, and the Queenes of Castile and Nauarre,
went to Auila, where he protested to the King his father, that he desired nothing
more, then to mediate a good peace: where after some small stay, he returned to Segobia,
promising that from thence he would write vnto the Queenes, touching their meeting
at Santa Maria de Nieua, there to treat with them of the meanes of an accord.
In the meane time the King receiued letters from Diego de Valera, a wise Knight and
of great experience, who had seene and frequented the courts of forraine Princes, seeking
(according to the custome of Noblemen of that age) honour by armes,D. Diego of Val^ra giues good aduice vnto the king. at Tournaies
and combats, beginning for pleasure, and ending many times with death, or some other
misfortune; yet he had alwaies beene fortunate, and had wonne much honour and
reputation, both in Spaine and else where. These letters contained many graue admonitions,
and proffitable councell, both for the King and his Estate. Being read in open
councell, D. Guttiere Gomes of Toledo Archbishop of Toledo, without any great consideration,
stept forward to answere for all the rest. Bid D. Diego said he, send vs men and
money, for wee haue not any need of councell. The King to gratefie the Prince his
sonne, gaue vnto him the towne of Guadalajara, the which by this meanes he thought
to wrest out of the hands of D. Inigo Lopes of Mendoca, Lord of Hita and Buytrago: but
they made resistance in the taking of possession. This hapened at such time as he came
to visit the King at Auila, or a little before. The Queenes and the Prince, according
vnto that which had beene promised to the King his father, met together at Santa Maria
de Nieua, where D. Iohn de Pacheco was also present: they conferred long together
about the pacification of the troubles, without any great conclusion.
From thence there was sent vnto Auila, Alphonso Telles Giron Lord of Beaumont,
father to Iohn Pacheco, and Doctor Valdenebro, a prior, that to make matters more easie,
he should approach to Areualo, wherevnto the King would not yeeld, wherein hee was
ill councelled by some, who feared they should loose their credit and authority, by the
accords which might be made there.
Matters beeing broken off the confederats sent the Admirall Don Frederike,
the Earle of Benauent, Don Pedro of Quignones and Roderigo Manriques, with
good numbers of men, beyonde the mountaines, into the Countrie of Toledo, who
ranne as farre as Escalona, and presented battaile vnto the constable, and to the Archbishop
his brother, who came from Illesca to ioyne with him, when as their enemies were
retired: these Lords of the league returned to Toledo without any blowes, whether came
some men of authoritie from the King, to stay them from fighting. At that time the Infant

Don Henry, at the Earle of Benauents, and the Admirals request, deliuered the Ambassadors:
but he did not forbeare to spoile the Constables and the Archbishops countries,
putting all to fire and sword. The Archbishop abandoned Illesca in the night, going
towards Madrid, whereof the Infant Don Henry beeing aduertised, he followed him
with all speed, and hauing onely ouer-taken and spoiled his baggage, hee returned and
seazed vpon Illesca: The Archbishop saued himselfe in Madrid, where hee was receiued
by the Kings commandement: the Admiral and the Earle of Benauent after these light
exploits, returned to Areualo. About that time Don Inigo Lopes of Mendoca, one of
the Lords of the league, hauing surprized the towne of Alcala of Henares; Iohn de Carillo
Gouernor of Cacorla, a Captaine of the Archbishop of Toledos and the Constables
faction, approched neere vnto the place with fiue hundred horse, and one thousand
two hundred foote, which he laid in ambush in certaine valleys, and sent some to runne
in view of the towne, to draw Don Inigo forth, who failed not, yet not with such order
and strength as he ought, wherefore he he^d him in, in such sort, as hauing lost most of
his men, himselfe being soare hurt, hee could hardly recouer Alcala. To recompence
this losse, the Infant Don Henries men, did cut some of the Constables troupes in peeces,
in Grismonda, where notwithstanding he lost Laurence d'Aualos his Chamberlaine,
nephew to the Constable Don Ruy Lopes d'Aualos.
The Infant hearing this, went presently to field, marching towards Toledo with sixe
hundred horse, ouer-running the country of Escalona, thinking that the Constable
would fight with him, but hee stirred not, finding himselfe too weake: wherevpon hee
sent to haue the Archbishop his brother to come, and beeing ioyned together, they
went to charge the Infant at Torrijo, who then kept himselfe within his sort, and whilest
that they spoiled the Country, euen vnto the gates of Toledo, killing men, and carrying
away the prey, he aduertised the King of Nauarre, and the other confederat Lords of his
estate, who parted presently from Areualo and Ontiueros, with one thousand two hundred
men at armes, and light horse to succour him. The King of Castile being much
incensed against the confederates, resolued to seaze vpon the lands, rents, and reuenues
of the King of Nauarre, beginning by Medina del Campo, neither did the protestations
and threats of the King of Nauarre and his confederates, preuaile any thing, to whom
the King of Castile made no other answer, but that they were all in armes contrary to
his commandements, and carried themselues as rebels.


Don Alphonso the fift of that name,
and twelfth King of Portugal.
DVring these tumults in Castile, the realme of Portugal was not without some crosses.
After the death of King Edwara, his sonne Don Alphonso succeeded him, at 
the age of six years,Portugal. vnder the gouernment of the Queene Donna Leonora, according to
the Fathers testament: but many townes of the realme reiecting the gouernment of a
woman, especially a stranger, they intreated the Infant Don Pedro, Duke of Coimbra,
that, as the eldest brother among the Infants of Portugal, hee would take vpon him the
sole gouernment of the realme. Many others, more modest, who would not altogether
breake the will of the deceased King, were of opinion that hee should gouerne with the
Queene. Of the first opinion, were the Infants Don Henry Master of Christus, and Don
Iohn Maister of Saint Ieames,Gouernment of a woman cause of contention. Don Pedro excusing himselfe of this charge, he perswaded
Don Iohn to gouerne with the Queene Mother, wherewith he should bee well satisfied:
but Don Iohn answered him freely, that it was not for him, who was the yongest amongst
the brethren, to gouerne: but that hee Don Pedro and Don Henry, should aduise to take
the gouernment of the realme vpon them, as Princes of Portugal, and worthy of such
a charge, and that they should not suffer a strange woman to rule ouer them, being an
infamous thing, vnworthy of the house of Portugal, and preiudiciall to the realme:
and that they must not regard that which the decea^ed King had ordained if it were



found vnreasonable and vniust. They that held the party of the widow Queene Donna
Leouora, were D. Alphonso Earle of Barcellos, with his sonnes D. Diego Earle of Oren and
Marquis of Valencia, and D. Fernand Earle of Arrojolos, and Marquis of Villauiciosa,
and with them the Archbishop of Lisbone, whose sister D. Constance, the Earle D. Alphonso
had taken to his second wife; D. Nugno de Goys prior of Saint Iohn, and D. Alphonso
Lord of Cascais: who with many others their adherents, who aduised the Queene
not to giue ouer the gouernment in the which the King her husband had placed her:
vpon which quarrell the Estates of the realme were called, by the Princes and Noblemen,
holding the chiefe dignities, where by the dilligence of the Infant D. Henry, there
was this order taken. That the Queene mother should be gouernesse of her childrens
persons, and of their reuenues and patrimonies, estates and Offices of the Kings house:
and that the Infant D. Pedro should haue care of the defence of the realme, and of armes,
and D. Fernand Earle of Arroyolos, of matters belonging vnto Iustice: This did nothing
please the Queene, being desirous to command alone: wherefore the contention
being greater then before, they made many new assemblies of the Estates: so as the last
conclusion was that the Infant D. Pedro should gouerne alone: the which was instantly
required of all men in generall: so as the Queene was wholy dispossest of the authority,
where of she might haue retained a good part: Being thus frustrate, with extreame
griefe, she had recourse to womanish practises, complaints and accusations, as well to
the Noblemen of the Realme, as to the Kings of Nauarre and Arragon her brethren:
and in the end she came sorrowfull and discontented to the King of Castile, her cousin
and brother in law, this yeere 1441. to complaine of the Infant D. Pedro, and to craue
aide against him. She found the king at Gomes Naharra, a Borrough of Medina del Campo,
troubled with the quarrels of the King of Nauarre, and other Noblemen, against the
constable, so as she could not obtaine any thing.
It was at such time when as the King of Nauarre,Castille. and the confederat Lords were gone
into the Realme of Toledo to succor the Infant D. Henry, who hearing that the King
proceeded against them with rigour, repast the mountaines, and came towards Medina
del Campo, and Olmedo, townes belonging to the King of Nauarre, whereof he of Castile
had seized. Approching neere to Medina, and wasting the time in demaunds and
answers, they of Olmedo receiued the King of Nauarres men, whose army encreasing
daily, he came to lodge within two bow shootes of Medina, into the which the constable,
the Archbishop of Toledo his brother, and D. Iohn of Soto Major Maister of Alcantara,
entred the night following with 1600. horse, so as for many daies there were
diuerse skirmishes amongst them, in the which many good men were slaine and hurt.
The Queenes of Castile and Portugall, sisters, and the Prince D. Henry propounded certaine
conditions of peace, whereon there was long debate, without any frute. But whilest
they were busie intreating and debating of these Articles, the King of Nauarre (who had
Aluaro of Bracamont and Fernando Rejon, Knights well affected to his seruice in Medina,)
delt so with them, as one night the constable and his brother beeing in gard and
not caring to goe the round themselues, but relying vpon an other, they gaue him entry
by a place called Our Lady of Antigua.
The confederats army was then growne to be aboue fiue thousand men at armes and
light horse,Medina del Campo surprized by the confederat Lords and the Constable almost taken. and a great number of foote: wherefore the King of Nauarre and the confederate
Lords, entred furiously into the towne with these forces, against the which
there was no offer to make defence, for the King knowing well that they had no quarrell
but to the constable, he commanded him, his brother, the maister of Alcantara, and others
of his faction, to saue themselues by an other port, opposite to that where their enemies
entred, wherein they shewed themselues nothing obstinate. These being gon,
the King retired himselfe to the place of Saint Antolin, without any care or trouble for
them that entred, who came presently to kisse his hands, first the Admirall, the Earle of
Benauent, and other Noblemen and captaines; then the King of Nauarre, who as a King,
made onely a reuerence, but did not kisse his hand, at which time there was no signe of
discontentment, but the King did looke of them all with a cheerefull countenance. The
constables lodging and of the rest of his faction were sackt: and the Queenes of Castile

and Portugall, sisters, did aduertise Don Gomes Guttiere of Toledo Archbishop of Seuile,
and his Nephew Don Fernando Aluares of Toledo, Earle of Alba, the first of that
house which carried that title, and Don Lopes of Bariento Bishop of Segobia, that they
should retire from Court, for that they were too much affected to the Constables
party, the which they did the next day, and all the Officers which had beene preferred
vnto the King by the Constable were dismist. And to make a good end of these troubles,
the Kings of Castile and Nauarre, and the other Princes and Noblemen which
were at Medina, made a compromise in the hands of Mary Queene of Castile, Don Henry
Prince of the Asturia's, the Admirall, and of Don Garcia Aluares of Toledo, who concluded
as followeth.Constable dismist the Cou^t for six yeeres. That the Constable Don Aluaro de Lunn Earle of Saint Stephens,
should absent himselfe from Court for the space of sixe yeeres next ensuing, appointing
him for his aboade, his houses of Saint Martin of Val d'Eglise, or Riaca: That
he should not write any letters to the King, but concerning his owne businesse, whereof
hee should send a coppie vnto the Queene of Castile and to the Prince her sonne.
That during the said time, hee should not make any league nor confederacie: That
all Knights which had followed him should retire to their houses, and none to remaine
about him but his household seruants: Notwithstanding the Constable, and the
Archbishop of Toledo his brother, might retaine for the space of thirty daies after
notice giuen them of this sentence, either of them fifty men at armes: And for the
execution thereof, the Constable should leaue in deposito the castles of St. Stephen,
Aillon, Maderuelo, Ganga, Rojas, Maqueda, Montalban, Castle of Bayuela and Escalona,
which places should remaine during the said sixe yeeres in the custody of certaine
Knights. And for a greater caution, the Constable should deliuer Don Iohn de Luna
his sonne and heire in hostage to the Earle of Benauent, during the said time: That after
the Constable should haue accomplished the aboue mentioned conditions, the
townes and places which the confederats held, belonging vnto the King, should be yeelded
vp, and the garrisons depart: That the King should restore priuate men to their
goods, honours, and dignities, whereof hee had depriued them, by reason of these troubles.
All guifts and grants made by the King, since the first of September, in the yeere
1438. vnto this present yeere 1441. should be reuoked and held for voide, except to
certaine persons of respect: That all that were partisans to the Constable, should be put
out of the Kings councell, who should be named by the King of Nauarre, the Earles of
Ledesma and Beneuent, Inigo Lopes of Mendoca, and Ruy Diaz of Mendoca: That all
souldiars should presently retire, and no longer hold the field: That the King of Castile
should recompence him of Nauarre, for the losses he had sustained in his lands in Castile,
during the seditions and that he, should pay the souldiars which the King of Nauarre
and his partisans had brought by reason thereof. These with some other Articles
were concluded the third of Iuly, this yeere 1441. and were confirmed by the king of Castile,
thinking thereby to end the confusions, whereinto he like a yong Prince, had plunged
his Estate, by fauoring and supporting his mignon to much, who was both indiscreet
and insolent, to the contempt of the Princes of his bloud, and the chiefe Noblemen
of the Kingdome, who notwithstanding vnder collour of prouiding for the publike
good, tended all to their priuate. Soone after the King beeing at Castro Xeris, the
Licentiate Alphonso Ruis of Villena came vnto him, with procuration from the Constable,
who allowed and accepted of the sentence, requiring to haue men sent to receiue
the hostages. After all this the Kings went to Burgos, where they spent some time in
feasts and sports, and to auoide all iealousie which might cause troubles and diuisions
amongst the Noblemen they made an accord amongst them that not any one should
affect to be more familiar with the King then an other: notwithstanding the Admirall
D. Frederic began to be very gracious with the King of Castile, nor without iealousie of
the King of Nauarre, who would willingly haue raised some stirs, after the accustomed
manner, but his impaciency was restrained by the Earle of Castro, his ancient and faithfull
seruant, who gaue him to vnderstand, that it must needs redound to his proffit, and of
other Noblemen of the league.
And to make a stricter bonde, hee aduised him, seeing that Queene Blanche his wife

was newly deceased, to marry D. Ioane the Admirals daughter: and he propounded vnto
him an other marriage, betwixt the Infant D. Henry his brother, and D. Beatrice daughter
to D. Roderigo Alphonso Pimentel, Earle of Benauent: these Noblemen still practising
the Constables ruine, which in the end they saw.
Blanch Queene of Nauarre after that she had conducted her daughter to the Prince of
the Asturia's into Castile,Nauarre. she parted no more thence. In the absence of the King her
husband, and hers, D. Charles their sonne gouerned the Realme of Nauarre, being assisted
by good councell. She was a religious Princesse, and much giuen to deuotion, and pilgrimages,Death of D. B^anch Queen of Nauarre.
especially to places dedicated to the Virgin Mary, whether shee made some
voiages during the aboue mentioned troubles, wherein spending her time, it happened
that she died at Santa Maria de Nieua, in the yeere 1442. It is doubtfull amongst the
Spaniards where her body was interred, for there is not any marke or menumont found
in Spaine, although she ordained that it should bee carried to Santa Maria of Vxue, and
that the priory of Ayuar should be anexed to that Church, the which notwithstanding
was not done. The Authors of the History of Sicile write, that shee died in that Island,
in the Monastery of Saint Nicholas des Arenes, at the foote of Mount Etna, and that
she is buried at Catanea, in Saint Francis Church. By the death of this Prince the
succession of the realme of Nauarre fell vnto her sonne, Don Charles Prince of Viana,
who at that time was full twenty yeeres old, bred vp by the Lords of Beaumont, whereof
Lewis was the chiefe, who afterwards beeing made Constable of Nauarre by King
Iohn, was the first of that house that was aduanced to that dignity.
The Constable of Castile bearing his exile from Court with the losse of his authority,Castile.
very impatiently (wherein hee might haue maintained himselfe, if hee could haue
knowne himselfe) beganne to make new practises, to grow into fauour with the confederats,
submitting himselfe to Iohn de Pacheco, that hee might bring him into fauour
with Prince Henry his maister: but the wound was to fresh, so as nothing was done at
that time.
The Estates beeing assembled that yeere 1442.1442. at Toro, they did graunt vnto Don
Iohn King of Castile (though with great difficulty) to furnish him with foure score
millions of Marauidis, paiable at two termes, that yeere and the next following. There
the confederate Lords beeing aduertised, that D. Pedro de Acugnas sought all meanes
to restore the Constable to fauour, the Admirall sent to take him prisoner in his
house at Duegnas,A bould attempt of the Constables sauorers. but soone after he was deliuered: and then there was an enterprise
descouered, which made the Constable much more odious, then hee had beene: for
some of his friends were so hardy, as to make a mine in Toro, the which did come vnto
the Kings lodging, and to the castle, by the which hee would secretly draw in armed
men, and kill, or take the King of Nauarre, the Infant his brother, and the confederate
Lords, whilest they were in councell. The Estates beeing ended, the King came to
Vailledolit, where as he gaue vnto Don Pedro of Estuniga, Earle of Ledesma, the City of
Plaisance, in recompence of Trugillo, which he demaunded, for that it had beene promised
him by the King.
There beeing great contention growne betwixt the Earle of Castagneda, and Don
I^igo Lopes of Mendoca, about the limitation of their iurisdictions, and vassals, in the
lands which they held in the Prouince of Alaua by reason whereof their armed men,
keeping the field, did spoile and oppresse the poore people: wherevpon many Commonalties
did rise in armes, against these two Lords, making sharpe warre against
them, hauing obtained leaue from the King to doe it, to the end they might suppresse
those insolencies which were committed vnder collour of their quarrels, which they
might and ought for to haue ended by Iustice, and not by armes. This yeere died
Don Iohn of Crezuela Archbishop of Toledo, the Constables brother, to the great
hindrance of his affaires, in whose place Don Guttiere Gomes of Toledo Archbishop of
Senile, was chosen, by the meanes of the King of Nauarre, to whom the house of Toledo
was reconciled.
At that time there was a change of the Bishops of Spaine, euery one aspiring to
that which was richest and of greatest dignity, the which is the greatest care of most of

the pastors in these latter times. The Archbishoprike was giuen to D. Garcia Osorio
Bishop of Ouiedo,Change of Bish^ps in Spaine. Nephew to the Admirall; the Bishoprike of Ouiedo to the Bishop of
Orense; that of Orense, to Doctor Iohn of Torquemado, of the Order of the preaching
friars, Cardinal of Saint Sixte, a great Doctor in the Cannon law.
At that time in Biscay there were descouered some followers of their opinion,Fratricelle heretikes (...). whom
they called Fratricelli, men condemned by Pope Boniface the eight, in the yeere 1290.
and afterwards by Iohn the two and twentith, for heretikes, and followers of all impurity
and abuses, hauing had their beginning at Ferrara in Italy, by one called Herman. The
King of Castile sent Francis of Soria a Franciscan friar, and D. Iohn Alphonso Cherino
Abbot of Alcala the royall, one of the Kings councell, to informe of their deeds, doctrine
and manners: and it was found by the informations which they brought to Court
that he which had reuiued, and newly practised this Doctrine of Fratricelli, was a Franciscan
friar, called Alphonso de Mella, and that many men and women were infected with
this error, in the towne of Durango and there abouts: wherefore the King ordained that
they should be apprehended, sending two Prouosts thether, well accompanied, who
brought away a great number, some to Vailledolit, some to Calcada, where they were
burnt. The friar Alphonso de Mellae, the reuiuer of this sect, escaped, hearing that they informed,
and past into the Moores country, with many yong strumpets, which were taken
from him, and himselfe condemned, and made a slaue, where hee ended his miserable
daies.
The King of Castile being sollicited by the Queene mother of Portugal,Portugal. to be a means
that she might be restored to the authority, in the which the deceased King her husband
had left her by his will; he sent Ambassadors to the young King D. Alphonso, and to his
vncle D. Pedro, and to the Estates and councell of the realme, to perswade and intreat
them, to leaue the gouernment of the King and realm, to the widow Queene, according
to the last wil of the deceased king Edward, whereof they did honestly excuse themselues,
especially the councell, yeelding many reasons why they could not consent therevnto:
At that time hapened the death of D. Iohn of Portugal, maister of Saint Iames and second
Constable of the realme, being 43. yeeres old, who was a great friend to Aluaro de Luna,
Constable of Castile, who was also administrator of the Maistership of Saint Iames in
Castile. This Infant was grandfather by the mothers side, to the Queene D. Isabella, the
heire of Castile and Leon, who was wife to King Fernand the fifth called the Catholike.
The same yeere Ambassadors came from D. Alphonso King of Arragon,Arragon. to the Court
of Castile, to condole with King Iohn for the troubles and seditions of his realme, and giuing
him councell in their maisters name, as a Prince that was his allie and friend, to loue
the Princes of his bloud, and to win them with fauors and good vsage, admitting them
into his councell of State, and gouerning his realmes by their aduice, and of the Noblemen
of the greatest and most ancient families of Spaine.
The Ambassadors did also make him a relation of the happy successe the King their 
maister had in the warre of Naples:Successe of the warre of Naples. where after diuers light exploits of warre betwixt
Rene of Aniou and him, he had beseeged Naples the second time, in the which Rene was:
and that by the good seruice of a certaine Mason, who had beene denied Iustice by
Rene, he had brought into the city by an old conduit, or sinke, about two hundred Spaniards,
to seize vpon some port, and giue entry to the rest of the army, who beeing
descouered and poursued, had fortefied themselues in a great Tower, where during
the fight hee had caused a scaladoe to bee giuen, and by that meanes put so
many men into the towne as hee became maister of Saint Genaios gates, which
hauing forced, they drew in all the armie of Arragon: That of the men of warre
of the Angeuine, party had made great resistance, yea there was Rene himselfe,
fighting verie valiantly, in his owne person, euen vnto the last extremity, so as hee
had like to haue beene taken prisoner, hauing beene staied by some certaine souldiars
of Cattelogne, from whom hee freed himselfe, cutting off the hand of one them called
Espejo, who held the Rheines of his horse-bridle, and with great difficulty he saued
himselfe in the fort of Castle-Nouo, which held for him; so as Rene beeing escaped,
and his souldiars retired where they could, hee remained maister of the city, and soone

after receiued the sorts of Capuana and Saint Hermo by composition; And that Rene
finding that he had need of new forces, leauing a good garrison in Castle Nouo, and a
Geneuois called Anthony Caluo to commaund there, had gone to the Florentins, and to
P^pe Eugenius, his confederats in Italy, from whom not being able to draw any sufficient
aide, he sent word vnto captaine Caluo, that if he could not hold the fort, he should
yeeld it with the best conditions he could, the which was done, and by that meanes the
King their maister remained absolute Lord of the chiefe city of the realme, and of the
castles, where he had beene receiued and acknowledged by the Neapolitans for their
King, with great pompe and triumph, his aduersary being retired to Marseilles, after that
he and his wife had held that realme in suspence and troubles by the space of sixe yeeres.
These newes were pleasing to the King of Castile, who with milde and friendly words
seemed to take in good part the admonitions and councell which the Ambassadors had
giuen him in the King of Arragons name. Thus King D. Alphonso remained peaceable
possessor of the realme of Naples, in the yeere 1442. after that he had contended
for it one and twenty whole yeeres, from the time that he was called from Corsica by
Queene Ioane. And soone after this conquest, making his peace with Pope Eugenius
who had need of his assistance and aide, for the recouery of the Marquisate of Ancona,
the which Cont Francis Sforza held, by the meanes of Cardinal Lewis of Padoua, and
of the Patriarke of Aquileia,Alphonso king of A^^agon inuested in the realme of Naples. the Pope graunted the inuestiture of the realme to him and
his, making D. Fernand of Arragon, base sonne to King Alphonso Legitimate to that effect,
hoping to succeed in the realme of Naples, and disanulling all other Inuestitures
which had beene made by him or his predecessors Popes, to all other Princes whatsoeuer.
In regard whereof, the King did aide the Pope with his forces, against such as
opposed themselues in the Marquisate, and made him to enioy it quietly. The King of
Arragons Ambassadors did admonish the King of Nauarre priuatly, to keepe friendship
with the King of Castile, and to doe him seruice: the like admonitions they gaue to the
Infant D. Henry, hauing such charge from their maister.
The Noblemen of Castile hauing with such contention plunged the Constable and
them of his party in a gulphe of miseres,Castile. and the Courtiers hell, which is the disgrace of
their Prince, and decay of their authority, they gaue him meanes by their negligence and
basenesse, to resolue and to returne to that dignity, from which he was fallne: for euery
one respecting more his priuate profit, then the publike good, or the maintenance of
their league, followed that which he held to be most profitable for himselfe, beginning
to iarre, and to haue factions amongst themselues, whereof the Constables friends that
were in disgrace, could make vse; wherefore Doctor Pero Ianes, and Alphonso Peres of
Biuero,Pollecy of the Bishop D. Lopes of Barrientos. very much affected to the Constable, had meanes to returne to Court. D. Lopes
of Barrientos, Bishop of Segobia, besides that he was a very deere friend to the Constable,
hauing or fearing to haue some quarrell with D. Iohn de Pacheco, fauorite to Prince
Henry, hee exchanged his Bishoprike for that of Auila, with the Cardinal D. Pedro of
Cerbantes, for that the Prince did ordinarily remaine at Segobia, it may bee hee would
haue this exchange serue for a collour for that which he pollitikely pretended, making
shew to hate and flie the Prince D. Henry, when as he had most desire to bee in fauour
with him, to restore the Constable, and to retire him from the King of Nauarre and the
confederats league. Soone after D. Pedro Suarez of Toledo, sonne to D. Garcia Aluares
of Toledo Lord of Oropesa, being fauored by D. Henry Prince of Castile, who was but
of a turbulent spirit, fortefied himselfe like an enemy in Talauera, the which being made
knowne to the King of Castile, who was then at Santa Maria of Nieua, with the King of
Nauarre, to celebrate the Anniuersary of D. Blanch Queene of Nauarre deceased; the
two Kings marched thether with some troupes, and hauing caused the Infant D. Henry to
come vnto them,Kings of Cast^le and Na^^^^ the (...). they forced them that held Talauera to yeeld, which place they gaue in
gard to D. Fernand of Crezuela, Archdeacon of Toledo. From thence they went al together
to Toledo, where by the way they did visit the Constable D. Aluaro de Luna, at Escalona
where the King and Queen were his Gossips to a daughter, who was called Ioane, the
which did wonderfully discontent the Admirall D. Frederic, and the other confederate
Lords. The Commonalties of the Prouince of Alaua, who had taken armes against the

Earle of Castagneda, and D. Inigo Lopes of Mendoca; did much harme vnto the gentlemen
of the country, and others, ruining their houses and committing many insolencies,
as a brutish people is accustomed to doe,Dangerous councel to arm a multitude. being a meere solly to arme them, how iust soeuer
the cause be: yea they proceeded so farre, as they did beseege D. Pero Lopes of Ayala,
Lieutenant and Gouernor of Guipuscoa in the towne of Saluat^erra of Alaua, which
did belong vnto him, who seeing himselfe prest, sent to intreat his Neighbour and kinsman,
D. Pero Fernandes of Velasco, Lord of Haro, being then at a village of his, to come
and succor him, who hauing seene D. Pero of Ayalas letter, he endeuored with all speed
to releeue him, gathering together in lesse then foure daies aboue foure thousand foote
and fiue hundred Launces, with which forces he marcht towards Saluatierra. The Commons
being aduertised of his comming,Insolencie of the commons punished. dislodged, yet not so speedily, but he tooke many,
whom he either slue or carried away prisoners, hauing chased the rest home vnto their
townes, and burnt many of their houses.
In the yeere 1443. D. Lewis of Guzman,1434. maister of the Knights of the Calatraua died:
so as the King of Nauarre obtained that place of the King of Castile, for a base sonne of
his called D. Alphonso of Arragon: whereof the King hauing written to the Commonders
(to whom the election did belong) D. Fernando of Padilla treasorer of the Order
(who had great credit among them, and the greater, for that he held D. Iohn Ramires of
Guzman great Commander of that Order prisoner euer since the ciuill warre, and
would neuer deliuer him, neither by the Kings commandement, nor for the threats of
the Princes and Noblemen) wrought so, as without respect to the Kings letters, or to any
thing else, he caused himselfe to be chosen maister of the Calatraua, disapointing D.
Alphonso of Arragon, and the King of Nauarre his father, of their poursute, who for that
cause made made great Instance vnto the King,Election preposterously made. and obtained many letters and commandements
to the Commanders, to disanull this election which was fraudulent, violent
and against their Orders: for this new maister beeing chosen, had freed the great Commander,
but hee had first made him to allow of his election, and to sweare fealty and
homage vnto him, as to his Superior, and maister of the Order. All this preuayling nothing,
the King caused the rents and reuenues of Calatraua to be seized on, forbidding all
their subiects and vassals, to obey or acknowledge D. Fernand of Padilla, who notwithstanding
was fauored and supported by D. Henry Prince of Castile, and other Noblemen,
who were somewhat iealous of the King of Nauars greatnesse. Moreouer the King sent
the Infant D. Henry of Arragon,Vsurper enioyes his mastership little. with an army, who did beseege this vsurper in the fort
of the Conuent of Calatraua, where he spent some daies, being defended by a good garrison.
At the last the war ended, by an accident which happened to D. Fernand of Padilla,
who died, being shot vnaduisedly by one of his Squiers, who aymed at the enemy. They
that defended the place,D. Alphonso of Arragon base sonne to the King of Nauarre, maister of Calatraua. hauing lost their maister yeelded vpon composition. The Infant
aduertised the King of Castile what had happened, who at the request of the King of Nauarre,
did write againe vnto the Commanders to choose D. Alphonso of Arragon, the
which was done, but he enioyed it little.
The Court remouing from Toledo, to come to Madrigal, the King being at Ramaga,
the Prince D. Henry his son did sollicit him to imprison Alphonso Peres of Biuero, Fernando
Iames of Xeris, Iohn Manuel of Lando, and Pedro of Luxan Grome of the Chamber, for
crimes whereof he accused them, and the King of Nauarre did the like, which was an occasion
to chase againe from Court all the Constables friends, fauorers and dependants,
and to change many of the Kings houshold seruants, yea to giue him so many gards, as
he was discontented, yet he had no wil to redresse it, for he was faint-hearted, and had no
royall resolution, yea hee endured that D. Henry Henriques the Admirals brother, and
Ruy Diaz of Mendoca were continually in his Chamber, to obserue what hee did, and
to aduertise the King of Nauarre, and his sonne in law the Prince Don Henry. It is
credible that this was the practise of Don Lopes of Barriento, lately Bishop of Segobia,
and now of Auila, who sought to giue the confederats some occasion to vse
the King rigorously, whereby it should appeere that they held him in vnworthy
seruitude, wherewith the King, his sonne the Prince of Asturia's, and others whom
hee would make friends to the Constable, might bee discontented, as it happened,

for this Bishop, being a very polletike man, vsed such meanes, as he wonne D. Iohn de Pacheco,
who was the heart of Prince Henry, procuring him to let the Prince his maister
vnderstand, how vnworthy a thing it was for him to continue in their league, who intreated
his father so vnworthely, who hauing chased from court by their seditious
armes, the constable, and other most faithfull seruants to the crowne of Castile, vnder
collour of some youth, but in effect it was for that they opposed themselues against
their tyranie, which they did build vnder a shew of the publike good, they held the
Kings person as it were in captiuity, to whom it was not lawfull to speake, see, nor
heare, but by their Organes, no not to conuerse priuately with the Queene his wife,
nor with him his sonne,Prince Henry won by the Constables faction. without witnesses and gards, who went and reported all to
them that he did and said: a shamefull thing, and full of contempt, the which he should
not suffer, who should be the support of his father, and the hope of all faithful subiects,
louing the greatnesse of the crowne of Castile, and the honour and reputation of their
Kings; with such perswasions hee induced the Prince D. Henry to leaue the league, the
which he did cunningly, as he was councelled by the Bishop; who vsed the happy endeuors
of Iohn de Pacheco, and by other diuises and meanes, hee drew vnto the constables
friendship (who was almost in despaire, and resolued, seeing himselfe so pursued, to passe
into Portugall) the new Archbishop of Toledo, the Earle of Haro, Alba, Castagneda
and Ledesma, who now intituled himselfe Earle of Plaisance, Inigo Lopes of Mendoca,
Pero Aluares Osorio and other great Noblemen. The better to couer this practise, beeing
also necessary for the Archbishop of Toledo, to dissemble, hauing not yet receiued
his Bulls from Rome for his Archbishoprike, hee and his Nephew, the Earle of Alba
made a new league, with the King of Nauarre: but the Bulles receiued, and beeing in
quiet possession of the Archbishoprike, they left the league, and ioyned with the
constable.
The effects of the Bishops of Auilas practises beganne now to appeere, the Earle of
Haro hauing complained of the subiection wherein they held the King, vsing some
word of threatning that he would remedy it: going to Curiel to the Earle of Plaisance
to conferre with him about it: wherevpon the King of Nauarre sent after him to take
him, and he had beene taken, notwithstanding that he went by vnknowne waies, if hee
had not beene very well mounted, and escaped by the swiftnesse of his horse, into his
owne country, where hee leauied men, and inuited all his friends to ioyne with him
in so honourable an enterprise, to free the King from the oppression wherein they
held him, so as within few daies hee had gathered together one thousand horse, there
being ioyned with him the Earle of Castagneda, and D. Pedro Sarmiento: against whom
Don Iohn King of Nauarre sent fifteene hundred Launces, led by the Admirall and the
Earle of Benauent, who led Prince Henry with them, who did not yet descouer himselfe,
but onely kept these two parties from fighting, making them in some sort friends, and
satisfied at that time one of an other, and then hee returned to Segobia. Whilest that
the Admirall and Earle of Benauent were absent in this voiage, hauing lest the Kings
in Tordesillas, Pero Aluares Osorio of the Bishop of Auilas faction, came and presented
himselfe before the towne, being accompanied with many souldiars, and did endeuor
to enter, but he could not, wherevpon he retired.
These things made the King of Nauarre, and the confederats very iealous, that there
was some great conspiracy against them, and not able yet to discouer who were the
conspirators, to bee the better certefied, they sent to intreat the Prince D. Henry to
come to Tordesillas, that they might aduise what was to bee done for the totall ruine
of the Constable, as they had concluded together.
The Prince hauing therein the Bishops aduice, who demaunded nothing more,
came with an intent to make knowne vnto the King his father the league which hee
had newly made, to free him from Gouernment, and to comfort him. Arriuing
at Tordesillas with the Bishop of Auila, Iohn de Pacheco and many other Noblemen,
they were receiued by the King of Nauarre, with great demonstration
of ioy. At that time there was no meanes for to conferre together, nor to treate
of any affaires, for they were readie to celebrate a marriage betwixt the King of

Nauarre, and the Admirall Henriques daughter, which were preparing with great state,
at the tower of Lobaton, whither all men went.
This marriage was accomplished to the great griefe of Don Charles Prince of Viana,Nauarre.
to whose preiudice the king D. Iohn his father,Mariage of the king of Nauar with D. Ioane Henriques. detayned the Realme of Nauar, and wold
not leaue it, although it were his inheritance by his mother, which was the cause of great
troubles. This Princesse D. Ioane was of the bloud royall of ^astile, for the Admirall Don
Frederick her father, was sonne to Don Alphonso Henriques, and grand-child to Don
Frederick Master of Saint Iames, who by the commandement of Don Pedro the cruell,
his brother, was slaine at Seuile. At the same time Don Fernand of Aualos, Chamberlaine
to the Infant D. Henry, was sent to bring Donna Beatrix, sister to Don Alphonso
Pimentel, Earle of Benauent, to Cordoua, being promised to the Infant his master: in
which citie that mariage was celebrated, of whom came D. Henry of Arragon, called the
Infant of Fortune, or the Fortunate, who came to be Duke of Segorbe.
The Court being returned to Tordesillas,Castile. they began to treat of matters against the
Constable, whereupon the Prince told the king of Nauarre, that it were good all they
of the league were together, to determine of matters of so great importance, the which
pleased the king of Nauarre, whereupon there were letters and messengers sent to them
that were absent to draw them to Court: and for that Tordesillas would not serue to
lodge so great an assembly, the towne of Areualo was appointed. The Bishop of Auila
was very desirous, that the king and the Prince, father and sonne, might conferre freely
together, the which was very difficult: for there were spies set by the king of Nauarre about
the kings person in his chamber, and in all other places, who did obserue what hee
sayd or did, and yet the king could not helpe it: yet the bishop found meanes to aduise
him, that he should faine himselfe to be somewhat sicke, and that vppon this occasion,
the Prince, vnder colour to visit him, and to do his duty, might deliuer many things vnto
him which might please him. The king kept his bed for a time, whereby the Prince had
oportunity to discouer the new league vnto him, and to assure him, that the Constable
whom he had chased away, should yet deliuer him from the captiuity wherein they held
him: wherewith the king was so ioyed, as he could not containe himselfe, but he did outwardly
shew the hope which he had conceiued, which made the gards suspect, that the
father and the sonne had had some discourse of great consequence, whereof they did aduertise
the King of Nauarre, who was very iealous of the bishop. They caused the Admirall
to aske the king, what good discourse the Prince his sonne had vsed, wherewith he
was so ioyed. The king wisely concealing what he knew, answered, that they were tales
of the follies of youth.
This busines hauing succeeded wishfully for the Bishop, the Prince tooke his leaue of
the two kings, his father and father-in-law, and so returned to Segobia, to attend (sayd
he) the time of the assembly at Areualo: but it was the least of his thoughts, for he had a
speciall desire to breake it if he could: whereof hauing conferred by the way with the bishop
of Auila his Councellor, he (who was a cunning politicke man) found this expedient:
he went to Areualo, beeing a towne of his Diocesse of Auila, with a great trayne,
and finding the lodgings alreadie marked, for the Noblemen that should come thither,
he caused some to quarrell with the harbingers, and with such of the traine as were already
come, so as he put the towne into a great confusion. Many of those which were alreadie
lodged, were forced to depart, and to giue place to my Lord Bishop and his men,
and then seeking for other lodging, there grew other contentions among them of the
Court, so as the king of Nauarre being aduertised thereof, hee was much discontented,
and growing more suspitious, he would not go to that assembly, fearing some practise
against him. The Prince hauing what he demanded, he wrote vnto the king of Nauarre,
complayning much that he was not come to the assembly at Areualo: wherefore they
sent the Admirall Don Frederick vnto him to Saint Mary de Nyeua to draw him to another
assembly, whereunto the Prince pretending some excuses, the Admirall told him,
that if he came not, it would seeme, that he meant to withdraw himselfe from the vnion
of the king of Nauarre and the confederate Lords.
The Prince pretended many reasons hee had for it, but he dissembled his intent: the

Admirall intreated him for an enterview with his father in^law at Olmedo, whereof hee
excused himselfe as honestly as he could, and sent backe the Admirall very much discontented:
for he spake not but as he was aduised by the Bishop of Auila, who wished him
not to enter into Olmedo, nor into any place belonging to the king of Nauarre. The
Bishop being vigilant and actiue to do any thing that might giue forme and effect to his
enterprise, for the restoring of the Constable to his first fauour and authoritie, posted
to Alba de Tormes, whereas he made the Arch-bishop of Toledo, and the Earle of Alba
his Nephew good friends and seruants to the Prince Don Henry, aduertising them
of all that had beene done, and he gaue order in Alba, that the like aduice should bee giuen
vnto Don Inigo Lopes of Mendoca, Lord of Hita and Buytrago, and being returned
to Segobia, he caused the Prince to write vnto him, and to promise to fauour him in the
question he had with the king of Castile for the Asturia's of Santillana. During these
practises in Castile, the Infant Don Henry hauing seized vpon the cittie of Cordoua, he
sought to draw the townes of Andalusia into the Confederats power, and had attempted
to seaze vpon Seuile; where finding resistance, he layed siege vnto it, and did greatly
presse it, at such time as the Prince D. Henry did publish his resolution openly in the citie
of Auila, which was, to continue vnder the obedience of the king his father, and to
seeke to free him from them that did oppresse him: wherefore they of Seuile, vppon this
newes, tooke courage, and did valiantly repulse the Infant. The Earles of Castagneda
and Haro, with many other Knights, hearing of this resolution, sent instantly to present
their seruice vnto the Prince.
The king of Nauarre seeing this storme approch, sought by all meanes to pacifie the
Prince, promising him all that he had formerly demanded, and not obtayned, but it was
too late. He that carried this message vnto the Prince for the king of Nauarre, was a wise
man, called Aluar Garcia of Saint Mary, who hath written part of the Chronicle of this
King of Castile. The king of Nauarre and his confederates seeing the Princes desseines,
and that they must come to force, they assembled men from all parts, and so did the
Prince: for the Constable, the Arch-bishop of Toledo, and the Earle of Alba came presently
to him to Auila, whereas they might haue some fifteene hundred horse, not sufficient
to beseege Tordesillas where the king was: wherefore they resolued to go towards
Burgos, to ioyne with the Earles of Haro, Castagneda, and Plaisance, and with Don
Inigo Lopes of Mendoca: whereof the King of Nauarre being aduertised, hauing alreadie
leuied aboue two thousand horse, he led the king to Portillo, and hauing there left him
in the guard of the Earle of Castro, he marched with his troupes towards Burgos, beeing
resolued to fight with the Prince and his men, and he came and camped at Pamphega in
the territorie of Burgos.King of Castile deliuered. The Prince who was within the cittie, and had alreadie aboue
three thousand horse and foure thousand foote, fallyed forth, and came and lodged within
view of his father-in-lawes armie. They expected nothing but a bloudie battell betwixt
these two factions: but they retired without any blowes, but only a light skirmish,
the which happened, whilest they did capitulate, at the sollicitation of some good relligious
men: at which treatie the king of Nauarre did in a manner yeeld to all that the
Prince required, leauing the king of Castile in full libertie to restore his Officers, and to
do what he pleased. The king of Nauarre finding no meanes to make an accord beeing
the weaker, he dislodged in the night, without sound of trumpet, and retired to Palencuela.King of Na^ars league dispersed.
The king of Castile being ill guarded in Portillo, vnder colour of going a hunting
escaped from the Earle of Castro, and came to Vailledolit, whither the Bishop of Auila
came presently vnto the Princes and the Confederates campe, which was neere vnto Palencuela.
The king shewed the best countenance he could vnto the Bishop, and acknowledging
the good seruice he had done him in his deliuerie, he made him infinit promises.
The King of Nauar, the Admirall, the Earle of Benauent, D. Pedro of Quignones, and other
heads of their faction, seeing themselues low, and at their enemies mercy, they resolued
to retire themselues, euery one to his house, and there to attend the euent: wherefore
the K. of Nauar, who for some yeares had not seen Nauar, went thither to prouide men
 and meanes, to enter speedily with great forces into Castile,Nauarre. against his aduersaries.
Being come into his Realme, he first of all furnished his fronter places, with all things

necessarie, to resist the king of Castiles attempts: who had no great desire to pursue him
into Nauarre, but onely to spoyle him and his, of that which they held in Castile, and first
of all he tooke Medina del campo, and Olmedo: then the towne of Pegnafiel was taken
by force and sacked, and the castle yeelded by composition, Roa and Aranda of Duero
opened their gates vnto the Prince, who with the Constable (hauing nothing that made
head in Castile the old) past into Andalusia, against the Infant Don Henry, and forced
him to flie into the country of Murcia, where he fortified himselfe in Lorca, vntill that
the Prince was retired into Castile, and then he passed into Arragon, and so ioyned with
the king of Nauarre his brother, who leuied men to returne into Castile. In the yeare
1445. dyed the Queenes Leonora of Portugall,An. 1445. and Mary of Castile,D^ath of two Queenes sisters poisoned. sisters to the king of
Nauarre, not without suspition of poyson: the Queene of Portugall was carryed from
Toledo, where she dyed, to the Monasterie of S. Mary of the battell: and Queene Mary
dying at Villacastin a burrough of Segobia, was interred in the Monasterie of Guadalupe.
Almost at the same time dyed Lope of Mendoca, Arch-bishop of Seuile, whose place
was giuen to Don Aluaro of Osorno, Bishop of Cuenca, and his Bishopricke was conferred
to Don Lopes of Barriento bishop of Auila, the which was giuen to Alphonso of
Fonseca,(...) such changes made the Pastors of Spaine, seeking the best reuenues. In the
spring-time the king of Nauar entred into Castile by Atienca, with foure hundred horse,
and sixe hundred foot: where at his first entry, he tooke Torrija, Alcala o^ Henares, Alcala
the old, and Saint Torquat, whither the Infant D. Henry his brother came with 500
men at armes.
These newes made the king go from Medina into the Realme of Toledo, where hauing
gathered together all the souldiers he could, hee marched that way, where as hee
thought to find the King of Nauarre, and comming neere to Alcala of Henares the
towne was yeelded to him. There the King of Nauarre presented himselfe to fight, but he
of Castile would not accept the battell: wherefore the King of Nauarre, and Don Henry
past the port or mount of Tablada, and led their army to Olmedo, where as the gates being
shut, and resistance made, they entred by force, and hauing caused informations to
be made against them that were culpable, Doctor Fuente, and two other Gentlemen
were condemned to dye, and were executed. The King of Castile following the king of
Nauarre, came and camped at the milles of the Abbey, within a little league of Olmedo,
hauing in his army the Prince his sonne, the Constable, the Earle of Alba, D. Inigo Lopes
of Mendoca, Don Lope of Barrientos, newly made Bishop of Cuenca, and then the
Earle of Haro came and ioyned with him. On the other side the Admirall, the Earles of
Benauent and Castro, Don Pedro of Quignones, D. Iohn of Tobar, beeing sent by the K.
of Nauarre, entred into Olmedo with a thousand horse, the which being ioyned to them
which the king of Nauarre and the Infant had brought, and gathered together, made about
fiue and twenty hundred horse.
Matters beeing readie to be decided by an ineuitable battell, the king of Nauarre hauing
no will to hazard himselfe*Confederats beseeged in Olmedo. hee demaunded a parle of the king of Castile of some
Knights of either part, the which being granted, the Admiral and the Earle of Benauent
of the one side, and the Bishop of Cuenca, and the Constable on the other, conferred
together many times, the King of Nauarre in a manner demanding no other thing, but
that they should restore to him the Infant D. Henry, the Earle of Castro, and others of
the league, their lands and estates: but as for the gouernement of the Realme, and quarrels
with the Constable, hee made not any mention. The Bishop vsing his accustomed
pollicy, prolonged this treaty all he could, knowing that D. Guttiere of Soto-major master
of Alcantara, should come within few daies to the campe with sixe hundred horse,
by which supply the king of Castile being euery way the stronger, he did hope to see his
enemies wholly defeated, and forced to yeeld to his and the Constables mercie. The
co^ference being ended without any conclusion,Demand of the confederats of the King of Castile. the king of Nauarre, and the confederates,
sent Lope of Angulo, and the Licentiat Cuellar his Chancelor, to the campe, to acquaint
the king of Castile with the miseries and losses which do follow a battel, whereunto
the Constable, respecting only his priuate interest, aspired tyrannously, for the fruits
which he gaped after by the death of the best Knights of Castile: wherefore hee should

do a thing worthie of himselfe, to chase away this man, arrogant of the authoritie which
he held vnworthily, and decree that they might bee heard in iustice, in some citie or other
place of the Realme, whither they should come like men of peace, not bringing with
them aboue ten men vpon moyles: else they protested, that they would make their complaints
vnto the Pope, and that the miseries which should follow, should be by his fault.
The king answered, that he would take order, requiring to haue this demand in writing.
Two dayes after Prince Henry going to view Olmedo,Prince Henry made to runne away. with certaine light horse, hee was
charged by the enemies who sallyed out of the towne, who made him to flie shamefully
to the campe, the which did so much displease the king his father, as instantly refusing to
heare any more speech of an accord, he caused his Standard to be displayed, and his men
to be put into battell; the Constable leading the foreward with eight hundred men at
armes: the Prince the battell with foure hundred men at armes, and the king the reereward
with sixe hundred men at arms, besides the light horsemen, which were very many
and diuided into these ordonances, the which hee made to stand firme aboue an hower,
in view of Olmedo, to see if the king of Nauarre would come foorth: who beeing wonderfully
incensed at this brauado, although he had not equall forces to his aduersarie, yet
like a couragious Prince, he would needs go foorth to fight, contrarie to the aduice of
many, it beeing late, opposing his squadron, and that which the Earle of Castro led against
Prince Henry, and the Infant his brother, the Admirall, the Earle of Benauent, Pedro
of Quignones, and Fernand Lopes of Saldaigne, with the rest of the forces against the
Constable of Castile:Battel of Olmedo llst by the k. of Nauar and so began the battell about two houres before Sunne-setting,
whereas the king of Nauarre and the confederates, notwithstanding their endeauours,
were vanquished: and it was happie for them that approching night parted them, and
kept the victors from pursuing of their enemies: so as notwithstanding that they did fight
with great resolution and obstinacie, yet there were but seuen and thirtie slaine vppon
the place, and about two hundred dyed after, of such as had beene wounded in the battel.
The King of Nauarre and his brother D. Henry (who was sore hurt in the left hand) retired
to Olmedo: the Earle of Benauent fled as farre as Pedraza: the Admirall was taken by
a Squire called Peter of Carera, who notwithstanding brought him to his owne house,
at the tower of Lobaton: many Noblemen and others, in number aboue two hundred
were taken. Among which the chiefe were, the Earle of Castro, and a sonne of his called
Don Pedro of Sandouall, Alphonso of Alarcon, D. Henry Henriques, the Admirals brother,
Fernand of Quignones, Diego of Londogno sonne to Sancho Roarigo of Aualos,
nephew to Don Ruy Lopes of Aualos, sometimes Constable of Castile, and Don Pedro
of Quignones, but he found meanes to escape. The rest of the confederates armie fled to
diuers parts, and was not pursued by reason of the night.
The King of Castile much pleased with this victorie, sent commandement throughout
his whole Realme, that they should make bon fires in signe of ioy, and hee caused a
chappell to be built vppon the place of fight, which he named the holy Ghost of the battell,
and hauing the day after sent Guttiere Sanches of Aluarado prisoner to Vailledolit, he
caused his head to be cut off. Before midnight the king of Nauarre, and the Infant his
brother going out of Olmedo, with such forces as they had, they tooke the way of Portillo,
and by Fonte Duegna they came to Daroca, and from thence to Calatajub, where
as the Infant Don Henry dyed of the wound which he had receiued in the hand,Death of Don Henry Infant of Arrrgon. it being
inflamed: his bodie was at that time layed in the chappell of D. Iohn de Luna, in that city,
and afterwards transported to Poblete, whereas the king Don Fernand his father lyes. He
left his wife Donna Beatrix with child, who was afterwards deliuered of a son, who was
called Don Henry of Arragon, and by surname the Fortunate Infant. His death was the
more grieuous to the King of Nauarre, for that it happened in an vnseasonable time, after
the losse of a battel^: besides, seeing himselfe depriued of such a brother, it did but increase
his griefe for the late death of his two sisters, the Queenes of Castile and Portugall,
there remayning not any o^ so many children which the deceased King Fernand his
father had left,League of the king of Nauar wholy dissolued. but onely he and Don A^phonso king of Arragon, who was in a manner
continually resident at Naples, and had no lawfull children. By this losse the king of Nauarre
was wholy abandoned by the confederate Lords of Castile, who retired home to

their houses to settle their affaires: but the King of Castile pursued them with all rigour
of Iustice, causing them to be proclaymed Rebels, and forfeiting their lands to the crown,
without respect of any:Condemnations against the confederates. yet the Prince D. Henry laboured so, as the Admirall was put out
of the roule of them that were condemned, but not without difficultie. In the castell of
Medina of Rio. secco was Donna Theresa of Quignones, with Donna Ioane wife to the
King of Nauarre. The king being come thither, he receiued the place, and vsed the Ladies
gratiously, by the Princes intercession, who preserued the Admirals goods, estates,
and family, vppon condition that he should return to the kings seruice, within foure moneths:
notwithstanding Queene Ioane remayned in the king of Castiles power: and the
League against the Constable was so dispersed, as there was not any towne or castle, but
was yeelded vp into the kings power, nor any man of name that durst oppose himselfe:
but some retired into Nauarre, and others into remote places, and little frequented by
the Court: The Admirall, the Earle of Benauent, Don Diego Manrique, Gouernour of
Leon, Don Pedro of Quignones, and Iohn Tobar, went towards Nauarre: by reason wherof
the King fearing some enterprise of that side, came to Burgos. Don Alu^ro de Luna,
the Constable beeing freed from so great enemies,Constable restored to fauor and made Master of S. Iames. grew to be in greater credite then euer,
and whereas he had been but administrator of Saint Iames, he was made Master of
that Order, which honors were but baytes of misfortune which did follow him, to plunge
him in extreme miserie.
He entertayned friendship with the Princes of Portugall as his last refuge: and in the
time of this warre had procured for the king of Castile a succour of 1600. horse and
two thousand foote, the which Don Pedro the third Constable of Portugal, sonne to
the Infant Don Pedro, Regent of the Realme, a young Prince but seuenteene yeares old,
brought to Majorga after the battell, where they were receiued and feasted with great
ioy: but for that there was no vse for them, they were sent backe payed and well satisfied.
In this voyage, the Constable treated with the Portugals, to haue the King his master,
(whose Queene was dead fiue moneths before) to marrie with Donna Izabella daughter
to the Infant D. Iohn deceased,Beginning of the kings hatred against the Constable. who had beene Master of Saint Iames in Portugall, wherwith
he had not made the king in any sort acquainted, so much hee presumed of the power
he had ouer him. This marriage with some other things, were afterwards the cause
that the King did hate him mortally.
This Prince D. Henry, and many other knights considering how great a losse it wold
be, if so many great Lords and worthie men should be estranged from Castile, they delt
so with the king (who of himselfe was patient and tractable) as they obtained a generall
pardon for all such as had carried armes with the King of Nauarre: vnto the which these
Articles following were annexed:
That a pardon was granted to the Admirall,Pardon granted to the confederates fled into Nauarre and other places. who should returne into Castile, when
he had leaue from the king, and should retire vnto the tower of Lobaton, in the which,
and the limits thereof, he should remaine confined two yeares: The Earle of Benauent
had the like sentence to remaine in his house at Benauent two yeares: and that he should
take into his charge and guard Donna Ioane Queene of Nature, and not suffer her after
the two yeares expired, to depart without the kings commandement, and the consent of
Prince Henry, and after that the Earle himselfe, and that the Admirall had taken an oath
of fealty vnto the king, to serue him against all men, according to the lawes of Castile.
These things beeing thus concluded, the King being at Burgos, he gaue the title of Marquis
of Santillana, to Don Inigo Lopes of Mendoca, for his good and acceptable seruice:
to Don Iohn de Pacheco in fauour of the Prince, the title of Marquis of Villena: the gouernement
of the castle of Burgos, held till that time by the Earle of Plaisance, was giuen
to Iohn of Luxan. Not onely the king of Nauarre, but his sonne the Prince Don
Charles, yea Don Alphonso of Arragon, Master of Calatraua, lost at this time all they
had in Castile. Don Pedro Giron, brother to Don Iohn de Pacheco, was made Master of
Calatraua by the king, being at Auila, and Don Alphonso, who was retired into Nauarre
with his father, depriued thereof: yet D. Iohn Ramires of Guzaman great Commander of
the Order, tooke vpon him the title of Master, against D. Pedro Giron: which contention
was afterwards reconciled by the Princes authority and others.

In the meane time they did write out of Murcia to the king,Granado. that they suspected the
Moores would make some attempt: wherefore it was necessarie to prouide for that fronter,
but it was a brute without effect, for that King Mahumet Aben-Azar, then raigning,
was forced to defend himselfe in his owne Realme, against another called Mahumet Aben
Ozmen, called Coxo, his nephew, who had rebelled against him, to depriue him of his
Realme, as he did, hauing intelligence with many Morish Knights of Grando, by whose
meanes he seized of the citty, and of Alhambra, and tooke King Mahumet his vncle, who
at that time lost his Realme, beeing the third time, and neuer recouered it more in the
yeare, one thousand, foure hundred, forty and fiue, hauing raigned thirteene yeares and
three moneths.
The King of Castile went into Extremadura,Castile. and forced D. Fernand of Aualos, sonne
to the sometimes Constable D. Ruy Lopes of Aualos, to yeeld him vp the fort of Albuquerque
and others, which had belonged to the Infant D. Henry, in consideration of
some recompence which the deceased Infant his Master did owe him. The king beeing at
Toledo, he tooke the Gouernement of the cittie from Pero Lopes of Ayala, who was a
partisan to the King of Nauarre, and gaue it to Pedro Sarmiento. There were many complaints
made by the Officers, and lesser Magistrates of the cittie, the which the king dissembled:
for that the Prince fauoured him, and was much discontented for that hee was
put from his gouernement of Toledo. In the meane time the King of Nauarre, (who was
also as Regent in Arragon, in the absence of King Alphonso his brother) prouided money,
and all other meanes to renue the watre in Castile, whereas hee yet held two strong
places, Atienca and Torrijo, and by the meanes of Gaston Earle of Foix his sonne-in-law,
(who had married D. Leonora his second daughter, to whom afterwards the succession of
the realme of Nauarre fell) he pretended to draw so me great succours out of France. In
Atienca Roderigo of Rebolledo was Gouernor, with a garrison of two hundred horse and
foure hundred foot: who by their continuall courses held the country for many leagues
round about in continuall alarme, killing, burning and carrying away all they incountred,
whereof there came daily complaints vnto the king of Castiles eares: wherefore
there were some troupes of horse sent to restraine their courses, vntill there might bee a
sufficient armie raised to beseege the place: and the better to attend his warre, the King
reconciled certaine pettie quarrels, which the Prince his sonne did cause; and he granted
libertie to the Admirall, and Earle of Benauent for their persons, restoring them to their
Lands and Estates freely: and moreoueer he suffered that Queene Ioane, wife to the king
of Nauarre, should be deliuered into her fathers hands, and kept by him, vntill that the
king of Castile should determine of her deliuerie to the king her husband. D. Diego Gomes
of Sandoual was also pardoned, the King retayning his forts still for two yeares: the
like pardon was granted to his sonnes, and to D. Iohn of Tobar, Lord of Berlanga: the
fort of Berlanga did also remaine two yeares in the kings hands.
These things beeing thus ordered,Siege of Atiensa. the king went in person to the siege of Atienca, the
which was furiously battered and assayled with engins of warre, and also with some iron
Ordinance; for the casting of brasse Ordinance was not then vsed in Spaine: so as Roderig^
of Rebolledo, Captaine of the Garrison, seeing himselfe thus prest, gaue the King
of Nauarre to vnderstand, that if he were not releeued, he could not hold it long: wherupon
the king of Nauarre, (who was not in case to rayse the seege) sent to propound
some meanes of a truce with him of Castile, the which was granted vpon condition, that
the townes of Atienca and Torrijo should be deliuered into the hands of Mary Queene
of Arragon, for a certaine time limited: during the which they should conferre of the
meanes to make a good peace betwixt the two kings: and if their quarrels could bee determined,
then the Queene should restore those two places to her brother-in-lawe the
king of Nauarre.
All hostility ceasing by this meanes,Choler of the King of Castile the king entred into Atienca, whereas mooued
by some vnknowne occasion, without regard of that which had beene capitulated, hee
caused some houses to bee sacked and ruined, and others to be consumed with fire, so as
a good part of the towne was burnt: whereat the King of Nauarre was much offended,
and would no more stand to the accord, nor deliuer the Castles and places to the Queene

of Arragon, reproching the King, that he had broken his promise, and giuing commandement
to his souldiers, that they should vse all acts of hostilitie, and commit what
spoiles they could in Castile, the which they did, and with such excesse, as the king of
Castile sent backe in the yeare 1446.1446. Don Charles of Areillan, Lord of los Cameros, a
great and famous Captaine, to suppresse the robberies and insolencies of the Nauarrois
in Atienca: and against them of Torrijo, Don Alphonso Carillo of Acugna, newly made
Arch-bishop of Toledo, by the death of Don Guttiere Gomes of Toledo, either of them
hauing three hundred Lances: but they of Torrijo made no great esteeme of the Arch-bishop
nor of his followers, making roades daily into the countrey, and bringing great
booties into their forts. They of Atienca were held more short and curbed by Charles
of Areillan.
The Arch-bishop hauing beene often beaten by the Nauarrois, and lost many of his
men, the King commaunded Don Inigo Lopes of Mendoca, that taking the Arch-bishoppes
forces,Torriio biseeged. with some new that were assigned him, he should continue the seege of
Torrijo, the yeare 1447. beeing well aduanced: The seege was long, notwithstanding
that the towne was battered both with Ar^illerie and Engines, for Iohn de Puelles who
defended it, was a valiant and couragious Captaine, and of great experience: yet the
continuance did so tyre him, as finding daily the want of men, victuals, and other necessarie
munition, to endure a seege, and beeing out of hope of succours from the king of
Nauarre, hee resolued to yeeld vp the place vppon very honorable conditions, and retired
his men and baggage safe into Arragon: the towne and castle of Atienca remayning
still in the power of the Nauarrois, who in despight of Charles of Areillan, issued
forth and spoiled the country; and moreouer they tooke Pegna of Alcacar, a fort in the
territory of Soria, from whence they did forrage, and carry away aboundance of cattaile
and other things, which they sent to sell in Arragon, where they had a safe retreat, as in a
country belonging to their Princes brother, who was then at Naples, well aduertised, to
his great griefe, of all the troubles of Castile, and the successe thereof, doing what hee
could to pacefie them, both by letters and Ambassage, yet fauoring his brother D. Iohn
King of Nauarre.
This yeere 1447.Second marriage of Don Iohn King of Castile. the King of Castile was married at Madrigall, to D. Isabella, daughter
to the Infant D. Iohn of Portugal, Maister of Saint Iames, who was sonne to the King D.
Iohn, who was maister of Auiz. This marriage was the Constables ruine, the Queene
being his enemy. The King of Nauarre being come to the Estates of Arragon, which
were held at Saragossa, at that time, there to preside as Gouernor Generall in the absence
of the King his brother, he was sommoned by Doctor Surban, and a Prouost of the
Court, sent Ambassadours from the King of Castile, to deliuer vp Atienca, as it had
beene concluded: which Ambassadours complayned to the Estates, that they that spoiled
the countrie of Castile, had their retreat into Arragon: whereunto answer was made
that they would send an answer to the King of Castile by expresse Ambassadours: and
soone after they dispatched Don Iames de Luna, Bishop of Tarrassone, and Don Iohn
of Ixar, who found the king at Soria, hauing charge to treat of a peace betwixt the two
kings: The King of Castile appointed them to follow him to Vailledolit, whether he was
prest to go, the which they would not do, and so they returned to Sarragossa, without
any conclusion.
In the meane time the Captaine, who had suffered Pegna of Alcacar to be surprized,
beeing ashamed to shew himselfe before the King, by reason of his error, hee sought to
repaire it, and surprized the fort of Verdejo in Arragon, the which he gaue to the king
his master, who hauing set good garrisons vppon the fronters of Arragon, hee went in
great hast to Vailledolit.
This yeare dyed Pope Eugenius the fourth at Rome,Amadeus of Sauoy called Pope Felix. who had bin condemned by the
Councell of Basill, and in his place Amadeus D. of Sauoy was chosen, who at that time
was Deane of Saint Maurice of the congregation of Saint Augustin, the hermitage of
Ripaille, in the Diocesse of Geneua, who carried himselfe as Pope, all the time that Eugenius
liued, notwithstanding that hee had retayned his dignitie: after whose death Nicholas
the fift being chosen at Rome, he renounced his Popedome, hauing held it 9. years

and fiue moneths, the rest of his dayes hee passed with the title of Cardinall of Santa
Sabina.
The reason which drew the king of Castile in such hast to Vailledolit, was, for that
hee had beene aduertised there were some knights would stirre vp new troubles: thither
came Ambassadors againe to him from Arragon,1448. in the beginning of the yeare, 1448.
who hauing treated of many things, in the end they concluded a truce for seuen moneths,
betwixt Castile and Nauarre: whereof the garrisons of Nauarre, beeing not aduertised
in time, they continuing their hostility in Castile, they surprized the towne of S.
Cruz of Campeco by scalado, it belonging to Lope of Rojas, whom they carried away,
with his wife and many others. And moreouer, the Gouernour of Albarazin seazed vppon
the castell of Huelamo, in the Bishoppricke of Cuenca, the which hauing beene ill
guarded by the Castillans, was well worse by these, so as Iohn Hurtado of Meudoca, recoured
it by the meanes of a Castillan souldier, who was there in gouernement among
the Naurrois.
The king of Castile sent into Nauarre to summon Prince Charles in consequence of
the truce, to deliuer Don Lope de Rojas, and the towne of Santa Cruz, the which was
done.A combate. At that time a knight of Bourgondie called Iames of Lalain, did fight a combate,
without any cause of quarrell, but onely to make triall of his valour, as it was the maner
in those times, against Don Diego de Guzman, brother to the Lord of Torrija, at Vailledolit
Don Diego was sore wounded in the fore-head with a battell-axe, after which they
closed, but the King casting his staffe, parted the combate, and did great honour to the
Bourguignon.
Ambition and couetousnesse, as they say, haue neither bounds nor bottome: the
which shewes it selfe chiefly in such as haue the gouernement of great Estates, whereof
at that time Don Aluaro de Luna, Constable of Castile was a notable president, who
not content with the happinesse to haue seene a dangerous League, conspired to his
ruine, by so many Princes, and great Noblemen broken, himselfe restored to the Princes
fauour, and to triumph ouer his enemies, but hee would plunge them into the like
miserie, as hee had escaped, and wholly gouerne the king and Realme with Don Iohn de
Pacheco the Princes Minion,Practises of the Constable D. Aluaro de Luna. and so diuide all the honours, fauours, and greatnesse of
Spaine betwixt them. Don Alphonso of Fonseca, newly made Bishop of Auila, was an
apt Councellor for their de^^eigne, who was of opinion, that they should cause some
of the great ones, who were offensiue vnto them, to be committed to prison. Hauing
therefore mediated an enterview of the king and Prince betwixt Tordesillas and Villeverd,
the Court beeing very great and stately, there were apprehended the Earles of
Benauent and Alba, Don Pedro and Suero of Quignones, and Don Henry brother to
the Admirall Don Frederick (who was also vppon the rowle, but beeing ill disposed, he
came not to this enterview) so as hee escaped, and so did Don Diego Gomes of Sandoual,
Earle of Castro Xeris, who beeing either aduertised, or doubting of some practise,
stayed at home: and afterwards hauing aduice, that the king came to Aguilar del campo,
and the Prince to Lerma, to take the Admirall and him, they both left their houses, and
retired to Nauarrette, and from thence passed to Tudele, where the King of Nauarre was,
whose faction was the accusation and colour of these imprisonments: the Constable
saying moreouer, that they had conspired to kill him.
The Admirall and Earle of Castro, were very kindly entertayned by the King of Nauarre,
who led them with him to Sarragossa, where it was resolued, that the Admirall
should go to Naples to the King of Arragon, to acquaint him with the gouernement of
Castile, and to sollicite him to come into Spayne, to ayde them to recouer their rankes,
dignities and lands, or else that he would giue them leaue to vse his forces of Arragon.
According to this Councell the Admirall embarked at Barcelona, and went to Naples.
The king of Castile hauing no great confidence in Don Diego Manrique, who had
the guard of the frontier of Nauarre, he forced him to leaue the forts of Ocon, Nauarret,
and Treuigno, and gaue them himselfe in guard to the Earle of Haro his Brother-in-law
for one yeare. These things thus done, all the lands of them that were absent
were seized on, and put into the kings hands, many Noblemen in Court beeing much

offended at these violences: but aboue all others they found the Earle of Albas imprisonment
very strange, who had alwaies shewed himselfe a faithfull seruant to the king,
and a partizan to the Constable: and euery man examined his conscience: many beeing
terrified, remembring that they had offended the King, or the Prince in some light matters,
so as there were retreates made daily from Court without leaue, with other confusions,
which made the king to see from whence the mischiefe came: besides, throughout
all Spaine they spake plainely and boldly, that the Constables ambitious desire to raigne
in Spain, had caused this tumult in Court, and so wronged the Noblemen that were prisoners.
Don Alphonso King of Portugall, sonne to Donna, Leonora sister to the king of
Nauarre, beeing dead in Castile, as it was thought, of poyson, beganne to apprehend
it: yea the King of Granado stirred in fauour of them that were so vnworthily poursued
by the Constable: wherewith the king of Castile beeing mooued, hee had a desire to
seize vppon the Constable: yet distrusting the inconstancie of the Prince his sonne, he
durst not do it.
There were some troupes of horse and foote sent to the frontiers of Nauarre and Granado,Moores of Granado incited by the king of Nauarre against Castile.
especially against the Moores, who spoyled the Countrie of Murcia, King Mahumet
Aben-Ozmen beeing sollicited by the King of Nauarre, to do the worst hee could to
the Christians of Castile, where all was full of seditions: but these were practises vnworthie
of a Christian Prince, yet vsuall among the Princes of this world, that are at warre,
who oftentimes make religion a vaile to couer their couetous, and inordinate passions
and affections.


Mahumet Coxo, the 17. king of
Granado.
THis Mahumet called Coxo,Granado. beeing come to the Crowne of Granado, by the violence
hee vsed against his vncle Mahumet, maintained himselfe with the like art, wherat
many of the Knights of Granado beeing incensed; they retired themselues to Montefrio,
a place which onely reiected the command of this tyrant; beeing held by Andilbar,
who had beene high Marshall to King Mahumet the left-handed, who entertayned
an enemie to King Coxo, to dispossesse him of the Crowne, as hee had done his
Vncle.
It was the Infant Aben Izmael, who hauing followed the warre in the seruice of
the King of Castile, had retired himselfe, with his leaue and fauour, to Montefrio, to this
Marshall, and there had beene saluted for King, yet weake, and ill prouided to make any
attempt against Granado, and the Alhambra, the seate royall, which was held by Coxo:
but God prepared him the meanes, and stirred vp occasions in time. King Coxo embracing
the confusions and quarrels of Castile, which made them neglect the guard of the
frontiers, and animated by the factions of Nauarre, entring into Andalusia, had taken
the towne of Banamaruel by force, and carried away Iohn de Herrera, who commanded
in the place,Exploits of the Moores in A^dalusia. with many other Christian prisoners, after that hee had slaine many: hee
then beseeged Bancalema, which was defended by Aluaro of Pecellin; the which he forced
in like manner, putting all hee found in it to the sword: for which losses the Captaines
were not to bee blamed, for wanting pay they could not keepe the Garrisons of
those sorts full and compleat: and moreouer, hauing demanded succours from them
of laen, Vbeda, and Baeca, they could not obtaine it, by reason of the diuisions and quarels
betwixt the King and the Prince, father and sonne, which could not be so well and
conueniently compounded, but vppon euery occasion they brake: so as the time beeing
fauourable for the Moorish King, hee made daily and ordinarie roades into Castile,
carrying away infinite spoyles of men, and innumerable multitudes of cattell and
other goods, besides the taking and sacking of the Townes of Arenes, Huescar,

Velez the white, and Velez the red, with their forts and castles, all through the negligence
of such as had the managing of affaires about the kings person,places vpon the fronter of Castile abando^ned by bad ^^^ncell. whereof some were so ill
aduised, as to giue their opinions in councell, that they should not trouble themselues
for those pettie places, which cost more the keeping, then they were worth, and that it
was more for the profit, and the ease of his treasure, to suffer them to bee lost: for with
that which should be spent in keeping them, they might fortifie other places of greater
importance.
This yeare 1448. after the former losses, King Mahumet Aben-Ozmen, was newly
entred into the country of Murcia, making cruell spoiles: wherefore Don Alphonso
Telles Giron, cousin to Don Iohn de Pacheco, being newly made Gouernor of Hellin and
Chumilla, desirous to make triall of his good command, went hastily to field, where finding
some of the Moores troupes disbanded, he charged, and cut some of them in peeces,
where the souldiers began presently to spoyle the dead, not caring to keepe any order
or discipline, or to see if all danger were past. The Moores which escaped, and others
that were not farre off, being aduertised of this defeat of their men, came vnto the place
where the fight had beene,Christians beeing Victors, and busie at the spoile, are vanquished. and finding the Christians dispersed like beasts, and busie at
the pillage, they charged them furiously, so as most of them were slaine. Don Alphonso
Telles with some few knights saued themselues by flight in Hellin, and by this route giuen
vnto the Christians, the way was open for the Moores to spoyle and burne the countrie
at their pleasures.
The King of Castile could hardly preuent these miseries,Castile. beeing continually afflicted
with seditions and mutinies in his Court and house, the Prince Don Henry giuing him
infinite crosses, and for light occasion: the which did much displease the Constable, fearing
that their discord would redound to his los^e and preiudice, wherefore hee made
them conferre together at Tordesillas. At that time the Estates were held at Vailledolit,
where the King hauing declared, that hee went to see the Prince his sonne, to haue him
concurre with him, to the end they might punish Rebels, and reward the good, euery
man hauing spoken something concerning that matter, Diego of Valera, Deputie of
Cuenca, a wise Knight, did highly commend the Kings holy resolution, to seeke the vnion
of his royall house, and to put in practise the act to distribute rewards and punishments
in equall proportion, according to euery mans merits: but hee did aduertise him,
as a faithfull vassall, that to do it without errour and misprison, hee must take the course
of Iustice, and examine euery mans actions, and iudge with good aduice, the parties being
duly called and heard, both present and absent.
The King tooke great delight in Diego's speech, and much more in a letter which hee
writ vnto him afterwards vppon this subiect, full of good and holesome councell and
aduertisements, whereof there were infinite copies taken by the Noblemen in Court,
who dispersed them ouer all Spayne: but this wisedome was offensiue to the Constable
and his faction; wherefore Diego de Valerras his recompence was, that the King took from
him a pension which he before had giuen him, and moreouer, hee was disappointed of
his entertaynment for the voyage hee had made to the Estates at Vailledolit, with Gomez
Carillo of Albornoz, as Deputie of the Diocesse of Cuenca, to teach him to bee a
Courtier, and not so zealous of the good of his Prince and country.
This good Knight was receiued into house by Don Pedro of Estuniga, Earle of Flaisance,
who made him Gouernour of his Nephew Don Pedro, supplying with his owne,
the Kings ingratitude: who hauing seene the Prince, and somewhat reconciled their
dis-ioynted affaires, past to Ocagne in the Realme of Toledo, where hee was aduertised,
that the Earle of Benauent had escaped out of prison from Portillo, and retired into
his countrey, where hee had put a garrison, armes and victuals into his Castle of Benauent,
and other places: Wherefore seeing himselfe engaged in a new warre, hee came
discontented to Areualo, and sent for his souldiers and vassalles to come thither, meaning
to go against the Earle, who stayed not in Castile, but retired to Morgadojo, a
 fort of Portugall,Ciuil warres corrupt the best men. where hee was well entertayned by the commandement of King
Don Alphonso, who did not greatly like the gouernement of Castile.
Ciuill dissentions make many attempt things against reason, and oftentimes such

as are in shew honorable, and of good conuersation, who otherwise would not vndertake 
any thing that were dishonest:Ciuill warres corrupt the best men. the which appeared at this time in Don Bertrand of
Gueuara, Lord of Ognate, a Knight of great authority in Spain towards the North seas;
who desirous to seize vppon the towne of Mondragon, in the Prouince of Guipuscoa,
by reason of the seditions of Castile, he vsed such practises and meanes as hee thought
would serue him: wherein he found the inhabitants contrarie to his will, incensed and
supported by Gomes Goncales of Butron, a Knight of great allyance and power in Biscay;
of the Ognazin faction,Ognazins and Gamboyus, factions in Guipuscoa and Biscay. contrarie to Don Bertrand, who held the partie of Gamboyn;
who seeing himselfe disappointed of that which hee pretended, fell into such hatred of
them of Montdragon, as he caused the towne to be fired in diuers parts, by some that he
had set on: so as he made in a manner all to be most inhumanly burnt. Don Bertrand being
apprehended by the kings commandement for this fact, and accused to haue set fire
of a towne belonging to the Crowne, was in danger to haue lost his life: yet as in a time
of confusion, money and fauour can do more then iustice, he had his life saued, making
satisfaction to them that had beene burnt and damnified: to value the which there were
arbitrators appointed, who by sentence adiudged most part of Don Bertrands lands to
the towne of Montdragon, and more they had giuen, if the foure arbitrators, chosen for
the Inhabitants, had not beene corrupted with money. This towne of Montdragon endured
this calamity, for that it would not bee alienated from the Crowne, for that they
maintayned their liberties better so, then in beeing subiect to any subalternall Lord: and
without doubt if Don Bertrand could haue seized theron, he would haue kept it, in this
time, full of reuolts and excesse, when as the confirmation or the pardon, had beene easie
to haue beene obtayned by a peace or otherwise. In cleargie matters this towne hath
alwaies beene stout to maintaine her rights and priuiledges, still refusing to accept any
Lay patron, as well in that which concernes the fruits, as the right of presentation in the
towne and iurisdiction.
In the yeare 1449. the truce betwixt Castile and Nauarre beeing ended, the garrisons 
of Atienca and of Pegna of Alcacar went to field,Exploits of (...) betwixt the Nauarr^it and Castillans. and made the cruellest warre that
might be. The King of Nauarre being exceeding glad that the Earle of Beneuent had escaped
into Portugall, he fortified himselfe with the fauour of king Don Alphonso by his
meanes: and hauing drawne out of Nauarre and Arragon, and from the Moores in the
Realme of Valencia, which were subiects to Arragon, a good number of fighting men,
sent them vnder the conduct of Don Pedro of Vrrea, Don Iohn Fernandes of Heredia,
Rodrigo of Rebolledo, Don Fernand, and Don Diego, sonnes to the Earle of Castro, and
of the iustice of Arragon, against the towne of Cuenca, making his base sonne Don
Alphonso of Arragon, late Master of the Calatraua, Generall of this armie: the which ioyning
with the troupes which Iohn Hurtado of Mendoca, and Lope of Mendoca his brother,
sonnes to Don Diego, had raysed for his seruice, for that they were entred into quarell
with the Bishop of Cuenca, and were become his enemies, might amount to sixe
thousand men horse and foot: with these forces the cittie of Cuenca was beseeged, the
which was defended by the Bishop Don Lope of Barriento, a better souldier then a Diuine,
although he had some fame for that facultie in Spaine, and by Alphonso Cherino son
to Fernando Alphonso Cherino, Syndic of the citty, and by Lopes and Iohn of Salezar breethren,
Captaines of the garrison, and the Inhabitants who made such resistance, as notwithstanding
that the Nauarrois had taken Saint Anthonies tower, at the bridge, and giuen
great assaults in other places, yet they defended the place, and repulst the enemie;
who despayring to take it, raised the seege, the which they did the rather, for that they
were aduertised, the Constable came with great forces to succour it. Towards Requena
and Vtiel, the king of Nauarre sent Don Baltazar sonne to the Earle of Huelua, with 200
horse and 500. foot, who running along the riuer of Xorquera, tooke a bootie of about
10000. head of small cattell: and the Inhabitants of Requena and Vtiel going foorth to
rescue the prey, they were incountred and defeated, thirty of their Knights beeing slaine
vpon the place, and seuenty caried away prisoners by the Nauarrois, and the rest were all
dispersed.
These were the King of Nauarres exploites, attending the returne of the Admirall

Don Frederick who was gone to Naples with the Bishop of Lerida, where they were so
well receiued by king Alphonso, and heard in their requests, that not beeing able to come
into Spaine as he desired, he sent letters and commandement to the Estates of Arragon
to furnish the king of Nauarre his brother, with men, armes, victuals, money of his
rents and reuenues, and all other things, in such quantitie as he should need, to make
warre against the King of Castile, to recouer from him his lands and Estates, and to deliuer
the Noblemen which were detayned prisoners, by the Constables practises and
slanders: with this prouision the Admirall and Bishop imbarked to returne into Spaine:
hauing receiued gifts and presents with all other good vsage from king Alphonso. The bishop
dyed vppon the way: so as the Admirall returned alone to the king of Nauarre, who
was much pleased with this fauourable dispatch, calling the chiefe men of Arragon to
Saragossa, where he acquainted them with their kings command: whereupon the Arragonois
hauing held a Councell, they besought the king of Nauarre, not to draw
them into quarrell with Castile, with which Realme they desired to maintaine peace, as
long as they might. The king of Nauarre vsed many intreaties and protestations to perswade
them: but he could not induce them to go to the warre with him, yet he drew from
them what summes of money he would, and seeing that he could not perswade them in
generall, he induced some knights in particular to serue him: and to make his way more
easie to that which he pretended, being sufficiently aduertised of the insolencies and follies
which the Constable committed daily to the great disdaine of the Noblemen of Castile,
he sought by all meanes to draw some into his league, letting them vnderstand, that
if they did any longer indure this mad man to gouerne the Realme of Castile in that maner,
they would repent it too late, and when as they should not bee able to preuent the
ruine of their houses, which he sought, hauing no other end but to root out the great families
of the Realme, to settle his familiars, and men of his sort. The king of Nauar had
a speciall desire to draw D. Pedro de Velasco Earle of Haro into this league, beeing a good
Knight, louing iustice, rich and mightyboth in meanes and friends, to whom the Constables
vnlimited ambition, and the vniust detention of so many good men, was displeasing.League made against the Constable D. Aluaro de Luna.
To draw him to his faction, he fed him with hope to marrie his sonne Prince Charls
vnto his daughter: so as the greatnesse of the royall Estate wherein D. Pedro should see
his daughter, if this marriage tooke effect, blinded his eyes, and made him open his eares.
This beeing in some sort concluded, they sent wise and discreet men to the Prince Don
Henry, and to his great minion D. Iohn de Pacheco, Marquis of Villena, and his brother D.
Pedro Giron Master of Calatraua, to D. Inigo Lopes of Mendoca Marquis of Santillana, to
D. Pedro of Estunig a Earle of Plaisance, and to D. Rodrigo Manrique great Commander,
and who caused himselfe to be called Master of S. Iames, to haue them ioyne in this new
league against the Constable, who was the cause of so much iniustice, imprisonments,
exiles, and the confiscations of the goods of so great personages, wherunto they seemed
willing, and it was likely that the Constable would be now ruined: but all goodly beginnings
haue not the like successe. The king of Granado beeing aduertised of all these practises,
sent to make offer to be of the partie, promising to enter into Andalusia, with all
the forces of Granado, to fauor the confederates.
 Whilest these things were working, there happened a great tumult in the citty of Toledo,Sedition at Toledo.
growing by the importune repetition which the Constable made of a million of
Marauidis lent, vnder colour that the king wanted mony: so as an artisan went and rung
the bell, and put the people into furie, in the which a rich Merchant called Alphonso Cotta
was slaine, and other insolencies committed: the which the Constable at that time
could not redresse. Don Pedro Sarmiento Captaine of the cittie, beeing iealous, embraced
this occasion to make his profite, and ioyned with the people, pretending the Kings
seruice, in that he did resist the Constable who was Gouernour of the cittie aboue him:
where hee committed so many outragious extorsions and thefts, as what Pero Lopes of
Avala had done before him, was nothing in respect of him.
The King aduertised of this disorder, drew neere vnto Toledo, to whom they refused
the entrie into their gates, and Don Pedro Sarmiento sent him certaine vnreasonable
Articles to signe, if hee would enter, wherewith the king beeing wrathfully incensed, he

caused the city to be sommoned by a King of armes, protesting to ruine the Inhabitants
if they did not obay: to whom they made answere with their shot and artillery, vsing
words of disgrace and contempt against the King, who leauing some companies about
the city to cut off their victuals and to anoy them, he came to Torrijo, whether the Inhabitants
of Toledo and Pedro Sarmiento sent Ambassadors, to beseech him to take the gouernment
of that great city from the Constable, whom they termed a tyrant, else they
should be forced to deliuer it into the hands of the Prince his sonne, wherewith the King
was more offended then at the refusall they had made (for that the Prince D. Henry and
he seemed to be diuided) so as he made them no answere: wherevpon D. Pedro Sarmiento
sent to Segobia to the Prince, and caused him to come to Toledo. The King hearing
of this, he commanded them that he had left about the city, to retire. But the Prince desired
to enter into Toledo with the good leaue and liking of the King his father,Pedro Sarmiento deliuers Toledo to Prince Henry. but hee
could not obtaine it, wherefore he entred as he might, and gaue a generall pardon, to
all men, namely to Pedro Sarmiento, for all the villanies which he had committed, and left
him Gouernor graunting him all that he desired, promising that he would not send him
to the Court, nor he should not present himselfe before the King, but in his company.
The Prince staied some time at Toledo, where going forth one day a hunting, he was
aduertised that some treated to deliuer the city vnto the King, wherefore he returned
speedily, and after information, some of the offenders were taken and executed, and two
Chanoins kept in prison.
In the meane time the King had taken the castle of Benauent, and then lost it againe,
by a surprize which the Earle himselfe made, against whom hee prepared an army: but
the Earle finding himselfe to weake, returned to his exile in Portugal. The Prince leauing
Toledo, returned to Segobia, and hauing assigned a day to the Noblemen practised
by the King of Nauarre and the Earle of Haro, at Crugna, a house belonging to Pero
Lopes of Padilla, they there resolued to make ready their men, and ioyne all together at
an appointed time, to beginne the warre against the Constable. The Prince was ready,
and there speedily ioyned with him the Earle of Haro and the Marquis of Santillana, but
the rest appeered not; yea the King of Nauarre was not ready to march so soone* wherefore
the enterprise was broken off, and euery one beeing returned to his quarter, the
Prince D. Henry reconciled himselfe to the King his father, and so did the Earle of Haro
and the Marquis of Santillana; whereby the treaty of marriage betwixt Prince Charles
and the Earle of Haros daughter, was broken. Notwithstanding all this the King of
Castile did not stirre, and the frontiers of Castile and Nauarre where reasonably quiet in
the yeere 1450.An. 1450. Pedro Sarmien^o forced to fl^e into Arragon for his thefts. and yet such as fled into Nauarre and Arragon were there receiued, amongst
the which was D. Pedro Sarmiento, whom the Prince D. Henry was in the end forced
to thrust out of Toledo, for his violences and treacheries. He gratiously commanded
him to be gone, and gaue him leaue to carrie away all his baggage, whereof hee had
two hundred moiles or horses laden, to the great griefe of the Toledains, seeing this
theefe thus inriched with their spoiles, and to carry it away freely before their faces. But
Pedro Sarmiento was much more greeued; to quit so rich a possession, whose fleece was
very proffitable. God would not permit him, to enioy that long, which hee had gotten
ill, for being come with this booty to Segobia, they did not onely spoile him, but he was
forced to saue himselfe by flight in Arragon, whether he carried nothing of all his thefts,
but the sinne and shame thereof. By the King of Nauarres permission, he dwelt a while
in the city of Pampelone, with his wife and children, poore and needy, and scarce could
they get a retreat in the towne of Bastide neere vnto Haro. The Marquis of Villena
following the Constables steps, hauing giuen the Prince his maister occasion to be discontented
with him, he had like to haue beene seized on, by the practises of D. Pedro Portocarrero,
of the Bishop of Cuenca, and of D. Iohn de Sylua, standard-bearer to the King,
but he auoided it. Afterwards it was pacefied by the marriage of Donna Maria de Pacheco
the Marquises daughter, and D. Pedro Portocarrero, who for that cause was made
Earle of Medellin. The King fearing new conspiracies to the preiudice of his estate,
being well acquainted with the Constables arrogancy and misdemeanors, he resolued
to make some accord with the King of Nauarre, to the end hee might haue the Prince his

some (who was light and inconstant) vnited vnto him, cutting off all occasions of
factions and leagues, which might distract him, attending a fit oportunity to make
the Constable feele his iust indignation: whilest this was working, D. Henry Henriques,
the Admirals brother,Accord betwixt the King of Castle and (...). escaped from his prison of Langa, slipping downe by a roape tied
with many knots. The Ambassadors of the two Kings being met, it was concluded that
the Admirall and the Earle of Castro should returne into Castile, to whom and to D.
Henry their goods should be restored; Iohn of Tabor de Luna should bee restored, and
D. Alphonso of Arragon put againe in possession of the Maistership of the Calatraua, the
which D. Pedro Giron held, against whom the King and all others would aide and support
D. Alphonso, if he would not leaue it. These matters agreed vpon, were partly effected,
for D. Pedro Giron, being in possession of the places which belonged to the maistership,
and well assisted and followed, was the stronger.
In Guipuscoa, they of the towne of Montdragon, being not yet well pleased with D.
Bertrand of Gueuara,Houses of strength retreats for theenes rained in Gaipuscoa. did ruine, by a Conuocation of the Commons, and the Kings
permission, the tower and strong house of this Knight, which was in a medow called Caldiybar,
which is to say, the valley of horses, whether many theeues and bandoliers retired
themselues, whereby the towne was much damnified, and D. Bertrand was condemned
in a thousand florins of gold, for their paines that were there assembled. The like
was done vnto an other house belonging vnto the said Bertrand, neere vnto the towne
of Salines, two leagues from Montdragon. Many of Pedro Sarmientos souldiars being
laied hold on, in diuers parts of Castile, they were executed, yea a Gonner who had shot
at the herauld, which the King had sent to summon the city of Toledo, who was drawne
and quartered.
 In the yeere 1451. Queene Isabella was deliuered of a daughter at Madrigal, who was
also named Isabel;Birth of the Iusanta D. Isabella who was Queene of Castile and Arragon. shee was Queene by inheritance of Castile and Leon, and wife to D.
Fernand King of Arragon, a Princesse indowed with great vertues. The accord made
betwixt the King of Castile and the Noblemen did not hold long, for the Prince D.
Henry had his priuate opinions, supporting D. Pedro Giron, Maister of the Calatraua,
against D. Alphonso of Arragon, which made his attempts to returne into the Maistership
vaine. D. Pedro at the instigation of the Toledans, seized vpon Torrijos and Orgas,
places belonging to D. Alphonso of Guzman, chiefe Marshal of Seuile. The Admirall
and the Earle of Castro, finding no safety for their persons in Castile, returned into Nauarre,
and the rather for that they performed little, of many things which they had promised
them. The Prince D. Henry caused the Earle of Alba and D. Pedro of Quignones
to be conducted to the castle of Toledo, commanding they should bee well kept:
for whole deliuery the people of Toledo, being turbulent, made great stirres, but without
effect, yet within few daies hee deliuered D. Pedro of Quignones, making him to
sweare that he would follow him, and serue him well and faithfully: for they prepared to
make warre against Nauarre, causing him to promise to imploy himselfe, to draw the
Admirall and the Earle of Benauent to his seruice, who had either of them married a sister
of D. Pedros. The Court being at Zamora, the King propounded to his Councell,
in the presence of the great men of Castile, an accusation against Pedro Sarmiento, who
was, by the aduice of them all, condemned as a rebell and guilty of high treason: which
sentence being confirmed by the Pope, they did confiscate all his goods, and they did
seize to the Kings vse vpon Salinas of Agnana, Ocio, Pont Lara, and other places of his
in Guipuscoa, Alaua, Biscay and elsewhere in Castile. From Zamora the King came to
Toledo (being at it seemed in good termes with the Prince his sonne) to goe and make
warre against the King of Nauarre, giuing the Gouernment of that city to the Constastable,
who at his departure left D. Lewis de la Cerde, one of his breeding vp there, and
did accompany the Prince, who marched towards the frontiers of Nauarre.
 The Castillan army entred into Nauarre by Viana which they could not force, the
King of Nauarre hauing well furnished and fortefied the places of the frontier, and therefore
they past to Torralba,Nauarre. where the garrison making a furious sally vpon the Castillans,
had almost put them in disorder, and to flight, D. Iohn of Beaumont prior of Saint
Iohn in the realme of Nauarre, being Gouernor in Torralba. Finally he defended it so

well, as they left it, and going through the territory of Berrueca, they went and beseeged
Estella, whereas Lope of Baquedan was Gouernour for the King of Nauarre. There
the King of Castile came and ioyned with the Prince his sonne, bringing a great power
with him.
It is likely that the castle of Buradon was taken and razed at this voiage: whereat
the Prince D. Charles, who with the royall councell gouerned the realme in the absence
of the King his father, was so greeued, beeing the best fort of Nauarre, as hee held the
whole realme to be lost:Deuice of two grey-bounds gnawing of a bone carried by the Prince of Nauarre. and they say, that as one out of hope, hee tooke a deuice of two
grey-hounds gnawing of a bone, signifying, that the realme of Nauarre, figured by the
bone, is scituated betwixt Castile and France, and that the Kings of these realmes, which
were the two grey-hounds did either of them deuour of his side. The city of Estella
being furiously battred and assaulted, the Prince D. Charles was of opinion to goe and
speake with the King and Prince, in their campe; hauing therefore obtained a pasport,
he was courteously receiued by them, and his well-spoken reasons so fauourably heard,
as they were in a manner forced by his modesty and good behauiour to raise the seege,
the which a great army could hardly haue done: so great force hath vertue, which is
fashioned by good education, in a Noble disposition: and in truth, there was not to bee
found (according to the report of Authors) in that age, a more generous Prince nor better
taught, then D. Charles of Nauar: for besides the naturall guifts of beauty, mildnesse,
affability to al men, and greatnesse of courrage at need, he was learned in the Scriptures,
which gouerned his maners,Vertues of D. Charles Prince of Nauarre. hauing also the knowledge of many good and commendable
sciences, by the which he was admirable in his life time, and famous after his death: Hee
loued poesie, hee was well read in Histories, and a subtill Philosopher for his young
yeeres: so as he translated Aristotles Ethikes into the Castillan tongue, turned into Latin
by Leonard Aretin, who florished at that time: wherein hee shewed great dexteritie
and iudgement, treating of that subiect in such fit termes, as without all doubt Aristotle
hath not written better in Greeke,VVritings of Prince Charls. nor Aretin so wel in his traduction in Latin: this book
was dedicated by him to his vncle D. Alphonso King of Arragon. Moreouer hee did
write a breefe Chronicle of the Kings of Nauarre his Progenitors, beginning with the
most ancient time, vnto King D. Inigo Arista, and from thence hath continued the History
vnto the reigne of King Charles his Grandfather, which Chronicle is to bee found
at this day in written hand, but full of errors, made by them that haue coppied it, for it
was neuer printed. He did also write some verses, imploying the time which he could
spare in the gouernment of the realme, in these honest exercises: so as this Prince was
cherished, beloued and blest of euery man but of his own father, of whom he demanded
the realme of Nauarre, being his mothers Inheritance, which bred him great troubles,
and aduersity, wherein he made proofe of his courrage and singular patience, the which
was better knowne and lamented after his death.
The King of Castile and the Prince his sonne hauing raised his seege from before Estella,Castille.
left Nauarre, without doing any other harme, and returned to Burgos, from
whe^ce soone after they led an army against Palencuela, whereas D. Alphonso Henriques,
the Constables sonne, had fortefied himselfe, and committed infinite spoiles round about.
The seege beeing before this place, the Constable going neere the walles, to
view the scituation thereof, a seruant of the Admirals, called Fernand Tremigno, sallied
out of the towne, with thirty men well armed, who came and charged the Constable and
them that were with him (beeing vnarmed) so sodainely, as they put them all in daunger
of their liues.The Constable charged and in danger to bee slaine. It behoued the Constable to shew his resolution, who like a valiant and
hardy Knight (as in deed hee was) with his rapier and cloake, made head against this
troupe, and the rest by his example putting themselues also in defence endured the
charge, vntill that succors came vnto them from the next lodging of the army; which
made the enemies to turne head, and retire towards the towne with some losse, the
which yeelded afterwards vpon composition. From thence the King went vnto Madrigall,
where hee had newes that the affaires vpon the Moores frontier succeeded verie
well.
King Mahumet Aben Ozmen,Moores. called Coxo, that is to say, the Halting, had made offer to

the King of Nauarre, to fauour his quarrels, promising that when he should inuest Castile
by Nauarre and Arragon he would enter by Andalusia, and assaile the city of Cordoua
with all the power of his realme. This Moore hearing afterwards that there had
beene some accord made betwixt the Christian Princes, did not forbeare to make warre
on his part withall violence,Moores defeated neere vnto Arcos. sending troupes of horse and foot diuers waies to spoile,
whereof a band of six hundred horse and eight hundred foot were incountred nere vnto
Arcos, by D. Iohn Ponce de Leon, Earle of Arcos, who made a notable slaughter. This
Nobleman beeing somewhat sickly in Marchena, had beene aduertised of the disorder
which these spoilers caused by a Christian renegado, sometimes called Benedict of Chincilla,
and then he was named Monfarres: wherevpon drawing together about 300. horse
and 600. foot, he went that way, being led by his spy, where hauing marcht foureteene
leagues that day and night, he came the next day where the Moores were, who expected
him not, who hauing put their foot-men before, to recouer some place of safety, the
horsemen made head against the Christians, and fought long, whilest that their foote retired:
but in the end the Earle of Arcos had the victory, there being aboue foure hundred
horsemen slaine vpon the place, and fiue and fifty taken prisoners, with a hundred
good horses of seruice. The Moores fainted not for this route, but within a while after,An. 1452.
and the same yeere 1452. they entred by Murcia, hoping to haue better successe in
that country, being six hundred horse and fifteene hundred foote, who hauing ruined a
great part of the country, vsing al kinds of cruelty, they draue away aboue 40000. head of
cattaile great and small, and about fifty prisoners: whereof D. Alphonso Faiardo being
aduertised, hee wrate speedily to D. Diego of Ribera, Gouernor of Murcia, Marshall of
the Kings lodging, that he should come forth of the city with all that were fit to beare
armes, the which he did presently, and came to Lorca with seuenty horse and fiue hundred
foote, whereas D. Alphonso Fajardo met him with two hundred horse and 1500.
foote, with these forces they went to affront the Moores, and charged them, breaking
them three times,An other defeat of Moores. but they rallied themselues twice againe together, yet at the third they
were victors, with the slaughter of aboue eight hundred of their men, and twelue captaines;
and of Christians there were forty slaine vpon the place, and aboue two hundred
wounded: by which victory, the booty was rescued. There is no other mention made
in our Histories of the deeds of this King Mahumet Aben Ozmen the Lame, but that hee
was depriued of his Realme by the Infant Aben-Izmael, who kept at Malaga, being assisted
and fauored by the King of Castile, but the yeere is not certaine.
 D. Frederic Henriques Admirall of Castile, being retired againe to his sonne in law
the King of Nauarre for that they kept not the promises made in the aboue mentioned
accord,Nauarre. did also thinke that it was lawfull for him to say, that for his part hee would not
be bound to performe to the King of Castile that which he had sworne and promised:
wherefore he led with him Queene Ioane his daughter, and deliuered her to the King her
husband. This married couple being together, it was not long before the Queene was
with child, she remayning at a place called Fresne in Arragon: where King Iohn beeing
exceeding glad of these newes, he caused her to goe into Nauarre, there to be deliuered.
She made her residence in the towne of Sanguesse,An. 1453. the remainder of the yeere 1453.
and there she applied her selfe, with the Prince Don Charles, and the Councell of the
Realme, to the gouernment of the State, the King her husband consenting therevnto,
but it was not very pleasing to many Knights of Nauarre, who were affectionate seruants
to the Prince, namely to the family and faction of Beaumont: holding that the
authority of a mother in law could neither be good nor proffitable for the Prince nor
Realme.
 The time of the Constables punishment did now approch, the measure of his villanies
being full,Castile. whereof he himselfe did seeke Iustice, by his impudency, and vnlymited
desire of reuenge. He hated D. Pedro of Estuniga Earle of Plaisance deadly, and was
in like manner hated by him. The Constable laid an ambush for this Earle, to take
him prisoner, which was the greatest matter he could doe to be reuenged his mighty enemies;
for being once taken, it was easie for him who had the authority and force of
the Realme in his power, to finde them guilty.

The Earle being aduertised of this practise, he did impart his deseigne to the Prince, the
Marquis of Santillana, and to the Earles of Benauent and Haro, with others: which was,
to loose his life, or to make the Constable loose his. The Prince Don Henry made him
no answere, as the rest did, who by the negotiation of Diego de Valera, laied a plot amongst
them, that the Earle of Plaisance and the Marquis of Santillana, should send
their eldest sonnes with fiue hundred Launces, vnder pretext of a quarrell which was betwixt
the Earle of Benauent, and D. Pedro Aluares Osorio; and that passing neere vnto
Vailledolit, whereas the King and the Constable were, they should finde means to seize
vpon a gate, and drawing their men into the town, they should take or kil the Constable,
publishing, that it was done by the commandement of Prince Henry. But it succeeded
not,Queene Isabel (...) Lords against the Constable. for the Constable beeing aduertised hee caused the King to dislodge and led him to
Burgos. These things beeing imparted by the King of Castile to Queene Isabel, who
was no friend to the Constable she imbraced this occasion, and induced the King to let
these Noblemen doe what (...) had resolued, the which was easie to effect for that the
King was already distasted of his Constable.
The Queene did not only this good office, but she did sollicit the confederates to make
hast, whilest the time was fit; sending the Countesse of Ribadeo vnto them, vnder collour
to visit the Earle of Plaisance her vncle, who had fortefied himselfe in Bejar, carrying
letters of credit, who did informe them, as shee was commanded, of the time, place,
and meanes they should hold, to seize vpon the Constable, or to dispatch him. This
Ambassage deliuered vnto the Earle, reioyced him much: and for that he was lame himselfe,
he presently sent D. Aluaro of Estuniga his eldest sonne, with Diego of Valera, a Secretarie
and a Page, to leauy men in Curiel, where they could not for the shortnesse of
time assemble aboue seuenty Launces, with the which D. Aluaro went towards Burgos:
and going before vpon a Mule, with one man that did attend him, hee entred into the
Castle of Burgos, commanding his men to follow after, giuing it out in the Country,
that they did belong vnto the Constable, but aboue all, that they should so obserue the
time, as their comming into Burgos should bee by night, and that they should not offer
to come into the castle, vntill they had newes from him; the which was duely executed,
and these seuenty Knights entred into the castle on Monday at night, the first of May in
the yeere 1453. whereas D. Aluaro had already drawne in the same night two hundred of
his friends of the towne well armed.Presage of the Constables end.
The day following there was an vncertaine brute, that the Constable should bee apprehended,
who had many other presages of his ruine, if hee could haue fore-seene it.
The King being priuy to all these matters, had a conceit that this apprehension could
not be made without great scandale, and therefore he sent commandement to D. Aluaro,
that hee should returne to Curiel, for that he could not execute that, for the which hee
was come, but D. Aluaro, a valiant and hardy Knight, made answere, that vpon his life hee
would seiz vpon the Constable, and deliuer him vnto him, so he would be pleased to giue
him a decree,VVarrant to apprehend the Constable. or warrant to apprehend him, the which the King caused to be made in this
forme. D. Aluaro of Estuniga, my Alguazil Maior, or Marshall, I command you to apprehend
the body of D. Aluaro de Luna, Maister of Saint Iames, and if he offer to defend himselfe,
that you kill him. And moreouer the King commanded the Rectors and Aldermen
of the city, to put the people in armes, according to their regiments and bands, and
to keepe them in battaile in the Bishops place, at the breake of day. At which time D.
Aluaro going out of the castle, to inuest the Constables lodging, and to take him, hee receiued
diuers commandments from the King, that he should not fight, but onely beseege
him, and set gards about his lodging, that he might not escape, which did much discontent
him. Comming neere the place, his men beganne to cry, Castile, Castile, for the
Kings liberty: At which noyse the Constable came to the windoe, and his men put
themselues in defence, many shot, both with bowes and harguebuses, wherewith there
were some slaine, and others hurt. D. Aluaro of Estuniga sent often to intreat the King,
that hee would giue him leaue to fight, for they slue his men from the windoes of the
Constables lodging, but he would neuer grant it. Therevpon arriued D. Alphonso of
Carthagena Bishop of Burgos, and Ruy Diaz of Mendocca Lord Steward, to whom the

Constable, who was armed and on horse-backe, yeelded himselfe prisoner, hauing
promised him, in the Kings name, that there should be no harme done vnto his person
nor goods, but by the course of Iustice. Being taken, he was giuen in gard by the King,
to Ruy Diaz of Mendoca, and by him to his brother Iohn Hurtado of Mendoca, who carried
him to Portillo, whereat D. Aluaro of Estuniga was very much discontented, and
the city likewise, so as some offred to goe and take the Constable away by force from
Iohn Hurtado, and to deliuer him into his hands to keepe, hauing more right therevnto
then any other, seeing he had taken him: but D. Aluaro, who was a discreet Knight, pacefied
them with thankes. After this the King went to Portillo, and caused a great quantity
of treasure, belonging to the Constable to be seized on, and carried to Vailledolit,
and he gaue him in gard to D. Diego of Estuniga, sonne to the Marshall D. Inigo Ortis of
Estuniga, who was Earle of Nieua, commanding that his processe should be made, and
that his Attorney Generall should informe against him.
This yeere was remarkable in Spaine,Nauarre. for the birth of (...) Infant D. Fernand, sonne to
D. Iohn King of Nauarre, by D. Ioane Henriques his wife, who being vnwilling to be deliuered
in Nauarre going towards Arragon, she was forced to stay at Sos, a small place
of Arragon,Birth of D. Fernand, who was King of (...) and Arr^g^n, and (...) to D. Isabel. where she had this Prince, who was famous, for the great things he did: for
by him the Moores were chased out of Granado, and all Spaine clensed of that vermine;
the West Indies discouered, with many Islands in the Ocean sea: the Realmes of Castile,
Leon, Arragon, Nauarre and Granado, vnited vnder one crowne; many places
conquered vpon the coast of Affrike, and subiected to the crowne of Spaine: And that
which may serue to make him famous, the Inquisition was instituted vnder him, the only
support of the authority of the Sea of Rome, and of the Clergy in Spaine. The yeere
of Prince Fernands birth 1453. was the last of the Christians Empire in the East, the city
of Constantinople being then taken by Mahumet Emperor of the Turkes, whose posterity
doth hold it at this day, with many other great Realmes and Prouinces, conquered
since by that infidell Nation.
D. Iohn King of Castile,Castille. hauing resolued to be rid of the Constable D. Aluaro de Luna,
whom he had raised to that greatnesse, he sought to seize vpon his places and castles, hee
got Maqueda easily, but not the rest: for whilest he liued, he had men at his deuotion,
who would notabandon him, hoping that he should recouer both his liberty and grace,
as he had formerly done; wherefore the King, to take away all these lets, resolued to put
him to death, and therefore he gaue charge to them of his Councell, to make an end of
his criminall processe. The which was done at the Instance of the Kings Attorney, by
twelue lawiers that were deputed; who hauing conuicted him to haue attempted against
the crowne of Castile, to haue taken and conuerted to his owne vse the Kings
treasure, and committed many tyranous acts, he was condemned to loose his head, the
which being set vpon a high pole, should remaine vpon a scaffold nine daies together, as
an example and spectacle for all the Noblemen of the Realme. This sentence beeing
confirmed by the King, D. Al^aro de Luna was brought from Portillo to Vailledolit, by
D. Diego of Estuniga, being accompanied by a great number of men, where hauing staied
one night,The Constable D. Aluaro de Luna executed at Vailledolit. his sentence of death being read vnto him, he was carried vpon a little
Mule, an Officer crying out with a loude voice before him, that it was the Iustice which
the King caused to bee done vpon that cruell Tirant, vsurper of the royall crowne etc.
Being come to the place of execution, he was beheaded: his head continued there nine
daies, and his body three, then they carried it to Saint Andrewes Hermitage, where malefactors
are vsually buried: but some daies after both his body and head were transported
to Toledo, and buried in a Chappel built by him, in the quier of the Cathedrall
Church. A man in whom we may obserue the inconstancy of humaine greatnesse,
but what auailes instruction to them, who from little come to great Estates, to make
them maintaine themselues with modesty,A good conscience is a sure support. and to relie vpon a good conscience: for
Princes fauours haue deceiued many, whereof both antient and moderne histories are
full, and the examples ordinary. All his goods were forfeited, and applied to the
crowne, the which were very great; for besides the dignities of Constable and Maister
of Saint Iames, he was Duke of Trugillo, and Earle of Saint Stephen de Gormas, he held

held the Citties of Osma and Truxillo,Constables great possessions. the townes of Cuellar, Maqueda, Montalban,
Valdoliuas, Aleocer, Salmeron, Saint Peter of Palmiches, Tremble, Zebreros, Villalua,
Alamin, la Tour Pre, Colmenar, Arenas, Adrada, Castel Valuel, Figuiere, Albuquerque,
Azagala, Aillon, Sepulueda, Riaea, Maderuelo, Castel-nouo, Escalona, Saint Martin of
Val d'Eglise, with other places and forts, to the number of 70. and fiue Earldomes, so as
he might number twenty thousand Vassalls, besids the dependances of the Maistership
of Saint Iames, and the Vassalls thereof, from all which places and lands, he drew aboue
an hundred thousand double ducats of rent, besids the estates, offices and infinit presents,
and other profits and commodities which he found out: being a man which hunted after
great gaine, yet he hid not scorne smale presents, after the manner of those that grow
great of nothing. All which things came vnto him, by the Kings bounty, fauour and
suffrance.Dispositions and qualities of the Constable A^uaro d'Luna Hee was subtill, and a great dissembler, pleasing himselfe much in such practises,
he was suspitious, enuious, an enemy and persecutor of great men, the which cost
him his life: A glorious vanter of his race and progenitors, not remembring his mothers
course of life, which made his beginning doubtfull. Hee was a good man at armes
and an actiue Knight, strong of body, though little of stature, yet well set: hardy in warre,
aduised, very affable and familiar in Court, gratious to his friends, discreet in his speech,
eloquent, and furnished with good reasons; giuen to pleasures, dauncing, and in some sort
a Poet. And for that the King had seazed vpon all that did belong vnto him, they did set
a siluer bason whereas his head stood, to the end that such as would giue any thing for
his buriall, might cast in it there: whereby they gathered much mony. It is strange that
hauing on a time inquired of certaine diuines of his future fortunes, they answering him
that hee should die vpon a scaffold,Deuines delud^ the Constable. which the Spaniards call Cadahalso, hee then remembred
that hee had a place called Cadahalso; into the which hee would neuer set his
foote, but he mounted vpon another Cadahalso, which hee doubted not. In the death
of this Constable, and the disgraces of Ruy d'Aualos his Predecessor, in the same dignity,
wee may note that Kings doe many times ruine men with the like error that they haue
raysed them: for it is certen, that they were both cast downe from that high degree of
fauour, for that they were strangers, seeing that they alone did not trouble the realme,
nor vsurpe the rights thereof, but kindred, allyances and friends did preserue many, who
had deserued no lesse then these: and there is no doubt but Don Iohn King of Castile
would haue winckt at all the Constables misdemeanors, and borne with them still, had
not the perswasions of his wife,The King put the Constable to death more through scare and basenesse, then for loue of Iustice. the dishonor which they layed before him, and feare
drawne him vnto it. He therefore put him to death as a rebell, and guilty of high treason
(notwithstanding that he neuer brake lance, nor carryed armes against the standard
royall) whome hee had so deerely loued, more to please another, then for any desire he
had to doe iustice, and moued therevnto rather through base couardise then by any
vertuous resolution. This execution past, the King beseeged Escalona, and sent letters
to all the great Citties and townes of the realme with an ample declaration of the iustice
had done vpon Aluaro de Luna, setting downe his offences particularly, aduertising
them that hereafter hee would haue iustice duly administred, expresly forbidding
them to assist, or to giue any fauour and support vnto Iohn de Luna his Sonne. The
fort of Escalona was yeelded vpon these conditions, that the Countesse, the Constables
widow, should haue halfe the treasor and iewells that was within the place, and the King
the rest; and to D. Diego of Auellaneda, who was gouernor thereof, should bee
giuen two thousand doublons of gold,Birth of D. Albonso of Castile. with the towne and castle of Langa. During
his small aboad in this place, hee had newes that Queene Isabel his wife was brought in
bed of a Sonne, at Tordesillas, who was named D. Alfonso.
The yeare following the King beeing at Auila hee sent for D. Lopes of Barriento Bishop
of Ciqueca and Friar Goncal of Illesca Prior of the Monastery of Guadalupe, to 
make them of his counsell to the ende that hee might by their aduice reforme the great
abuses past:An. 1454. to effect the which hee resolued to rayse a power of eight thousand lances
with an ordinary entertaynment, and many other things. Being in this discours, hee felt
himselfe to be much troubled with a quartaine ague, which had held him some-time,
yet hee did not forbeare to trauell to Madrid, and from thence to Vaylledolit,

where the Queene his wife was, leauing the whole gouernment of his Realmes, to the aboue
named Bishop and Prior. His sicknesse increasing, he made his testament, and left
to Queene Isabel the city of Soria,Death of D. Iohn King of Castile. with the townes of Madrigal and Areualo, and to his
sonne D. Alphonso the administration of the Maistership of Saint Iames, whom hee
would willingly haue made heire of his crowne, and King of Castile and Leon, if it had
beene lawful, so much he did mislike Prince Henry his eldest son, for his disobedience and
lightnesse. To his daughter D. Isabella, he gaue the towne of Cuellar, with a great quantity
of gold for her dowry. He did not long suruiue his Constable, but died of the violence
of his quarten ague, at Vailledolit, in Iuly the same yeere 1454. hauing held the
Realm 47. yeers, being 49. yeeres old and fiue months: his body was for that time l^ied in
the Monastery of St. Pablo of Vailledolit, to be transported to the Carthusians of Mirefleurs
at Burgos, as he had ordained by his testament. The Constables death had reconciled
the King of Nauarre vnto him, and restored all the other Noblemen to fauour, yea
the Admiral D. Frederic, who was then fled into Arragon: notwithstanding hauing made
to much hast to re-enter into Castile, without an ample licence from the King, hee had
commandment to goe backe, and not to returne into Castile, vnlesse he were sent for, vpon
great penalties. This King had resolued to make warre against D. Alphonso King of
Portugal, for the descoueries which he made vpon the Westerne coast of Affrike, beyond
Cap Verd, towards Guinee, saying these conquests did belong to the crowne of
Castile, but death brake of this desseigne, and continued the peace of Portugal.
 The Estate of which Realme after the death of King Edward had beene gouerned by
the Infant D Pedro,Portugal. in quality of a Regent, chosen by the Estates, by reason of King Don
Alphonsos yong yeeres. D. Pedro had for his greatest Aduersary his brother D. Alphonso
Earle of Barcellos, and his sonnes, the Earles of Oren and Arroyolos, notwithstanding
which contention, King D. Alphonso beeing come to the age of sixteene yeeres, married
at Saint Iren, with Donna Isabella, daughter to the Infant D. Pedro, receiuing the nuptial
blessing from the hand of D. Fernand Archbishop of Braga. D. Alphonso Earle of Barcellos,
sonne to King Iohn, had obtained in the yeere, 1448. of his brother D. Pedro Regent
of the realme, although they were in quarrell, the Estate of Brangance, in title of a
Dutchie, and the castle of Lotero, by the decease of Don Goncalo, who held all those
places.
This good turne was ill requited by the new Duke: for he seeing him make no shew
to giue ouer his Regency, notwithstanding that the King had beene declared capable to
gouerne his realme himselfe, and being married, he put a conceit into the Kings head,
that the Infant D. Pedro had caused Queene Leonora his mother, to be poisoned in Castile,
and that he sought to doe the like to him, that he might seize vpon the crowne. For
this cause the king did persecute D. Pedro his vncle: so as he forced him to retire to
Coimbra, of which hee was Duke. Being much incensed at this iniury, hee had certaine
practises with them of Lisbone, to giue him entry and support in that city, with his partisans
and friends, whereof he had many, meaning to rebel against the king his Nephew.
These practises being discouered, the king gathered together all the men he could with
great secrecy, to surprise D. Pedro vpon the point of the execution of his enterprise: and
came and incountred him as he was comming to Lisbone, at a place called Aforr^beira,Defeat and death of the Infant D. Pedro Duke of Coimbra.
where hauing fought with him, vanquished, and slaine him, hee ended those troubles.
It may be the Infant was innocent of the death of Queene Leonora: but if it be true that
he caused poyson to be giuen her, hee was paied with the like money, for hee was slaine
with a poisoned arrow. There died many good knights in this battaile, and amongst others
D. Al^aro of Almada, Earle of Abranches.
They did for a long time refuse to burie the Infants bodie in the royall Monastery
of the battaile, an argument of the kings great hatred, and of the Duke of Braganca's
against him: yet they had cause to lament him, for they wanted him in the Gouernment;
The duke of Bragance soone after demaunded the City of Porto, and
the towne of Guimaranes of the king, the which hee gaue him: Guimaranes receiued
him, but Porto would not in any sort: for they would maintaine themselues
for the king, and so did Portalegre, which the king had giuen vnto the Earle Don

Sancho of Logrogno, brother to D. Constance, the Duke of Braganca's second wife, being
sister also to D. Pedro Archbishop of Lisbone.
In the yeere 1451.Marriage of the Emperor Frederic the 3 and D. Leonora of Portugal. Donna Leonora the Kings sister was married to the Emperor Frederic
the third duke of Austria, and the betrothing was in the city of Lisbone, by the Noblemen
that were deputed by him, hauing ful power and authority, who afterwards conducted
their Empresse by sea to Pisa, being accompanied by the Marquis of Valencia, by
D. Lewis Coutin, Bishop of Coimbra, D. Lope of Almada Earle of Abrantes, and other
Noblemen of Portugal: whose marriage was celebrated at Siena, the yeere following
1452, In the which King Alphonso had a sonne by his wife, called D. Iohn, which liued little.
That yeere the body of the Infant D. Pedro, vncle and father in law to the King, was
taken from Alberca where it had beene interred, and transported to the castle of Abrantes,
or at the least his bones.
The coast of Affrike,Descoueries of the coast of Affrik^ by the portugals which discontented the Castillans. towards the Westerne and South seas, were at that time descouered
by the Portugals, who brought gold from Guinny, whereof King D. Alphonso caused
a certaine coyne to be made, which hee called Croisats, by reason of the Croisadoe
graunted by Pope Nicholas the fifth to make warre against the Infidels. D. Aluar Goncales
Bishop of Lamego, was the bringer of this Croisadoe into Portugal. D. Iohn the second
King of Castile, being growne iealous of these nauigations and conquests, as I haue
said, sought to hinder them, sending word vnto the King Alphonso that they did belong
vnto the crowne of Castile, and therefore he did forbid the Portugals to goe thether any
more, else he would make violent warre against him. King Alphonso answered his
Ambassadors (who were D. Iohn de Guzman, and Doctor Fernand Lopes of Burgos) very
mildly, that he had alwaies held that the conquests and descoueries of those coasts did
belong vnto the Realme of Portugal: yet he would alwaies, if need were, submit himselfe
to iudgement, and would desist, if it were said, that it did belong to any other: and
therefore he intreated him that, without good information, hee would not breake the
peace betwixt the two realmes: Herevpon the King of Castile died, in the yeere 1454.
at which time King Alphonso had a daughter borne, called D. Ioane, which was a very vertuous
and religious Princesse.
In the end, the body or bones of the Infant D. Pedro, hauing remained some time in
the castle of Arantes, and remoued from thence to Saint Eloy at Lisbone, they were buried,
at the intercession of the Pope, the Duke of Burgondy, of the Duchesse his wife, and
of the Queene D. Isabella, and of many Noblemen and Prelats, in the Monastery of the
battaile: so great account they made of a small matter in these ceremonies, as the whole
world must of force bee therein imployed. The funeralls were celebrated with great
pompe and solemnity.
The end of the nineteenth Booke.




SEMPER EADEMTHE TVVENTETH BOOKE
of the Generall History of Spaine.

The Contents.
1 DOn Henry the fo^rth of that name, and nineteenth King of Castile, and fortith of Leon:
his disposition and qualities.
2 Forgetting of offences, rebellions, and riots past: repealing of the Lords absent from
Castile.
3 The Gouernment of Castile at this Kings comming to the Crowne.
4 Warres against the Moores.
5 The diuorce of D. Henry the vnhable, King of Castile, with his second marriage.
6 Quarrels betweene the Prince D. Charles of Nauarre, and Queene Ioane his mother in
law. Partialities of Beaumont and Grammont in Nauarre: warre betweene the father
and the sonne.
7 Last deeds of the King of Arragon, D. Alphonso the fifth, his royall disposition and quallities.
8 Commotions in Biscay.
9 Continuance of the warres against the Moores.
10 Aduancement of diuers of meane condition in the Court of Castile.
11 Insolencies of D. Iohn of Pacheco Marquis of Villena.
12 Domesticall affaires of D. Henry the vnhable King of Castile, his loues, and vanities.
13 D. Iohn the second of that name, the eighteenth King of Arragon: troubles betweene
him, and the Prince D. Charles his sonne.
14 Affaires of Castile: hatred and enuies of Court.
15 Enterprises of the Prince D. Charles against the King Don Iohn his father: his ouerthrow
and imprisonment: and of that which followed afterward, euen vntill his deliuery
and death.
16 The warres of Granado.
17 Gouernment of Castile, and of the affaires of Court.
18 Warre betweene Castile and Arragon.
19 Behauiours of King Henry the vnhable, and of Queene Ioane his wife: the birth of D.
Ioane the supposed Infanta.
20 Sedition and ciuill warre in Cattalog^a, with the rebellion of the Barcelonois: and pawning
of the Earldome of Rossillon to the French King.
21 Gaston de Foix sonne in law to the King of Arragon and Nauarre his behauiour towards
his sister in law. Lady Blanche the heire of Nauarre. Continuance of the warre of
Cattalog^a.

22 Arbitrement of King Lewis the eleuenth, for the composing of the differences and disagreements
betweene the Kings of Castile and Arragon, and those of Barcelona with their
Prince. Enter view of the kings, Lewis of France and Henry of Castile, on the frontiers.
23 Murther of a lew collector of the subsidies in Guipuscoa.
24 Deceits betweene the Kings of Castile* Nauarre and Arragon.
25 D. Pedro of Portugal chosen King by those of Barcelona.
26 Slanderous and false accusations of bloudy Monkes. Quarrels betweene the prelats in
Castile.
27 Carelesnesse and iniustice of King Henry the fourth of Castile.
28 The house of Braganca: vnlucky enterprise of the King of Portugall D. Alphonso the
fifth in Affrica.
29 Lady Ioane borne in adultery: promotion of D. Bertrand de la Cueua to the dignity of
Maister of Saint Iames. Matters of quarrell in Castile: Conspiracies and ciuill warre in
that kingdome.
30 Dangerous enterprises and treasons of the rebels against Don Henry King of Castile, the
King degraded by them, and his brother the Prince Don Alphonso lifted vp to the regall
dignity.
31 Donna Leonora Countesse of Foix, her cruell appetite and desire of gouernment* her behauiour
towards her elder sister.
32 Continuance of the warre against the rebels of Cattalogna. D. Pedro of Portugal a tumultucs
King in Barcelona, his exploits, and death: The taking of Tortosa by the king Don
Iohn of Arragon.
33 The raysing vp againe of the king D. Henry of Castile: stirres in Andaluzia by D. Pedro
Giron. Agreements, recompences and gu fts made and giuen by the king of his faithfull
friends, and others.

Here follow the names of the Princes raigninge
in Spaine in this twentith Booke.

CASTIL, and LEON.
19. D Henry the 4. and XL.


ARRAGON and NAVARRE.
18. D. Iohn 2.--himselfe.

KIng Iohn the second being dead,Surnames of liberal and vnable. his sonne Henry the fourth of that
name succeeded him in the Kingdomes of Castile and Leon: who by
diuers was surnamed the liberall: for he was not onely bountifull, but
a great water and prodigall, the which he did inherit from the King
his father. The surname of vnhable was giuen vnto him, by reason of
his naturall weakenesse, being in the company of women, the which his
Queenes had experience of: and yet those which haue written of his stature and proportion,
say,Qualities and manners of the King D. Henry the fourth. that he was strong and bigge, of a manly aspect, fierce and hairy.
This Prince was light-headed, variable and inconstant: yet for all that of faire demeanure,
cutteous and affable to his familliar friends, in so much as he neuer said thou to any one

he did euer maintaine his grauity with Princes: he was a louer of peace and did naturally
put of from himselfe the managing of matters of State. Hee would at one time bee
bold and confident, without suspition, and within a while after contrary to himselfe, solitary,
and an enemy of company; most of which quallities he had by inheritance from
his father. He did take great pleasure in hunting, in musicke, and in buildings of houses
of pleasure, and he did likewise erect monasteries with other religious houses: he would
oftentimes sit and sing in Churches with singing men: he was a great eater, but he did
neuer tast any wine. By his bounty and liberality he raised diuers to great honors and
riches who were issued from base and obscure families. Thus King Henry, at the age of
one and thirty yeeres was proclaimed King at Valiodolite in the presence of D. Iohn of
Pacheco Marques of Villena (his most priuate and familliar friend) and his brother D.
Pedro Giron Maister of ^alatraua, D. Ruy Diaz of Mendoza, great Maister of the household
to the late King D. Iohn. D. Pedrod' Aguilar, Lord of Priego and of Cagnette, the
Marshal D. Diego Fernandes of Cordoua Lord of Baena, and other Noblemen which
were then at the Court.
The beginning of his reigne was very plausible, by reason that he did enlarge of his
owne accord, without being therevnto solicited by any one, D. Garcia Al^ares of Toledo
Earle of Alua, and D. Diego Manriques Earle of Treuigno, restoring them to all their
former riches honours, and dignities; and hauing made a certaine speech to the Lords
that were then about him, they gaue him great and humble thankes, reputing that demonstration
of his clemency as an high fauour, and so with al reuerence kissed his hands.
He displaced none of all those which were in any office or place of dignity during the
life of his father, but receiued them into his seruice in the selfe same quality that they
were in before. In regard whereof all men thought the Kingdome happy being fallne
into the hands of so good, so curteous and liberall a Prince, and they did yeeld infinite
thankes vnto God, the only giuer of so desired and necessary a fauour for the Realmes of
Castile and Leon.
Diuers great Lords so soone as they heard of the death of King Iohn, came in all hast
to mourne with him for the same, to do him reuerence and to take the oth of alleageance
due to the new King. The Ecclesiasticall persons were, D. Alphonso Carillo d' Acugna;
Archbishop of Toledo, D. Roderigo de Luna Archbishop of Saint Iames, D. Alphonso
Fonseca Archbishop of Seuil, D. Alphonso de Carthagena Bishop of Burgos, Frier Lopes de
Barriento Bishop of Cuenca, D. Alphonso de Madrigalls called Tostado the most renowned
Bishop of Auila, D. Pedro Baca Bishop of Leon, D. Pedro of Castile Bishop of
Palenca, D. Goncall of Illesca Bishop of Cordoua, D. Lewis d' Acugna Bishop of Segobia,
D. Inigo Manrique Bishop of Ouiedo with diuers other prelats. The secular Lords
were D. Fernand de Velasco Earle of Haro, D. Alphonso Pimentell Earle of Benauent, D.
Gaston de la Cerde Earle of Medina Celi, D. Diego Manrique Earle of Treuigno, D. Iohn
Manrique Earle of Castagneda, D. Roderigo Manrique Earle of Paredes, D. Gabriell
Manrique Earle of Osorno, D. Aluaro of Estuniga Earle of Plaisance, whose father was
newly dead, much about the time of the Constables decease, D. Pedro Aluares Osorio
Earle of Transtamara, D. Pedro d' Acugna Earle of Valencia, an other D. Pedro d' Acugna
Lord of Duegnas and Tariego, brother to the Archbishop D. Alphonso Carillo, D. Iohn de
Sylua Standard-bearer to the King, and many others, who with the deputies of townes
and Prouinces there assembled, sware to the Kings fealty and homage after the accustomed
manner.
Now the King being desirous to suppresse al fore-passed quarrels, and to settle a firme
peace in his dominions,The King of Nauarre and other Lords pacified, recompenced and repealed by the new king D. Henry. did at his comming to the crowne send Ambassadors to the
King of Nauarre, who greatly complained because of the confiscation of all his goods
in Castile, wherevpon it was concluded that in recompence of all the wrongs that hee
could pretend, he should haue certaine yeerely pensions assigned him out of the ordinary
reuenue of the Kingdome of Castile, in regard of which assignation he should deliuer
vp into the King of Castiles hands, the townes of Atienca, La Pegna de Alcacar: it was
likewise agreed vpon that the Admirall D. Frederic, D. Iohn of Touar Lord of Berlanga,
the children of the Earle of Castro lately dead, and all the Knights and others which

were fled out of the Kingdome by reason of the late warres, should be repealed and restored
to all their goods and lands. These things were soone effected, and the Admirall
with the rest returned to Valiodolit to kisse the Kings hands, who receiued them very
graciously, and yet for all that did put them in minde of the faith and obedience due
to Kings, to the end they might the better remember it afterward, and so with his free
pardon dismissed them. And besides all this the better to confirme his peace on all
sides with Christian Princes, he sent Ambassadors into Italy to Alphonso King of Arragon,
to the end to renue the leagues and antient alliances betwixt the crownes of Castile
and Arragon, who were receiued and entertained with great honour; a notable argument
whereof was, that as the Ambassadors of Castile and the Commissioners of Arragon
stood vpon termes who should be first named in the instruments and writings, the
King D. Alphonso decreed that the precedency should be giuen to Castile,Castile pres^r^ before Arragon. in regard that
he himselfe reigning ouer the Arragonois was a Prince issued from the stocke of Castile,
an antient race of the Kings of Gothes: so that in all the writings which did concerne
the league and alliance, the King of Castile was first named, the which his Ambassadors
at their returne certified to him and his councell to their exceeding ioy and contentment.
But notwithstanding these good beginnings, if the reigne of the late King Iohn was 
turbulent and troublesome, and if euer Spaine was Spaine was seene to be shaken with furious tempests,The gentleness of a Prince not accompanied with iustice and seuerity, is both hurtful to him selfe and his Esta^e.
it was now most of all by the miserable gouernment of his sonne King Henry,
whose clemency and carelesse gentlenesse was the onely cause thereof, making him to
forget the other part of the duty of a Prince which is Iustice, by meanes whereof he fell
into the contempt of the great ones of his Court, and namely of his most priuate minions,
so that both hee and his Kingdome fell into very dangerous streights. At the beginning
he and his affaires were gouerned by D. Iohn de Pacheco Marquis of Villena, a
wise, rich, and discreet person, and one well seene in the mannaging of state-affaires, likewise
by the Archbishop of Seuil, D. Alphonso de Fonseca, a prelate of an excellent wit,
but lesse graue then beseemed the place and ranke he held; by whom for certaine yeeres
space the Kingdome was well gouerned to the contentment of all men.
The first martiall enterprise attempted in the reigne of King Henry was against the 
Moores of Granado, ouer whom reigned Ismael,Moores and Castile. the same who had taken the crowne
from Mahumet the Lame: for the execution whereof King Henry assembled the Estates
of his kingdome in the city of Cuellar, vnto whom hauing propounded what he ment to
doe, D. Iatgo Lopes de Mendoca, Marquis of Santillana in the the name of them all, answered
him in such eloquent and discreet termes, as did highly please and content him.
The warre beeing resolued and decreed in that assembly, euery man went home to his
house to make preparation, and in the beginning of the yere 1455. they began to march
towards the frontiers of Andaluzia. The King parting from Segobia ordained viceroys
in Castile and Leon for matters of Iustice, D. Alphonso Carillo Archbishop of Toledo
and D. Pedro Fernandes de Velasco Earle of Haro, who should keepe their residence at Valiodolit.
The army being in a redinesse entred into the Moores country, being in number
fiue thousand horsemen, and a great company of footmen making great spoile euen
to the walles of the city of Granado, notwithstanding that Ismael had beene established
King by the helpe and fauour of the King of Castile D. Iohn deceassed. On the fourth
day the Christian army returned to Eccia, and some few daies after went towards Malaga,
burning and spoyling as before, albeit that a great company of Moorish horsemen
did oftentimes present them the combate, which the King by the wise and discreet councell
of his captaines did euermore refuse, and brought backe his army in safety to Cordoua
loaden with all manner of spoiles.
This yeare the sute (begunne many moneths past betweene king Henry of Castile and 
Ladie Blanche of Nauarre his wife) was ended before Pope Nicholas the fift,Castile. of whom he
entreated to be diuorced from her, and to take another wife, because, as he said, she was
barraine. The Pope granting his request, separated them, albeit it was very well knowne
that the fault was in himselfe, and not in the Ladie, who with great griefe returned home
into Nauarre, hauing lost the title and dignity of Queene of Castile: but King Henry,

not beeing contented with the experience which he had made of himselfe with this Ladie,
would needs make proofe of another, and by D. Fernand his great Chaplaine caused
a marriage to be treated of betweene him and the Infanta Donna Ioane of Portugall,Second marriage of the K Don Henry the Vnable.
sister to king Don Alphonso, and daughter to the late king Don Edward, a Princesse of
great beauty, who was betrothed vnto him, notwithstanding she had sufficient notice of
the kings insufficiencie, yet shee consented thereunto, beeing tickled with a desire to bee
Queene of Castile. The king Don Henry without receiuing any thing with her, did endow
her with an hundred and twenty thousand florens, to be leuyed vpon cite Real, Olmedo,
and their lands, and for her ordinarie expences, a million, and 500000. marauidis
then currant. It was also agreed, that the Infanta his next wife might bring with her a
douzin Ladies of noble parentage, vnto whom the King would giue husbands fitting
their degrees, and of these the Ladie Beatrix de Norogno should be gouernesse, who for
her part had leaue to bring with her foure yong Gentlewomen, with like hope. All these
things promised and confirmed by the king, Don Iohn de Guzman the first Duke of Medina
Sidonia, and Earle of Niebla, was sent to meet the Infanta, who brought her to Cordoua
where the marriage was solemnized with great magnificence: the Arch bishop of
Tours beeing then Ambassadour in the Court of Spaine for the French king Charles the
7. performed the ceremony. All manner of pompes, shewes, and pastimes accustomed
at such feasts were there performed, sauing that in the opinion of all men, the Bride remained
the next day as pure a virgin as she was borne of her mother. Both King Henries
Queenes were his cousin germaines once remoued, daughters, the one to the king of Nauar,
the other of Lady Leonora of Arragon his sister, cousin-germains to his father.
About this time Pope Nicholas, by his death, gaue place to a Spaniard borne in Xatiua,
a towne in the kingdome of Valencia, called Don Alphonso Borgia, Cardinall of the
title of S. Sixt^s, who was named Calixt the 3. a man of 77. yeares of age, who had beene
a Counseller to Alphonso K. of Arragon. By him was made Cardinall a nephew of his
named Rodrigo Borgia, yet he was not of the family of Borgia, but of the Lan^coles, a noble
family in the kingdome of Valencia, sonne to Don Ieffrey Lancol, Lord of Canales,
and to a sister of Pope Calixts, he did intitle him Cardinall of S. Nicholas in carcere Tulliano,
who afterward attayned the Papacie.
Whilest that the mariage lasted at Cordoua,Ambition of D. Ioane of Portugall. great numbers of souldiets were drawne
from all parts of Castile into Andalusia, the number of them amounting to about fourteene
thousand horse, and fourescore thousand foot, whose chiefe Commanders were
the Admirall Frederic, the Duke of Medina Sidonia, the Marquis of Santillana, hee of
Villena, the Earles of Alba de Tormes, Benauent, Arcos, S. Esteuan, Alba de Lista, Valence,
Cabra, Castagneda, Osorno and Paredes, and the Arch-bishop of Seuile, besides
others of lesser note: with these forces the king entred into the Moores country, and with
out dis-banding his army, or giuing aduantage, or hope to the enemy to come to battell,
hee made roades vp and downe for 20. dayes space, so as it was thought, that the
Moores would not be able in many yeares to gather any profit or fruit in their country,
the which the king thought to be the surest and easiest way vtterly to ruine and ouercome
them. Hauing brought backe his army to Eccia laden with spoiles, not long after, he discharged
the greatest number of them, and dismissed the Marquis of Santillana, the
Earles of Benauent, Alba, Plaisance and others home to their houses, he himselfe remaining
in Andalusia with the people of the country, and the town garrisons did make continuall
roades vpon the Moores all that Sommer, at the latter end whereof he returned
to Auila and Segobia, to giue order for the war of the yeare following.
Alphonso king of Portugall hauing by the marriage of his sister confirmed the peace
and auncient alliances with the Crowne of Castile,VVars against the Moores. determined with himselfe to vex the
Moores in Affrica: the same yeare in the city of Lisbon was born vnto him a sonne, who
at his christening was named Don Iohn: the baptisme was solemnized by Don Fernand
Arch-bishop of Braga, the Infant was carried by Don Fernand his vncle, his Godfathers
were the Earles of Arroyolos, and Don Vasco of Attaydo, Prior of S. Iohns, and D. Pay^
Correa: the godmothers, the Infanta D. Catherine the Kings sister, and the Ladie Beat^ix
de Meneses one of the Queenes chiefest Ladies.

In these times began the troubles and calamities in Nauarre,Nauarre. Don Charles cannot endure his mother-in-law partaker with him in the regencie. occasioned by the factions
in that kingdome, after this manner. The Prince of Viana Don Charles was in his
flourishing age, and in the absence of his father had, very vertuously, with great iustice,
and to the liking of all men, gouerned the Realme of Nauarre, by the good councell of
the Lords of the countrey: and namely by the Lord Lewis of Beaumont: now the king
his father hauing married to his second wife the Ladie Ioane Henriques, daughter to the
Admirall of Castile, would haue made her a partaker in the gouernment, the which was
distasted by many, who did stirre vp the Prince, beeing lawfull heire of the Kingdome,
not to suffer his mother-in-law to thrust her selfe into the command of his possessions.
The desire of rule which tickleth all great and magnanimous natures:The desire of rule, an affection of a magnanimous nature. did so farre possesse
the Prince Don Charles, hitherto obedient to his father, as hee declared vnto him
the purpose that he had to enioy alone the right of his mothers inheritance, in which his
mother-in-law had no part, and thereupon made preparation to send her foorth of the
countrie, and to resist the king his father, if he opposed himselfe against his determination,
and in conclusion to haue by way of armes that which he purposed. From this pernitious
quarrell,Factions of Beaumont and Grammont in Nauarre. which prooued so successeles to the sonne against the father, did spring the
two factions of those of Beaumont and Grammont, which so many yeares did infect the
kingdome of Nauarre, names taken from two mighty families, to wit, that of Beaumont
beyond the Pireuean hils,The house of Beaumont called of old, Lusa and that of Grammont on the hither side neere vnto France,
albeit that the house of Beaumont had his originall from Normandy, and was first of all
called Lusa; neuerthelesse both of them of old issued from the bloud royall of Nauarre,
the which the armes of both those houses do witnesse, and namely, the chiefe of the faction
of Grammont, who are the Marshals of the kingdome, the Marques of Cortes, do
not intitle themselues of Grammont but of Nauarre. Now the Lord Lewis of Beaumont
Constable of Nauarre, beeing chiefe of his house, he and all his followed the Princes: on
the contrarie, the house of Grammont and their adherents, did maintain the Kings quarell
against his sonne, and of this house were chiefe, the Lord Peter of Peralta, who by
reason of these tumults was made Constable, and the Marshall Don Pedro of Nauarre.
The sonnes reasons were, that beeing sonne and lawfull heire to Lady Blanche the right
Queene and heire of Nauarre, he ought to gouerne, seeing that the king his father had
made a second marriage, which barred him from any pretence of right or claime. On the
contrarie the king sayd, that by agreement of his first marriage, it was concluded, that
whether he had any children or no by his wife Queene Blanche, that he should raigne during
his life: to the which article the Lords and States of the kingdome were sworne, and
therefore it ought to take place.
The Prince disputed against this poynt, as beeing made to his preiudice, not good in
law, and therefore of no force: for as by the lawes of the Realme, two beeing married,
the suruiuer enioyeth the goods of the partie deceased, so long as they continue in widdow-hood,
but so soone as they marrie againe, they lose that right. Now the question
was, whether the condition agreed vpon in the contract of marriage, in the behalfe of K.
Iohn, made against the lawes of Nauarre, and to the preiudice of the Prince his sonne,
were good or no: but how iust so euer it was, they fell to armes. Queene Ioane remaining
in Estella, beeing aduertised of Prince Charles his conspiracie, gaue foorth-with notice
thereof to the king her husband, who came out of Arragon into Nauarre with a great
company of men at armes, vnto whom those of Grammont ioyned themselues. First of
all he tryed by messages and ambassadors, if hee could diuert the Prince his sonne from
this dishonorable poursute, whereby (as he sayd) he did blemish the shining luster of the
races of Nauarre, Castile, Arragon, and France, from whence he was descended: the question
betwixt the father and sonne was brought to very good termes, by the reasons alleaged
by King Iohns Ambassadors, had not the counsel of the chiefe of the part of Beaumont
hindred it, who kept the Prince in his first resolution, to haue the absolute rule of
his kingdom without any exception: and those of Grammont did incite the king against
his sonne, both parts thinking (as it is very likely) to increase their honours, riches, and
dignities rather by these troubles, then by the peace of the kingdome.
All treaties and negotiations of peace ceassing, the Prince assembled his forces, as wel

Knights as the common people of his partie,An. 1456. and carried himself as king the yeare 1456,The Prince of Viana Don Charles caused himselfe to bee called king of Nauar.
giuing gifts, priuiledges, and liberties, with other royall acts, the letters and writings
whereof were found in these times in the citie of Toralba, and other places of the country:
he called also from Castile diuers of his friends, of whom certaine troupes entring
by Logrog^ into Nauarre were ouerthrowne neere to Viana, by the King Don Iohn;
who like a wise and a discreet Captaine went and met them, not suffering all his sonnes
forces to ioyne together, before that he had fought with them: after which exploit there
were diuers encounters betwixt them with doubtfull victorie, neere to Estella, Pampelona,
Olite, and Lombier: so as the last battell of this first ciuill warre, was fought neere
to the citie of Ayuar, in the which, by the prowesse and valour of Peter of Peralta, and
Lopes of Castillo, and others of the faction of Grammont, those of Beaumont were vanquished,
and Prince Charles taken prisoner, who was carried to Tafalla by the commandement
of the king, who came thither soone after, and did labour to bring him to some
agreement of peace, the which the sonne (beeing ill aduised) did contemne: and that
which was worse, he going about to incite his neighbour kings to take in hand the defence
of his cause, a packet of letters was taken which he sent to king Alphonso of Portugall,
wherein diuers matters were discouered, by reason whereof hee was shut vp in the
castle of Mont-Roy. Hereuppon the factions were so fleshed one against the other, as
through all the citties of the kingdome, betweene neighbors and towns-men, whole families
did so bandie themselues, that infinite cruelties, murthers, burning of houses, and
other insolencies and impieties of ciuill warres were committed.The great loue of the Earle of Lerin to the Prince Don Charles. The imprisonment of
the Prince was so irkesome to the Lord Lewis of Beaumont, Earle of Lerin, as he did not
cease by all meanes, and assurances that he offered, till that he had obtained his deliuerie
of the King, for the which he himselfe (so dearely did he loue him) gaue his owne person
in hostage, and remained in prison the space of seuen yeares. But when the Prince was at
libertie, he wanted no counsellers to animate him to a new warre: for the desire of rule
will not be bridled, especially in Kings children. Leauing then the Earle of Lerin as hostage,
hee ranne to armes, and entred the field the second time, and then the factions of
Beaumont and Grammont, returned euery one to his side, and made more cruell and
barbarous warre then before, which the Realme did feele many yeares after. The end
was, the Prince was againe defeated neere to Estella, and his people dispersed, but hee
escaped by the swiftnesse of his horse, and hauing resolued neuer more to poursue this
warre, he went to Naples to the king Alphonso his Vnkle, leauing his friends in Nauarre
in great trouble and danger, where the seede of discord betwixt the two factions did encrease
and spring vp diuers times afterward.
The Prince Don Charles passing thorow France and Italy,Arragon. was euery where receiued
with great honor, and namely at Rome by Pope Calixtus a Spaniard: but chiefly his vncle
D. Alphonso did feast and welome him, admiring his graue wisedome and kingly qualities,
answerable in euery point to the report that had beene made of him: and beeing
desirous to see him reconciled to the King Don Iohn his father, hee laboured very much
therein, performing thereby all the Offices of a louing kinsman and Christian Prince: for
he did daily put him in mind of the duty of children towards their fathers, whereunto
Princes are more bound than other men, in regard that their subiects do commonly fashion
themselues after their examples: and on the other side, hee did write to the King
D. Iohn, alledging all reasons that might be auaylable to induce him to loue and desire
the presence of his sonne: but this good and vertuous king had not the meanes to accomplish
so holy and laudable a work, beeing preuented by death, which seazed on him
in the new castle of Naples, the yeare 1458. hauing raigned two and fortie yeares and
two moneths in Arragon, and foure and twenty yeares in Naples, in the 65. yeare of
his age.
This Prince, after that Renee of Aniou had retired himself into France the yere 1442,
finding himselfe master of the whole kingdome of Naples, had contention with the Venetians,
in the behalfe of Philip Maria Duke of Milan, then against his sonne-in-lawe
Francis Sforza, who was duke of Milan, and last of all against the Venetians, Geneuois,
and Florentines in league together, in which wars he alwaies maintained the reputation

of a great and excellent Captaine. And againe, in the yeare 1453* he had some likelihood
of a future warre about his kingdome of Naples, against Renee of Aniou, who had repassed
the mountaines, and was come downe into Lombardy accompanied with Lewis the
Daulphin of France, with two thousand men at armes, hoping by the fauour of the duke
Francis Sforza, and the Florentines to be able to re-enter into his lost kingdome, and to
driue Alphonso out of it, but that iourney proued vaine: then the King D. Alphonso being
a king in peace, purchased the friendship of the Duke Francis Sforza, and contracting allyance
with him, he caused D. Alphonso, sonne to his son D. Fernand of Arragon, duke of
Calabria, to marry with Hippolita Maria daughter to the Duke Sforza: and hee did betroth
D. Leonora, daughter to his son Fernand, to Sf^rza Maria son to the same Duke
Sforza, notwithstanding that his second mariage took no effect, for D. Leonora was afterwards
married to Hercules de Este, the second Duke of Ferrara. The king D. Alphonso being
in league and friendship with the most part of the Potentates of Italy, Pope Calixtus
a Spaniard borne in Xatiua,Ingratitude of Pope Cal^xius. his subject, and one that had beene of his councell, did euer
carry a particular hatred against him, the which hee declared by the answer which hee
made to the kings Ambassadors at Rome, at such time as they came to congratulate his
assumption to the papall dignity: for they asking him in their masters name, how they
should carry themselues one toward another: the Pope sayd; Let him gouerne his kingdome,
and let me alone with my Popedome. And he did more openly manifest it after
the death of D. Alphonso: for he did as much as in him lay, to minister all hinderances to
D. Fernand his son and successor in the kingdome of Naples, disputing with him about
his right therein, saying, that D. Alphonso his father could not appoint a king in the kingdome
of Naples, which held of the Church, and that it was in the Popes power to inuest
therein whome he pleased: and the king D. Fernand could neuer haue other remedie of
him, who afterward was confirmed and established by Pope Pius his successor. Now D.
Alphonso had beene absent halfe the time of his raigne out of his kingdome of Arragon,
leauing his wife D. Maria of Castile Gouernor in his Realmes and Dominions in Spain,
a vertuous and chast Princesse, assisted by his brother D. Iohn of Nauarre. By this Lady
he had no children, and he par^ed from her the second time in great anger, by reason of
her iealousie wherewith she was greatly possessed, the which made her to commit an act
inhumane, cruell, and in no sort toyall: for shee vnderstanding that the king her husband
made loue to one of her Ladies,4 cruell act. named D. Margaret of Ixar, she caused her one night to
be strangled in her bed, beeing with child in the citie of Valencia, the king beeing at that
time for his pleasure abroad on hunting, which was a speciall cause that hee cared neuer
after to liue with her. By other wiues he had D. Fernand. who succeeded him in the kingdome
of Naples,Genealogie of Arragon. D. Maria of Arragon married to the Marquis of Ferrara, D. Leonora
of Arragon, Princesse of Rossano wife to Martin Marzan. At his death hee left for heire
in his kingdomes of Arragon, Valencia, Sardynia, Majorca, Minorca, and Sicill, his brother
the King D. Iohn of Nauarre.
The gifts and qualities of this Prince comprehended in few words,Disposition of King D. Alphonso of Arragon the 5. although they deserue
a great volume, were these: concerning the bodie, he was of meane stature, actiue
and well proportioned, of colour somewhat pale, quicke-sighted, and gracious, he had a
hawke nose, a signe of an haughtie nature: hee was briefe and succinct in his speech, but
neate and eloquent, sweet and amiable in his answers, and oftentimes quicke and pleasant:
few kings had their minds more disposed to goodnesse then he: the Religion according
to those times, and the ceremonies belonging thereunto hee had in singular recommendation,
so that it is reported of him, that beeing on a time at Masse, by meanes
of a great Earth-quake the church wherein he was, was so shaken, as the people fearing
to be slaine by the fall thereof, fledde out at the doores, hee onely remayned vnmooued
and fearelesse. And seeing the priest which sung Masse readie to runne away for companie,
hee stayed him and enforced him to make an end of his seruice. He was liberall to all
men, and magnificent in gifts, especially to Princes and their Ambassadours: Hee was a
louer of iustice, and yet neuerthelesse mercifull, full of commiseration, and flow to condemne
any man to death, the which he could temper so well, as his clemencie profited,
and redounded to the benefite of diuers: yet offenders were punished and corrected, in

such sort, as his Realmes were neuer since his time so well gouerned, and cleansed from
all manner of violence and outrage. When hee had ouercome his enemies, hee did alwaies
shew himselfe meeke and gentle, hee tooke delight in all excellent things, vsing
alwaies great modestie therein: hee was sumptuous in mooueables, in gold and siluer
plate, iewels, and other ornaments of rare esteeme, except about his owne royall person,
which was euer apparelled according to the common vse and fashion of his Gentlemen,
not delighting in rich and costly stuffes, nor new fashions: hee was stately and magnificent
in martiall playes and shewes, which were frequent in his Court, and no lesse in buildings,
whereof the royall pallace, the bridge, and great Hospitall of Sarragossa do make
mention.
The new castle at Naples, brought into the forme which now it is, is a worke of his: he
made the fortresse of the Eggeshabitable and commodious: hee caused the marshes about
the cittie to be dryed vp: hee builded shippes of no meane greatnesse, which seemed
like castles vppon the sea, he entertayned a great number of huntsmen: but his chief
delight and pleasure was in hawking. And beeing a warlike Prince, hee made two enterprises
into Barbarie, the one to Zerba, anciently called the Isle of the Lotophages, the
which he tooke, and defeated in battell Butifer king of Tunis, who came to driue him
thence with aboue an hundred thousand Moores: the other against the towne properly
called Affrica, the situation whereof hee very well viewed, hauing a purpose to returne
thither, where he burned all the shippes and vessels that he found in the hauen: when hee
was at peace in the kingdome of Naples, he gaue ayde and succour to the Despotto of
Acarnania assayled by the Turkes, and to Scanderbeg Prince of Albania warring vpon the
same nation,Learning and learned men beloued of king Don Alphonso. Sentence of D. Alphonso. where his souldiers gaue sufficient proofe of braue warriours, which did
greatly redound to the Kings honour. A man would scarce beleeue what honour and
respect he did beare to learning and learned men, beeing oftentimes wont to say, That a
King without learning, was like a crowned Asse, the which sentence he had read in the preface
before the Spanish Translation of Saint Austens booke Of the Cittie of God, and
therefore he employed part of his time in the study of letters, although he were of good
yeares before he beganne: and he did neuer neglect the reading of Bookes, nor his conference
and disputations with learned men, how great affaires of State or warre soeuer
hee had.
Beeing well stricken in yeares, hee euer had in his company an old Grammarian called
Master Martin, with whome hee delighted greatly to discourse both abroade and at
home, and he did so profit at his studie, that hee did translate Seneca's Epistles, a worke
very hard, intreating of morall Philosophie, into the Spanish tongue: hee tooke such
pleasure in reading the holy Scriptures, as hee would often vaunt, that he had read the
old and new Testament fourteene times ouer. To shew the singular affection hee did
beare to learning and learned men, hee gaue for his Deuice in armorie an open booke,
and hee would say, that Bookes were Princes best Councellors, with protestation, that
he had receiued best counsell of the dead, meaning of his bookes.
In the deuastations and spoyles of Citties during his warres, hee reserued for his
part of the spoyle, bookes, which were carefully sought for and brought vnto him, hee
would reade with great delight Titus Li^ius, and Caesars Commentaries, so that besides
the sundry reparations of Schooles and Auditories, where hee assigned pensions to the
Doctors, Regents, and schollers, his Court was daily frequented with the learnedst men
of his time, to wit, Bartholomew Facio, George of Trebiconde, Laurentius Vall^, Iohn Auri^pa,
Antonio of Palermo, and others. Hee did honour the great Captaines and worthie
men in the Art militarie,^earned men (...) to K. A^phons^s court. of what nation soeuer they were, likewise Grauers, Architects,
excellent Enginers, skilfull Marriners, and generally any man of worth and desert in
what art of science soeuer: so that hee left behind him the eternall and euer-during memorie
of a Prince truly vertuous, valiant, bountifull, and esteeming vertue as it rightly
deserued.
Now King Don Alphonso beeing dead, and his sonne Don Fernand beeing in trouble
at his first comming to the Crowne, diuers citties, and some great Lords of the kingdome
of Naples, did mooue and stirre vp the Prince Don Charles of Nauarre to take

to himselfe the same Crowne which they offered vnto him: but he made them such an answer,
as they perceiued thereby, that he had learned to be modest, to follow equity and
right, and not rashly to cast himselfe into another mans possession. And for that hee
would not giue any euill suspition of himselfe, hee went into Sicill, a Kingdome fallen by
the death of Don Alphonso to the King his father, with those of Arragon, Sardynia, Majorca,
Minorca, Valenc^a, and the Principalitie of Cattelogne, in the which by right belonging
to the eldest sonnes of the Kings of Arragon, hee obtayned in esse the principalitie
of Girona, and the right of succession in all these Kingdomes afterwards: He remained
and continued a while in Sicill, greatly honoured and beloued of the Sicillians, during
which time he was amorously familiar with a very fayre and beautifull Gentlewoman
of a meane of spring and parentage, named Capa, on whome hee begate two children,
the one named Don Philip of Nauarre and Arragon, who was Master of the Order
of Monteca,Geneal^gie of Nauarre and Arragon. and dyed in the warre of Granado in the seruice of the King Don Fernand
his Vncle* the other was called Don Iohn, who was Bishoppe of Huesca. Hee had
also a daughter named Donna^ Anne of Nauarre and Arragon, who was Dutchesse of
Medina Celi, and wife to Don Lewis de la Cerde: but it is vncertaine whether shee was
borne of this mother.
As the aboue-named tumults and dissentions continued in Nauarre, the Prouinces 
of Guipuscoa and Biscay beeing neere-bordering neighbours,Castile. and wrapped vp in one
selfe same ayre, entred into ciuill or rather vnciuill dissentions, hauing likewise their factions
of the Gamboines and Ognazines, who could not bee repressed by any forme of
iustice. Therefore the King Don Henry was aduised to go thither in person; the which he
did, and there by the aduice of his Councell, and vppon information made of those trobles
and outrages, he razed and ouerthrew diuers towers, and strong houses belonging
to the chiefe of the Factions, which serued for places of retreat and harbour for murtherers
and euill-disposed persons, who committed infinite insolencies and outrages in the
Countrey.Strong houses in Biscay and Gu^^uscoa ouerthrowne. In which number were the tower of Olaco in the iurisdiction and confines of
Elgoiua^, the house of Lescano, the house of Inigo de Saldibia in the Cittie of Tholousa,
that of Fernand D' Astagarriuia in the towne of Guettaria, and others in the Countrey
of Anduayn, in the towne of Vergara, and else-where, as well in Guipuscoa, as in Biscay,
in which iourney hee tooke into his seruice in the Cittie of Durango, the sonne of
an Inne-keeper, named Perucho of Munsaras, who afterward became a man of great repute
and estimation.
So soone as hee came to Victoria, hee called before him out of euery towne of
Biscay and Guipuscoa, two or three men deputed, with whome hee intreated about the
gouernement and iurisdiction of the same countrey, hee confirmed diuers and sundrie
Liberties and Priuiledges graunted by the Kings his Predecessours, and left there for
Gouernour and Commaunder Iohn Hurtado of Mendoca, one of his priuie Councell.
Notwithstanding all these demolishments, with that of the strong and inexpugnable
Castle of Montdragon, the murthers, thefts, deuastations, factions, and rebellions in
Biscay and Guipuscoa did continue, countries in all times infamous, because of these
matters, vntill the raigne of the King Don Fernand the fifth, and Queene Izabell, who
rooted out the factions of Gamboines and Ognazines: by meanes whereof iustice began
to take place there.
At the Kings departure from Victoria, hee came by great iourneyes to Cordoua, hauing 
a great desire to the warres of Granado,Moores. into the which Kingdome he made a furious
entrie, finding often resistance by the Moores who kept his armie close, not suffering
them to straggle, who vpon a day did surprize certaine Castillan troupes, where amongst
other of note, Garcilaco de la Vega, a valiant Knight, and welbeloued of the king,
was slaine: by reason whereof he commanded, that all the vines, oliue trees, and all other
kind of trees bearing fruite throughout the whole territorie of Granado should bee
cut downe. He beseeged and tooke the towne and strong castle of Ximena, and did such
hurt,Truce between Granado and Castile. that King Ismael was constrained, not being able to resist, to begge a truce, and to
submit himselfe to such tribute, taxation, and other conditions as should best please
him.

It was then agred vpon that the Moore King should pay to King Henry twelue thousand
doublons of gold for tribute, and should become his vassaill: that hee should giue him
yearely during the time of the truce sixe hundred Christian prisoners, and where they
were wanting as many slaue-Moores to bee deliuered at Cordoua at a day appoynted:
And that the warre should continew open on the side of Iaen: In regard of which
things, and the present payment of the first yeares* tribute, the Christian army
dislodged out of the territories of Granado. The King returned to Cordoua leauing the
Earle of Castagneda for Gouernor of the frontiers of Iaen, with two thousand lances, and
discharged the residew of his army. Albeit he vsed great dilligence in these warres against
the Moores, yet it was not of so great importance as the wars made by his predecessors,
whether it were through the Kings negligence, who was soone weary of businesse, or
through any other occasion, so as he began to fal into the contempt of his owne people.
The Earle of Castagneda left vpon the frontiers, to represse the inuasion of the Moores,
was a Lord as carelesse and negligent as his maister, and there withall couetous, by
reason whereof, within a while he found him selfe very meanely accompanied which the
Moores vnderstanding they laid a strong ^mbush for him, into the which they craftily
drew him, hauing sent some to forrage the fields, who beeing pursued by the Earle, hee
perceaued him-selfe, to bee ^em'd in on euery side, and so with great losse of his people
he himselfe was taken prisoner, whereof the King beeing aduertised sent in his place
another Captayne called Michael Lucas de Fran^^u, with commission and charge to
change the truce, made with King Ismaell, into a peace, prouided the payment of the
tribut-mony agreed vpon by the truce, the which did greatly please the Moore King:
and so ended the warres of Granado, the Earle of Castagneda beeing redeemed with a
great summe of mony.
Pope Calixtus taking pleasure in these warres against the Moores, did about that time
send to the King Don Henry a Hatte and a Sword, which they vse to blesse vpon Christmas
Eaue, at night, laying them vpon the Altar where they say Masse, which they terme
the Masse of the Cocke:A sword blessed by the Pope on Christmas. Euen. and hee did write vnto him, exhorting and annimating him
to pursue so holy a warre. About this time died D. Alfonso of Carthagena, Bishoppe
of Burgos a Prelat highly esteemed of the Spaniards, who wrote an History of Spaine
intitled Anacephaleosis with other workes.
Now the small estimation of the King was manifest ouer all Spaine and came vnto
his owne eares, which made him become suspitious, and hee began against his nature
to distrust the great ones, to counterpose whome, hee aduanced diuers of his seruants of
base and meane degree to great honours, and authority. Hee made Gomes de Caceres
and Solis,The King contemned by his subiects. Maister of Alcantara, and gaue the Citty of Coria to a brother of his: he made
Bertrand de la Cueus, Sonne to Diego de la Cueua of Vbeda, great Maister of his house
and Viscount of Huelma, who hauing beene his page, and carried his lance, became one
so greatly in his fauour, as no man so much. The office of Constable was giuen to
Michael Lucas of Erancu borne in Beaumont, a meane gentleman, and with that the
towne of Agreda,Gifts giuen by King Henry the forth. the Castles of Verato and Vosmedian, with the Captaineship of Iaen,
the towne of Andujar, with other rents and possessions: and to one of his brothers the
commandery of Montizon, and that of Orjea to another; which are the best places belonging
to the order of Saint Iames: he gaue the Priory of Saint Iohn, to Iohn de Valen^cuela,
the Bishoppe-ricke of Iaen to Alfonso de Peleas, and that of Auila to
Martin de Vilches, euery one of these places to bee surendred so soone as they should
be voyde.
The Marques of Santillana Don Inigo lopes de Mendoza being dead, who was also
Count de Real de Mancanares, his Sonne Don Diego Hurtado was confirmed
by the King in his Fathers dignities, but hee was compelled to come and stay at the
Court, and to bring thether his brethren, Don Pedro Goncales de Mendoza, Bishoppe
of Calaorra, who was since the Arch-Bishoppe of Toledo, and Cardinall. Don
Inigo Lopes de Mendoza, Don Lorenzo Suares, Don Iohn Hurtado, who
hauing kissed the kings hand, were with the Marquis commaunded not to stirre from the
Court.

Beeing at Madrid the yeare,An. 1458. one thousand, foure hundred, fifty eight, where hee celebrated
with great cost and royall magnificence, the Funerals of the King Don Alphonso
of Arragon, dead at Naples, hee committed an act in the behalfe of the Marquis of Villena,
scarce well digested. This Marquis in regard of the affaires and gouernement of the
kingdom had the same power, and almost equall boldnesse which the Constable Aluaro
de Luna had in the time of the King Don Iohn, and hee would let nothing fall to ground
which was profitable or commodious for him or his: Now hee had a great desire to
make a marriage betweene his eldest sonne Don Diego Lopes de Pacheco with the Countesse
of Saint Steephen de Gormas,Violent marriage of the Countesse of S. Stephen de Gormas, and D. Diego Lopes Pache^o. daughter and heire to Don Iohn de Luna, and Grandchild
to the Constable Don Al^aro, who at that time was in the gouernement of an vncle
of his named also Don Iohn de Luna, Nephew to the Constable, who was Captaine
of Soria, and the Marquis did not onely practise the marriage of his eldest sonne with
his Neece, but also to dispossesse him of his Captaineship of Soria, with other lands
which he held: For the obtayning whereof, hee caused the King to haue him in suspition,
saying, That hee was one of the conspiratours which were ioyned in league and
confederacie against his seruice.
The King did easily and willingly beleeue this report made by the Marquis, and feigning
to ride on hunting, hee came to Aillon where Don Iohn de Luna kept his residence,
who did receiue and feast both him and his trayne very sumptuously, and with great
magnificence, who riding amongst the rest of the companie, hee was no sooner entred
into the fields, but he was arrested as prisoner, without knowing any cause or reason therof.
In the end hee was enioyned to dispossesse himselfe of Soria, and other fortresses and
places of strength, and to receiue into them such garrisons as should please the king:
whereunto hee must needes obey, on paine of loosing his head, so as hee did not onely
yeeld vp Soria, but all that which did belong to the Countesse his Neece, and her person
also: and so the Marquis had that which he desired.
The contempt of this Prince encreasing daily, Don Alphonso Fajardo, the chiefest
Knight of Murcia,Don Alphonso Faiardo, (...) contumelious rebel chastised. holding a long time Carthagena, Lorca, and other places against the
Kings will, and these that ruled and gouerned him, had likewise in a manner taken to
himselfe by force, the Master-shippe of Saint Iames, and the Marquisate of Villena, committing
many outrages and insolencies vppon the lands and reuenues belonging to the
King and Marquis, beeing ayded and releeued sometimes by the Moores of Granado.
Against him Go^^calo de Sahauedra was sent with sixe hundred horse, by whose care and
diligence, Don Alphonso lost all that which he held of his owne and other mens, and so
became a poore and miserable Knight, hauing nothing left him but onely his sword and
his cloake, accounting and esteeming it for a great fauour and extraordinarie kindnesse
to haue his life saued.
This man had his deserts, and the King continued in his carelesnesse, so as he was no
more feared. Aboue all the townes of his Kingdome, the abode at Segobia and Madrid
pleased him best, because hee louing hunting better then affaires of consequence,
this Countrey beeing woody was very fit for it, as also abounding in victuals and prouision
for his Court,The Kings Guard burthensome and super fluous. which was very great^ for he did daily carrie about with him, a guard
of horse-men to the number of three thousand and sixe hundred Lances, with an incredible
expence, wherewith his reuenues was charged to the vttermost; the which his
chiefe Treasurer Don Diego Arias,In answer of K. Henry ^auoring of small iudgement. like an honest and faithfull seruant, put him in mind
of on a time, beseeching him to cut of so superfluous an expence: you speake (quoth he)
like Diego Arias, but I will liue like a King, and that was all the answer hee could receiue.
By his bountie and liberalitie he was well serued and attended on by diuers, and in those
dayes those of his Councell, Chancerie, and Iudges, did discharge their duties very sufficiently*
In Areualo one of his Secretaries named Pedro de Tieda was put to death, and
others of his complices, for counterfeiting the Kings letters, and selling them for great
summes of money. Beeing in the cittie of Leon, hee caused certaine Gentlemen to bee
brought out of Gallicia which had dispossessed a Knight of his house, hauing commanded
their processe to be made, they were there for the same put to death. Such iust executions
were sometimes done, but he did greatly faile in other matters.

At the end of the yeare 1458. Queene Ioane made hir magnificent and royall entrie into
the Cittie of Leon: then they came to keepe Christmasse at Escalona, where the Kings
chiefe delight and recreation was in hunting, and singing in the Church, where he himselfe
in his owne chappell would beare a part, which in those dayes was the best furnished
with cunning and experienced Musitians of any one particular place in the whole
world.
The same yeare Don Alphonso King of Portugall led his armie into Affricke,Portugal. where
he tooke the towne of Alcacar, distant sixe miles from Ceura, his Vncle Don Henry, and
his brother Don Fernand Duke of Vis^o accompanying him in that expedition. Alcacar
was taken by meanes of certaine honest conditions, and Don Edward de Meneses bastard
sonne to Don Pedro de Meneses, Earle of Viana, who succeeded his father in the Earledome,
was left there as Gouernour. After the kings returne into Portugall, the Moores
did indeauour, but in vaine, to recouer the place: for the repayring and fortifying wherof,
the King caused a great quantitie of ground, betweene the towne and the sea, to be
enclosed with a great and strong wall, defended and guarded with towers, the stone, lime,
and other prouisions necessarie for such a worke of worth, was by him brought from
Portugall.
The yeare 1459. the King Don Henry of Castile,Castile. sent Don Inigo Lopes de Mendoca,
sonne to Don Inigo,An. 1459. and brother to the Marquis of Santillana, Ambassadour to the
Councell held at Mantua by Pope Pius the second, before times called Aeneas Syluius
Picolomini, who had newly succeeded Calixtus the third. There with great deliberation
and hope, the warres against the Turkes was debated, which in the end came to nothing,
and Don Inigo returned into Castile, carrying home onely a Iubile of full remission of
sinnes, the collections whereof were so great and inestimable, as hee therewith builded
and erected the Monasterie of Saint Anne de la Pegna, in his towne of Tendilla, of the
 Order of Saint Iercome. The King beeing returned to Madrid, entertayned himselfe there
a long time with feasts,The loues and vanities of D. Henry the vnable king of Castile. playes, and shewes, where the Arch-bishop of Seuill Don Alphonso
de Fonsecs, hauing feasted the King, Queene, and the Ladies, among other singularities,
there was serued in after dinner for the banquet, two plates filled with rings of
gold, set with rich and pretious stones for the Ladies, amongst whom Donna Guiomar
was held, next the Queene, to be the fayrest and most beautifull Ladie of Spaine without
compare: to her the king shewed many amorous fauours at this feast, which the
Queene perceiuing, grew very iealous, and euer after vsed the Ladie vnkindly and rigorously,
by reason whereof the King shewed himselfe strange to her, and appoynted her
a Court and trayne apart, not suffering her to come neere his Court by two leagues:
Whereunto the Arch-bishop of Seuille, who was well seene and experienced in such businesses,
did willingly employ his best endeauours in the behal^e of Guiomar: for whatsoeuer
the king did, was but fayned and imaginarie shewes, who was so farre from beeing
offended and displeased with his friends in such affaires, as hee was content to spare
them his owne wife: for the common rumor was, that not beeing able to endure that
men should esteeme him vnapt for venereall, acts, which he reputed a great and ignominious
disgrace,Basenesse of K. Henry the vnable. hee dealt with the Queene his wife to receiue Don Bertrand de la Cueua
into her bed, (his base and degenerate mind desiring and consenting that this Knight
should lye with her, to the end shee might prooue with child by him, and so by that
meanes suppose an heire to the kingdome in his owne name, though vnlawfully begotten
by another.)
It was credibly reported, that at the first the Queene would by no possible meanes bee
drawne to agree and giue her consent to so vile, detestable, and dishonorable a deede,
but yet afterwards, shee had more neede to haue beene curbed in with raines and bridle,
then of spurres. Now don Bertrand de la Cuena, was a gallant and most accomplished
Knight in all points belonging to an excellent Courtier, and so esteemed and beloued
of the King, as for his sake, because he so valiantly, and with such an vndaunted courage,
defended a passage at the arriuall of an Ambassadour of Brittayne: hee builded a
Monasterie on the high way from Madrid to Pard, which for him was named, the Monasterie
of Pas.

The King the better to couer his owne naturall weaknesse, made shew of loue to diuers
Gentlewomen in sundry places: for before he made loue to Ladie Guiom^^, he had
professed himselfe seruant to another Ladie, named Catherina de Sandouall, whom he had
oftentimes entertained pr^^atly, but she not contented with his vaine embraces, and
beeing desirous to furnish her selfe with a more able Knight, shee grew familiarly acquainted
with a young Gentleman named Alphonso de Cordoua, whom she kept companie
with a long time secretly, which turned to his destruction: for the King hauing notice
thereof, commanded Alphonso to be beheaded at Medina del campo. In this sort did this
King behaue himselfe in his most priuate affaires, giuing occasion to all men to speake
euill and vncharitably of him, which beeing reported vnto him, hee entred into distrust
and hatred against the great persons of his Realme, and oftentimes for sleight occasions
he would rayse great troubles.
And not beeing pleased, that Don Diego Hurtado de Mendoca Marquis of Santillana
should hold the cittie of Guadalajara, where hee did not onely commaund the towne
and castle, as Gouernour both in matters of State and warre, but also had authoritie
and preheminence to bestow publike Offices, hee caused him to bee taken by the Commander
Iohn Fernandes Galindo, who entred into the towne with sixe hundred men at
armes, by meanes of intelligence that he had with one of the Marquis his Captaines,
called Alphonso de Gaona, who was corrupted with money, and the Marquis was compelled
to leaue that Gouernement to the Kings dispose, hauing giuen him no iust nor
lawfull cause of offence or iniurie, and so hee retired and with-drew himselfe to Hita.
Soone after, the King and the Queene came thither, and left Alphonso de Gaona Gouernour
there.

Don Iohn the second of that name, and the
eighteenth King of Arragon.
WHilest these affaires continued in Castile, the King Don Iohn of Nauarre took 
quiet possession of the kingdome of Arragon,Naua^re, and Arragon. fallen vnto him by the death of
his brother: vnto whome came Ambassadours from the Prince Don Charles
his sonne, to beseech him that all faults past might be forgotten, and that it might please
him to receiue him into grace and fauour: the which request the father easily graunted,
for he was very kind and gentle to his children, but especially to the Prince Don Charles,
who beeing daily sollicited by those of the faction of Beaumont, who continued and
maintayned the warres in certaine sorts and strong holds in Nauarre, not beeing able
without him to bring their businesse to effect, hee desired to returne into Spayne, either
to helpe them to make their peace, or to defend them by force of armes.
Hauing then had a pleasing answer from the King his father, hee departed that yeare
1459. from Sicill, beeing accompanied with a great number of Sicillian Lords and Gentlemen,
and landed at Barcelona, where beeing welcommed and receiued with great
pompe,Agreement betweene the King D. Iohn of Arragon, and his sonne Don Charles. magnificence, and honour, by the Barcelonois, hee dealt so wisely, that for his
sake the King pardoned those of Beaumont, and declared that his pleasure was, that all
former matters of what kind soeuer, should be buried in perpetuall obliuion: those of
Cattelogna beeing sureties for the sonnes faith and obedience to his father, and for the
fathers loue and good-will to his sonne.
This reconciliation beeing made to the great ioy and contentment of the whole
kingdom, the King D. Iohn knowing himself to be a mightie Prince, thought vpon fit
and conuenient meanes how to recouer his lands which were confiscate in Castile: for
the effecting whereof, hee entred into league and confederacie with Don Alphonso
King of Portugall, and agreed vppon a marriage betweene the Prince his sonne, and
the Ladie Catherine of Portugall,New desseignes to troble Castil. sister to King Alphonso, and to Donna Ioane Queene
of Castile: into the which league entred Don Alphonso Carillo, Arch-bishop of Toledo,

the Admirall Don Frederic father-in-law to King Iohn, Don Pedro Giron Master of Calatraua,
and all the Manriques of Castile, with others whereof when the king of Castile
Don Henry had notice, by the aduertisement of D. (...) de Fonfeca, Arch-bishop of
Seuill, he was aduised by his councell, to send the bishop of Cite Rodrigo, and Diego de
Ribera Ambassadours into Arragon, vnder pretence of congratulating in his name the
welcome-home of Prince Charles, and his reconcilement with the king his father: but
they had commission to deale vnder-hand secretly with Prince Charles, to offer him all
friendship, and to treate of a marriage betweene him, and Donna Izabella of Castile, the
Kings sister.
The Ambassadours hauing cunningly executed their commission, possessed the mind
of Prince Charles with new thoughts, and made him hope to bee able by meanes of his
marriage with Castile, and friendship that he should gaine thereby, to obtaine his kingdome
of Nauarre. Therefore hee did forsake the Infanta of Portugall, who for griefe
thereof retired her selfe into the Nunnerie of S. Clare at (...), where shee spent her
time in Virginity, dying so one after, when as shee was betrothed to Edward the fourth,
King of England. Also this other marriage came to no effect, by reason of the shortnes
of Prince Charles his life, God hauing ordayned that Princesse to be wife to his younger
brother.
Prince Charles vppon hope of ayde from Castile,The desire of rule an v^tamed ^ury. began againe to encourage those of
the faction of Beaumont, and to sollicite certaine of Cattelogna to begin new troubles
in Nauarre and Arragon: for the mind of man beeing once bewitched with the desire of
rule, cannot be contained in any bounds. In these times the Cardinall Bessarion a learned
man, a Greeke by nation, was perpetuall administrator of the church of Pampelona, by
the death of the Bishop of D. Martin of Peralta.
 The King Don Henry of Castile, hauing with wise councell and discretion broken the
league of Portugall,Castille. determined to persecute those of his kingdome which had any hand
therein. And because hee was assured, that the Master of Calatraua was of the number,
hee shewed very bad countenance to his brother the Marquis of Villena, but hee was so
wise and cunning, as he soone excused himselfe to the King, and wiped out of his mind
all suspition conceiued against him. That was the occasion why the two brethren, the
Marquis, and the Master of Calatraua did conceiue such mortal hatred against the Arch-bishop
of Seuile, who about that time obtained for a nephew of his named also Alphonso
Fonseca, Deane of Seuile, the Arch-bishoppricke of Saint Iames: but vnderstanding
that Don Lewis Osorio, sonne to the Earle of Transtamara, had intruded himselfe into the
same, with the fauour and support of the whole Countrie of Galicia, he made a feigned
bargaine with his Nephew, and resigned to him the Arch-bishoppricke of Seuile, taking
that of Saint Iames for himselfe, with this condition, that matters beeing pacified,
they would each of them returne to their former dignities: for the vncle thought that
by meanes of his great credite and authoritie hee should be best able to deale with Don
Lewis Osorio.
The yeare 1460. the King Don Henry did expell the Abbesse of Saint Peter de las Duegnas
out of Toledo,1460. named Donna Marquesada de Guzman,An importunate manner of reforming Nunnes in Castile. a Ladie of a religious and
holy life, saying, That he did it to reforme the Nunnes of that place, who had the report
to liue dissolutely, and he gaue them for their Abbesse and Gouernesse, the Ladie Catherine
de Sandouall his quondam Mistris, wherewith the Arch-bishop and the whole Clergie
beeing offended, the house was interdicted, and diuers of the Clergie degraded and
banished, but the King made an end of the matter.
 This yeare running on, king Iohn of Nauarre and Arragon did assemble the Estates of
the principalitie of Cattelogna at Lerida,Nauarre, and Arragon. and assigned those of Arragon to meete at
Fraga. At the assembly at Lerida, the Prince Don Charles arriued, where whilest they
consulted of the affaires, a Gentleman named Iohn Carillo, presented letters of credit to
the King,The K. of Nauar and Arrag^ aduertised of all the enterprises of Prince Charles. from the Admirall of Castile Don Frederic his father-in-law, and he was by him
aduertised of all that which had passed betweene the Prince his sonne, and the king
Don Henry: adding thereunto, that those of the faction of Beaumont, incited and stirred
vp by the Prince Don Charles, did prepare to armes, and addresse themselues

for the warres, vnto whom the Cattelans ioyned themselues, the which did greatly trouble
the King who hauing had therevpon the aduice of his most priuate and faithfull
councellors, he caused the Prince to be called into a Chamber a part, and there hauing
declared vnto him what he knew of his dealings and practises, he did sharply reprehend
him, saying, that he thought that he had begotten a fury, who did torment and trouble
his Kingdomes, falling so often into rebellion, and abusing his fatherly pitty and meekenesse,
but that now the time was come, wherein it behooued him to vse fit remedies to
represse his madnesse, and to punish him in such sort, as the vnhappy example of a father,
liuing in continuall feare and suspition of his sonnes treacheries, should now cease in
his family: wherevnto the Prince would haue replied, but he could not bee heard; and by
the appointment of the King his father,Imprisonment of Prince Charles. being arested, he was condemned to close prison
in the castle of Mirauet: Neuerthelesse at the earnest request of diuers great Lords,
vnto whom it seemed ouer rigorous, hee was committed vnder sure keeping to a more
easie prison in the Aljaferia of the city of Saragossa, to the great discontentment of the
Realmes of Nauarre and Arragon, and likewise of the King of Castile, who being in the
towne of Madrid was soone after aduertised of the durance of Prince Charles. With
him was likewise imprisoned Don Iohn of Beaumont, brother to the Constable Don
Lewis.
The Cattelans who were sureties for the reconcilement made betweene the father
and the sonne at Barcelona,The Cattelans intercede in vain^ for the Prince. hearing those newes, sent speedily fifteene men of great
authority in Ambassage to the King, to know of him the reason of the Princes captiuity,
because it seemed to them that the King therein had infringed the assurance which
they had giuen for him, and that his promise was to intreat him louingly like a father.
Hauing heard by the King that it was for conspiracy and intelligences with his enemies,
against his Estate and person, being the third time that he had fallne into open rebellion,
they vsed many praiers and intreaties for the behoofe and deliuery of the Prince:
but seeing it to be in vaine, they returned with the Kings answere to them that sent them.
Then the Cattelans being very much mooued,A free remonstrance of the Ca^t^lans to their King. added to these fifteene Ambassadors,
three score more, and sent them backe to Lerida to the King, vnto whom the Abbot of
Ager (being chiefe) hauing shewed with great liberty how grieuously the Cattelans did
take the imprisonment of his sonne the Prince of Viana and Girone, who expected to
haue beene well and kindely intreated by him, vpon the promises and surety which they
had giuen for him, and did hope thereby to haue beene sufficiently defended against the
slanderous and malitious attempts of his Aduersaries, chiefly of the Admirall D. Frederic,
who openly and by all meanes did labour to extirpe the eldest sonne and lawfull
heire of the Realmes of Nauarre, Arragon and other Dominions annexed to the same
crowne, to the end to raise and aduance to those dignities his daughters children against
all right and piety, and he protested that the whole state of the principallity of Cattalogna
would imploy their goods, liues, meanes, and friends (which he knew to be very great
in that Prouince) to defend Prince Charles from wrong, and to deliuer him from so vniust
a captiuity: wherefore he besought him to consider thereof with a fatherly affection,
and at their requests to set him at liberty, and to heare how he could iustifie himselfe,
and not to trust so much to his owne opinion in affaires of so great importance onely to
please the Queene his wife and her father, and to preuent by wise and good councell the
great troubles and miseries which might thereby ensue.The King of Nauarre and Arragon his answere to his subiects of Cattalogna. To this rough discourse, full of
threats, the King answered with great grauity and moderation, concluding, that hee
knew how to doe Iustice, and that hee was not determined to giue ouer his purpose in
punishing his rebellious sonne, who had so often abused his clemency, for any passionate
or importunate soliciting of his subiects.
The Ambassadors hauing written and sent backe this answere, there followed forthwith
a manifest reuolt of the Cattelans, who hauing leauied a great company of men of
warre, and obtained by their Ambassadors, sent to Segobia, aide from King Henry of
Castile, of fifteene hundred horse, vnder the conduct of the Commander Goncalo de Sahauedra,
they aduanced their forces towards Lerida, with intent to seaze vpon the kings
person, and to put to death all those of his priuy councell. And for the more easie

execution of their enterprise, they had secret intelligence with diuerse courtiers, the
chiefe of whom were Francis de Espla, Gerrard Ceruillon, and Iohn Agullen: but God preserued
the King and his from so furious a conspiracy, discouered at the instant when it
should haue beene executed, and yet so happily as the King had leasure to get away
thorough the gate of the preaching friers, notwithstanding that D. Pedro d'Vrrea Arch-bishop
of Tarragon, one of the Ambassadors of Cattalogna had councelled him not to
leaue the towne of Lerida, but there to make head against his enemies, whose aduise was
approued by all the other Lord; there assembled. The King was no sooner gon, but
the conspirators entred the pallace with intent to haue committed their purposed massacre,
but to their great discontent they found it empty. The King retired himselfe to
Fraga, whether the Ambassadors determined to haue followed him, and to try once againe
if they could induce him to forgiue his sonne, hoping that the tast and new beginning
of the troubles, which he had seene, would make him more mild: but they al^ering
their purpose returned home into Cattalogna. The rebels forces marched towards
Fraga where the King was, who from thence went to Saragossa, and left them the spoile
of that place.
In the meane time those of Barcelona tooke their Gouernor D. Lewis de Requesens
prisoner, those of Valencia, Arragon, Sicil and Majorca, assisting them, and ioyning with
them for the Princes deliuery. But aboue the rest, the faction of Beaumont in Nauarre
shewed themselues violent in the pursure of their enemies of Grammont which held the
Kings party, causing such ruines and calamities in the Kingdome as can hardly be expressed,
the mindes of the multitude of each side being so inflamed against their contrary
faction, as they knew not vpon what termes, nor for what occasion, they had taken arms:
for if one should haue demaunded of those of Beaumont or Grammont, wherefore they
were so animated one against the other: they could make no other answere, but that
they did it because their neighbours, friends and kin^-folkes did the same. The ruines
and desolations increasing on euery side King Iohn seeling himselfe touched in conscience,
as if such troubles had falne vpon him by the iudgement of God, who would
haue him to taste and see in his owne Kingdomes, that which he the yeeres before had
caused the Realme of Castile to endure, he did therefore harken, to the admonitions
which were newly made to him by diuerse wise men, namely by a Charterhouse Monke
of the Monastery of Scala Dei in Cattalogna, held at that time for a Prophet, whose
name is supprest or forgotten by the Authors, and through their perswation he did resolue
to set the Prince at liberty, and to giue him to the Cattelans who did so earnestly
desire it: He was then taken from the Aljaferia of Saragossa by his mother in law
Queene Ioane,Don Charles Prince of Vian^, deliuered out of prison, but poysoned by his stepmother. who by the commandement of the King went with him into Cattalogna,
and in the City of Villa-franca deliuered him vnto them: The common and constant
report was, that from the time the Prince came forth of prison, hee neuer had one daies
health, but his life did daily consume and decay, and diuerse did impute the cause thereof
to Queene Ioane, who (as they say) poysoned him, to the end to aduance and raise her
sonne D. Fernand Duke of Momblancke, to the succession of the Kingdome of Arragon
and dependances of the same, a certaine stranger physitian being actor of so impious a
deed, and the sicknesse wherewith the Queene was soone after afflicted, being an vlcerous
canker ouer her whole body was attributed to the iust iudgement of God,Queene Ioan^ punished by the hand of God. who did
punish her for committing so execrabld an act: others, reiect this accusation as false,
and counterfeited by those of the faction of Beaumont, who notwithstanding the Princes
deliuery, continued in armes against those of Grammont, namely in the towne of
Lombier which by Charles ^Artieda, in the name of Prince Charles* was taken: against
whom this King sent his sonne D. Alphonso of Arragon Duke of Villa Hermosa with
a great number of souldiers, who beseeged the towne, and soone after the King came
thither in person, with those of Sanquessa and other townes of the faction of Grammont.
Charles of Artieda perceiuing himselfe to be ouerlaied with numbers, demaunded aide
of the Castillans, who forthwith marched thither, to meet the troupes of the Commander
Goncalo de Sahaue^ra, and those of Rodrigo de Marchena, who raised the seege. The
King D. Iohn hauing put garrisons into Pampelona, Lerin, and other places belonging

to them which he distrusted, came to the Estates at Catalajub, leauing the gouernment
of Nauarre to his children D. Iohn, and Alphonso of Arragon, fearing and foreseeing
the warre against Castile.
During these stirres in Nauarre and Arragon, the country of Andeluzia was assailed 
by Mulei Albohacen,Moores. or as some others termed him Hali Muley Hacen eldest sonne to
Ismael King of Granado, contrary to the peace betwixt the Realmes of Castile and Granado,
which his father King Ismael desired sincerely and inuiolably to obserue and keepe.
This young Prince impatient of rest, with fifteene thousand footemen, and two thousand
fiue hundred horsemen came into Castile ouer-running and burning the country
of Estepa, from whence he led away many Christian prisoners, and a great number of
cattaile: to represse whose spoile and robberies D. Roderigo Ponce of Leon, eldest sonne
to the Earle of Arcos, and Lewis de Pernia captaine of Osuno, came in all hast to Estepa,
with about two hundred and threescore horse, and six hundred chosen footmen onely;
who being come to the riuer of las Ieguas,The Moores defeated at Mad^ogno. espired the Moores going vp the hils of Madrogno,
who hauing discouered this smal Christian troupe, they sent out two thousand
three hundred horse in three Squadrons to make head against the^, commanding the rest
of their people to goe on their iourney with the prisoners and spoile: the Christians at
the first were amazed at their enemies force; but being incouraged by the captaines,
they marched brauely against them, and charged them so valliantly as they brake them
and put them to a shamefull flight, with an incredible slaughter: for the dead bodies
being viewed, there was found slaine on the Moores part foureteene hundred, and
of the Christians onely thirty horsemen and a hundred and fifty footmen. The little
victorious army of the Christians hauing rested and rallied their troupes, at the
fountaine of stone, perceiued the herds of cattaile as they returned toward the places
of their accustomed pasture, being forsaken by the flying Moores; the which they tooke
and brought backe, with their booties and spoiles, which were great and rich: and so they
returned home to their garrisons and houses, bearing along with them in great ^oy and
triumph, the colours, trumpets, and drums of the Moores: for the which victory, publike
and general processions were made ouer al Spaine: King Ismael on the other side was
much greeued for the great losse of his rash and vnexperienced sonne: but most of
all, for the breach of the peace betwixt him and the King of Castile, which was the occasion
of the totall ruine of the state of the Moores in Granada, as shalbe hereafter
declared.
D. Henry King of Castile did graunt this yeere to diuers valleies and places of Gu^puscoa,
the rights and customes of the towne of Saint Sebastian of the same Prouince,Castille.
correcting and reforming those which they had of olde times, as the royall priuiledge
of the yeere 1461. dated at Segobia doth testifie, signed by Garcia Mendes, secretary to the
King. ^rom Segouia the Court remooued to Sepulueda, where the King restored
D. Diego Hurtado de Mendoza Marquis of Santillana,D. Diego Hurtado de M^ndoza restored to his right in (...) to the rights which he claimed in
Guadalajara, as he had enioyed them in times past, with this condition, that his brother
D. Pedro G^ncales de Mendoza Bishop of Calaorra, with the eldest sonne of the Marquis
D. Iohn de Mendoza, should follow the court: which things were practized and brought
to passe by the Archbishop of Siuil, D. Alphonso de Fonseca, and by D. Iohn de Pacheco
Marquis of Villena. These two were the principal persons about the King, by whose
councel the whole Kingdome was ruled; and yet for all that they were enemies, and extreamely
iealous the one of the other, as it is ordinary among great men in cour^: as also
for the reasons, which we haue heretofore mentioned. Now the Marquis being desirous
to driue the Archbishop, his coriuall, from the Court, the better to manage his affaires
alone, he solicited the King his maister to make warre vpon King Iohn of Nauarre and
Arragon, seeming therein to agree with the Archbishop, who had councelled the same
euer since the imprisonment of Prince Charles, which was by reason of the league which
hee had with Castile. For the effecting whereof, it behoued him to take some assurance
of the Admirall D. Frederic, and the Archbishop of Toledo, D. Alphonso Carillo
de Acugna, who remained together at (...), making shew to fauour the King of
Nauarre and to be of that party.

The Marquis laboured to bring them to agreement with the King Don Henry, and
did promise that his brother Don Pedro Giron Maister of Calatraua, should bee ready
to doe him all seruice; but that it did behooue him to leaue some one of great authority
at Valiodolit, as Gouernor and Viceroy, knowing very well that this charge could
be layd on none other but the Arch-Bishoppe of Siuill. These things were brought to
passe in Aranda of Duero euen as the Marques had deuised and aduised: for the King
gaue credit to whatsoeuer he sayd, and was wholy ruled by him. About this time Don
Pedro of Castile Bishop of Palencia departed this mortal life, Don Guttiere de la Cueua
being pormoted to the same dignity: hee was brother to Don Bertrand de la Cueua
the King and Queenes chiefe minion,The Queene of Ca^tle go^ten with child by D. B^rtrand de la ^u^ua. who at that time prooued to be with child, to the
Kings great ioy and content, albeit hee knew very well, that Don Bertrand had done the
deede, he himselfe being altogether vnable to performe such an act.
 Don Pedro Grion Maister of Calatraua arriued at Aranda with two thousand fiue
hundred horse, which forces beeing ioyned with king Henry his great gard,Nauarre, The King of Castill makes warees vpon Nauarre. made vp
the list of a mighty army, wherewith the king marched towards Logrogno where hee
assembled all men fit for the warres out of the Prouinces of Alaua, Biscay, and Guipuscoa,
from the age of twenty to three score yeares, declaring by his ordonances and proclamations,
that hee did vndertake that warre in his owne person in the behalfe of his
welbeloued Cosin Charles Prince of Viana, the proper heire of Nauarre. The Kings
forces were so great as the Nauarrors which held the part of the King Don Iohn, being
terrefied with so mighty an army, did yeeld vp diuers places without any fight at all,
specially la Garde, Arcos, and Saint Vincent: As for Viana it was furiously battered
and assayled, and as brauely defended but in the end, Don Pedro of Peralta at that time
Constable of Nauarre, was forced to yeeld it vp to Don Goncall de Sahauedra generall
of the Kings army at that siege, a Nobleman very expert in the art of warre: the Constable
being in mourning habit went out at one gate, and at another the Castillans
entred, in which place the King appointed Don Iohn Hurtado de Mendoza to be gouernor.
The Prince Don Charles remayned at that time in Barcelona, reuerenced and well
entertayned by the Cattelans, who vnderstanding the successe of that warre of Nauarre,
sent a Gentleman of Cattalogna called Iohn Traillas to the king Don Henry, with
charge to conclude the Articles of the marriage betweene him and the Infanta
Donna Isabell the kings sister: the which this knight hauing effected, beeing accompanied
with the Bishop of Astorga, by the Kings leaue hee passed on to Areuallo,
where the Infanta lay with Queene Isabell her Mother, whom in the Princes name
he visited, and so returned: but not long after, Prince Charles languishing euer since
his last imprisonment, dyed, not without suspition of beeing poysoned by the practises
of his mother in lawe Queene Ioane, as hath beene already declared. The Barcelonois
perceiuing the Princes and to draw on, did entreate him to marry La Capa his
concubine, by whom hee had two sonnes, Don Phillip, and Don Iohn, to the end that
by the same marriage, they might bee ligitimated, and so consequently become capable
to inherite after him, the which tooke none effect. There was no manner of
vowes, prayers, or pilgrimages omitted for the recouery of the Princes health, but
there was no remedy, natures debt must bee payed, and so hee departed this life, to
the great griefe of the Cattelans. It is reported that vpon his death bed he did confesse to
haue greatly offended in banding himselfe against his father, vnto whom hee owed his
estate, goods, and his proper life, crauing pardon of him before sundry witnesses: forgiuing
likewise all those which in any sort had offended him: he died in the fortith yeare of
his age, and his body was interred in the monastery of Pobleta, where the ancient Kings
of Arragon were wont to be buried* A little before his death, by agreement made betwixt
him and the King his father, by the meanes of Queene Ioane his step-mother, hee had
obtayned the gouernment, iurisdiction and reuenew of the principality of Cattalogna
reseruing onely to the King, the title of soueraigne: and by the same agreement, were
deliuered out of prison by exchange, Don Iohn of Beaumont on the one part, and Don
Lewis of Requesens on the other. By the deceasse of Don Charles, the Principallity
of Viana, with the right of succession in Nauarre, returned backe againe to the

Lady Blanch his sister the some time Queene of Castile, diuorced from King Henry then
reigning, and his brother the Infant D. Fernand Duke of Memb^ane, sonne to King Iohn
by his second wife Lady Ioane became heire apparant to the crowne of Arragon.
The King D. Henry being aduertized of the Princes death,Castile. made account to keepe
still the towne of Viana, and continuing the the warrer, he went to be^eege the towne of Lerin,
which place by reason of the inexpugnable scituation therei^, he could not take:
wherefore he brought backe his army to Log^^g^^, hauing of^ certaine of his troupes
as they forraged the country, who were incountred and defeated by D. Alphonso of Arragon,
and other captaines committed to the guard of Pamp^^lona, and the country
neere to (...)* ^rom Logrog^^ the King went to (...) of Duero, where the
Queene lay, vnto whom he gaue that towne: the^^ he receiued letters from D. Iohn Pachico
Marquis of Villena, by the which he certified him, that by his endeauor, the Archbishop
of Toledo and the Admirall, were returned to his (...), by reason whereof
he aduised him to come backe to Madrid: to which place D. Alphonso of Eo^seca, Archbishop
of Siuill came, beeing weary of so long absence from the Court: but finding
his entertainment to bee cold, hee returned much discontented to Valliodelit: for the
King had wholy abandoned himselfe as a prey to the Marquis, at whose entreaty hee
came to Ocagna, whither the Archbishop of Toledo came first and kissed his hand,
bringing along with him all the Manriques.
These being gonne backe to Yespes, the Admirall Don Frederic came likewise to
salute the King, who receiued them all very gratiously and promised them all fauour.
The Archbishop of Toledo, returned to Court to be of the Kings Councell, and it was
decreed that once euery weeke vpon the Friday, the councell for Iustice should be held
in his house: which was continued a while, with great hope that Iustice would florish
in Spaine more then euer: but as these Courtiers, intent were not iust and pure, but onely
shewes and maskes to couer their enuies and emulations, this lasted not long, and the
Realme was as badly gouerned and troubled as before: the Marquis of Villena and the
Archbishop of Toledo practizing nothing more, then to remooue him of Siuil.
Now the King being returned to Madrid, hee sent Roderigo of Marchena to Arand^
to accompany and bring thither the Queene, to the end that she might there be deliuered
of child, whither she came with a great traine, the King and the whole Court going
forth to meet her, of whom she was receiued with great ioy, and loue of all those which
knew not her behauiour; which continued, till by her vndiscreet and open carriage, she
discouered her filthy life. The Infant Don Alphonso and the Infanta D. Isabella were
likewise by the councell of the Marquis and the Archbishop brought to Court, the gouernment
and bringing vp of the Infant was giuen to Diego de Riuera, and the Infanta
remained in the palace in the company of the Queene, the King making great shew of
brotherly loue to them, albeit that a little before, he had continually placed a gard of two
hundred horse about their persons.
In the beginning of the yeere 1462.1462. the Queene was deliuered of a daughter, with
hard labour,Queene Ioane deliuered of a daughter. betweene the armes of Don Henry Earle of Alua de Lista: the King, the
Archbishop of Toledo, and the Marquis of Villena being present; for ioy of whose
birth, great triumphes were made ouer all Spaine: the eight day following shee was
christned in the chappel of the Kings house, by the Archbishop of Toledo, accompanied
with the Bishops of Calaorra, Osma and Carthagena, and shee was called Donna Ioane
by her mothers name: her Godfathers were the Earle of Armignac, Ambassador at that
time in the Court of Castile for the French King Lewis the eleuenth, and the Marquis
of Villena; the Godmothers were the Infanta Donna Isabel, and the Marquesse of Villena,
the child was carried and held at the font by the same Earle of Alua de Lista, with great
pompe and royall magnificence.
And the better to recompence Don Bertrand de la Cueua, who acted the chiefe part
in this Commedy,D. Bertrand de la Cueua created Earle of Ledesma. the king, by the aduise of his councell, who knew that it was his pleasure,
did create him Earle of Ledesma: the office of great Maister which hee held, was
giuen to Andrew of Cabrera, a young man, very wise and discreet: The new Earle was
inuested and receiued into the number of the Lords of the councell, with the fauour of

all men:The Infanta D. Ioane newly borne, sworne and d^^l^ed heire of the kingdome. and being a noble and bountifull Knight, he kept open Court for certaine daies
with great feasting and pompous shewes. The Infanta being scarce two moneths old,
the Kings pleasure was that she should be sworne and declared Princesse, and inheritrix
of his Realmes in the assembly of the generall states assembled at Madrid for the same
purpose; the Infants D. Alphonso and Donna Isabella his sister being the first that did
sweare in this solemnity: there grew a dontention at this parliament about the precedencie
of the citties, who should first sweare: but the Kings pleasure was that Segobia
should sweare first before any of the rest, without preiudice to their rights and preuiledges.
The Court remained certaine months at Madrid and Segobia, the King taking great
delight to hunt in those wooddy countries: from thence he went to Alfaro, to treat
of the affaires of Nauarre and Arragon, and hee left the Queene at Segobia three
monthes gonne with child,Fire kindled in Queene Ioanes haire by the Sunne beames. but she miscarried soone after the Kings departure, being
flighted with a strange fire kindled in her haire by a beame of the Sunne, as she sate in her
chamber, which burnt part of her lockes, a rare thing, but yet proceeding from certaine
ointments apt to kindle, wherewith she vsed to die and collour her haire, a thing ordinary
amongst amorous Ladies, whose only care and study, is, to correct and amend the naturall
forme of their bodies, with artificiall receits, to make them seeme the more louely:
this abortiue child was a sonne.
King Henry being at Alfaro,Nauarre. and Arragon. the Archbishop of Toledo, and the Admirall D. Frederic
began to mediate a peace betweene the two Kings of Castile and Arragon: and for that
purpose King Iohn came to Tudela, vnto whom the Marquis of Vallena was sent, the
King of Castill hauing first taken D. Iohn of Arragon as ostage for him. At Tudela, diuerse
meanes were propounded for the conclusion of the peace, which taking no effect,
it was thought fit that the Marquis should goe with King Iohn and the Queene his wife
to Saragossa to consult more amply of those affaires. The Marquis made summe stay
there, but King Iohn had occasion to goe in all hast into Cattalogna; in the meane time
the Queene did entertaine him very sumptuously, and among other fauours, she caused
him to eate at her owne table, which as then was serued onely with Ladies and gentlewomen
without any men at all. At the Kings returne to Sargossa, the peace was concluded,
vpon the deliuery of ostages and certaine places for assurance on each side, to
weet La Gardo,Peace betweene Castile and Arragon. Saint Vincent, Arcos and Larraga by the King of Arragon, and on the
part of Castil, Lorca in the Kingdome of Murcia, and Comago in the territory of Soria.
The Nauarrois were discontented that King Iohn should giue any places of the Realme
of Nauarre in pawne, rather then those of the Kingdome of Arragon: but of necessity it
behoued them to bee content therewith. The Cattelans also were reconciled to the
King, and they did acknowledge by oth the Infant D. Fernand being then nine yeeres
old, for heire and lawful successor to the crowne of Arragon, who from thenceforth was
intituled Prince of Girona.
 This peace, betweene King Iohn and his subiects lasted not long,Sedition in Cattalogna. whether it were because
they were certified of the Princes vntimely death whom their did so deerely loue,
and which they desired to reuenge, or for any other occasion: but it fell so out that in
the country of Rossillon, Ampurdam and other places of Cattalogna, there arose great
tumults and mutinies, the Earle of Pallars being chiefe of that rebellion: there was a
rumor spred abroad, that Prince Charles his ghost did nightly complaine in the streets of
Barcelona, crauing vengeance on Queene Ioane his step-mother, who by poison had parted
his soule from his body.
The Queene to resist those disorders came to Girona, where she was forthwith beseeged
by the Earle of Pallars,Queene Ioane beseeged in Girona. and constrained, with the Prince D. Fernand her sonne, to
fortifie her selfe with great daunger of their liues in the tower of the Cathedral Church
of the same city. At the same time the Barcelonois did driue al the Kings officers forth of
their city, and as many as did loue and affect him, resoluing neuer more to obey him, but
to become subiects to the King of Castile. The Inhabitants of Girona did greatly fauour
the beseeged Queene, who vnder the conduct of Du Puy master of the order of Montesa
made great resistance, but the Earle of Pallars entred the city by force, and did furiously
assaile and batter the strong tower, desirous to take the Queene and the Prince her sonne:

but they one her side vsed such dilligence as the Earle was beaten out of the towne with
great losse of his people.
The King being much troubled with the reuolt of the Cattalans, and other places
also of his Kingdomes, sent into France, to intreate of King Lewis aide of men and money,Iohn of Arragon pawneth Rossillon to Lewis the eleuenth.
vnto whom he engaged, for the summe of three hundred thousand crownes of gold
for the paiment of his souldiars, the Earledome of Rossillon and Cerdagne. He obtained
of him two thousand fiue hundred horse, amongst whom were seuen hundred
Launces furnished, of which forces, Gaston Earle of Foix, and Lord of Bearn, sonne in
law to King Iohn was Generall. In this warre, which was long and troublesome, diuers
Knights of the faction of Grammont did good seruice to the King, the chiefe of whom
were Don Peter de Peralta, Constable of Nauarre, Sanches of Londogno sonne to the
Marshall of Nauarre, Fernand of Angulo Stephen of Garro, Roderigo of Puelles, the Viscount
Bertrand of Armendaris, Iohn Henriques of La^arra, and Gyles de Aualos, Iames
Diaz of Armendaris Lord of Cadreita, Pedro of Ansa, Iohn of Aquerri, and Sancho of Erbiti
surnamed the obstinate, who did beare for his motto or deuise, So, or no: glorying
in that he was contentious: by reason whereof, this Knight had in his time many quarrels
to maintaine. The comming of the French, caused the Earle of Pallars to raise
his seege from before Girona. So the Queene beeing freed, ioyned with the army
of the Earle of Foix, and pursued the Rebelles, causing diuerse of them to craue pardon.
The King hauing leauied men at armes, sent them vnder the commaund of his sonne
Don Alphonso of Arragon to ioyne likewise with the Earle of Foix his forces: hee himselfe
following after, staied a while in the City of Bellaguer to appease the tumultuary
Inhabitants, into the which towne he entred in armes, and there receiued newes of the
yeelding vp of Tarraga, whether he forthwith went, but soone after he was constrained
to dislodge from thence, being aduertized that Don Iohn de Agullon with certaine Regiments
came thitherward to surprise him, and so he returned to Bellaguer. Those of
Barcelona,D. Iohn declared enemy by the Barcelonois and despoiled of his right in that principallity. mooued with extreame hatred against their King, did by publike proclamation
declare him enemy of their country, saying that they did iustly withdraw themselues
from his obedience, he being the murtherer of his own son, an oppressor of his subiects,
breaker of his faith and promise, and one that did violate their rights, priuiledges, and
antient liberties: and they sent the acts and formall proceedings thereof to Rome to the
Pope then reigning, who was called Pius the second, a Siennois of the family of Picolomini.
And by a decree of the three Estates of the country, they sent an Ambassage to
the King of Castile, to the end they might be receiued, maintained and defended, by him
against the power of King Iohn.
The Ambassador was a Gentleman very learned,Castile. named Copus, who in disguised habit
past into Castile, and found the King Don Henry at Atienca, who came thither to recreate
himselfe, after the marriage made by him of the youngest daughter of the Marquis
of Santillana, with his Minion. Bertrand de la Cueua Earle of Ledesma and one
of his priuy councell. The Ambassador spake with the King, and declared vnto him the
cause of his comming, which was to giue him notice of the title which hee had to the
principallity of Cattalogna as also to the crowne of Arragon, the which was much better
then King Iohns, because hee was issued from the eldest sonne of Donna Leonora of
Arragon, Queene of Castile, whereas King Iohn and his brother King Alphonso, came of
the yonger sonne, and that he had now a fit occasion offered him for the recouery thereof,
by the meanes of the Cattelans, iustly prouoked by the wrongs and tirannies of the
King D. Iohn. The King hauing heard these things, referred the Ambassador to his councel
at Segobia, whither he shortly came, and propounding there in the open assembly of
the great Lords, and of his councel, that which the Ambassador of Cattalogna had declared
vnto him, their opinions were diuers. In the end the Ambassador was called, and
being asked wherefore he came, hee told them that hee was sent to request two things, to
wee^, that it might please the King of Castile to receiue the Cattelans for his subiects,
and to aide them with certaine number of souldiers to defend them from their enemies,
shewing the charge and commandment which he had from the three Estates to take the
oth of obedience to him in their names.

The councell perceiuing that these offers did please the King, did wholy consent therevnto,
and two thousand fiue hundred horse were appointed to succour the Cattelans,
whose captaines were D. Iohn of Beaumont, Prior of Saint Iohns of Nauarre, and Iohn
de Torres a Knight borne in Soria. These forces being sent away King Henry, fauoring
this warre, came to Agreda.
Thither came an Esquier of Nauarre dwelling in Tudela,Nauarre. who told Don Bertrand
de la Cueua, Earle of Ledesma, that if King Henry would well reward him, he would deliuer
vp into his hands the city of Tudela: promise was made to this Squire of certaine
lands neere to Agreda, and according to the agreement made, at an houre appointed,
Pedro de Guzman was sent, with twenty braue souldiars to seize vpon one of the gates,
and by the same to let into the towne a certaine number of souldiars which should follow
after him. Pedro de Guzman and his men were no sooner entred into the city, but
they were all taken, whereat King Henry being greatly mooued, sent his troupes to spoile
all the contry round about Tuleda, with commandement to burne all places, and to
put the people to the sword: but this spoile soone ceassed by reason that they of Tudela
deliuered the prisoners.
The King Don Iohn beeing aduertized of all these things, fortified himselfe on euery
side, and had in readinesse an army sufficient to assaile the rebells, with their allies
and protectors, Don Iohn Archbishop of Tarragon the Earle of Prades, Don Mathew
de Moncada, Don Anthony of Cardona, Don Guillen Arnau Ceruillon and many
other Cattelan Knights beeing ioyned with him. Therevpon hee came and beseeged
Lerida, which they of Tarraga endeauoring to releeue, they were defeated by Don
Iohn of Arragon, who was sent by the King his father to incounter them, who led away
diuerse prisoners with him to the campe: Neuerthelesse the King raised his seege
from before Lerida, beeing aduertised that a captaine called Martimon came to the aide
thereof with tenne thousand souldiars; and that in an other place Iohn de Agullon
was in field with forces, for the same purpose, and that Don Hugo of Cardona held
his seege before Miralcampe, a strong towne and greatly importing the affaires of
Arragon, wherefore with all speed hee hasted thitherward, but Don Hugo was departed
from thence, not beeing able, by reason of the great heate in those parts, to continue
his seege: then the King ioyned his forces with the troupes of Don Alphonso his sonne,
who held Iohn d' Agullon beseeged in Casteldas: thither also came the Earle of Foix
with the French men at armes. By these forces the towne and castle of Casteldas were
so beaten, as Iohn d' Agullon was constrained, for all his propounding of diuers conditions,
to yeeld himself to the Kings mercy, who caused him, with other captaines, to be executed
by forme of law at Bellaguer: and he committed the towne to the keeping of D.
Iohn de Londogno.
Gaston Earle of Foix had married Donna Leonora the second da^ghter to King Iohn,
by his first wife Queene Blanche of Nauarre;Complot betweene King Iohn and his sonne in law Gaston de Foix to the hurt and ruine of Lady Blanch the true heire: of Nauarre. and because the succession in that Kingdome,
by the death of Prince Charles did belong to Donna Blanche her eldest sister,
who was married and diuorced from Henry King of Castile, because shee had no children,
the father in law, and the sonne in law practised together, how they might keepe
this forsaken Queene of Castile from marrying any more, that shee might haue no children,
by meanes whereof the Realme of Nauarre should fall to the Lady Donna Leonora
and to the house of Foix: wherefore she was deliuered into the hands of Earle Gaston
her brother in law, who sent her into France to the towne of Lescar, vnder the power
and keeping of the Countesse Leonora her sister.
Among the captaines which did serue the King Don Iohn, there was a Castillian called
Iohn of Sarauia, who did greatly annoy the enemy, who found a time to surprise
him: for vpon a day as hee spoiled and ouer-runne the country neere to Ceruera, hee
was charged by Hugo of Cardona, accompanied with about foure thousand men as
well horse as foote, so as hee was constrained to leaue his booty, and to assure himselfe
in the castle of Rubinate, where hee was furiously beseeged and beaten with
store of Artillery and Engins: hee fearing to bee forced to yeeld vp the castle, found
meanes to aduertise the King of his necessity, who came thither with all his forces:

by reason whereof Don Hugo hauing left fiue hundred of his people at the seege of this
castle, retired himselfe to a strong hold; from whence euery day he offered the King battaile,A bloudy fight betwixt the Kings army, and that (...) D. Hugo de Caodona.
beeing come to fight the victory remained for a while doubtfull on either side,
but the last it fell to the King: there died as well in this incounter, as in the skirmishes
of the seege, more then fifteene hundred of the enemies, and very neere as many on the
Kings part: so as hee had small occasion to reckon this victory in the number of his
happy ones. From thence the Kings army marched to the aide of the Archbishop of
Tarragon whom those of Lerida and Ceruera held beseeged in a place very discommodious,
who freed him from thence. In an other place Don Alphonso of Arragon obtained
a great victory neere vnto the towne of Saint Colomba, with whom the Kings
army ioyning, that place yeelded: besides this the towne of Ceriall was taken by force,
and all the country thereabout whilest the Queene and the Earle of Foix in an other
place, tooke the towne of Moncada by assault, with many other places which for feare
yeelded vnto them.
Whilest the affaires of King Iohn succeeded well in Cattalogna,Moores. the King of Castile
made open warres vpon the frontiers of Granada, since the defeate of the Infant Haly
Muly-Hacen, wherein Don Iohn de Guzman the first Duke of Medina Sidonia, sonne
to Count Henry of Niebla, who was drowned before Gibralter,Gibralter taken by the Castillians. made excellent proofe
of his valor and good conduct, and he had the good hap to subiect the city of Gibraltar
to the crowne of Castile, which his father had attempted in vaine. The newes of
this conquest were so pleasing to King Henry as amongest his other titles hee would bee
called King of Gibraltar; for this city had beene the chiefe in the Kingdome of Abomelech
the Infant of Marocco, sonne to King Alboacen of the kindred of the Merins. This
happie exploite was accompanied with the taking of the City of Archedona by the
Maister of Calatraua Don Pedro Giron, brother to the Marquis of Villena. The keeping
of Gibraltar was committed for that time to Pedro de Porras.
About this time diuers Princes and Potentates sent their Ambassadors to the King
of Castile,Castile. namely from his cosin King Fernand of Naples, from Pope Pius and the
Colledge of Cardinals, and from the Venetians, who desired his perpetuall friendship
and confederacy. The Geneuois offered him fealty and homage, and withall to become
his subiects: but King Henry contenting himselfe with his owne estates, not being
by nature ambitious, did not desire to meddle in those forraine businesses, albeit there
wanted not diuers of his councell to animate him therevnto.
King Iohn hauing,Nauarre. and Arragon. at Moncada, ioyned his army with that of the Queene his wife,
and his sonne in law the Earle of Foix, the councell thought it fit to send to beseege
the City of Barcelona, and it was so concluded, notwithstanding that the King was
of a contrary opinion. The Barcelonois had receiued the aboue mentioned aide from
Castile,Barcelona erecteth the banners of Castile. and resoluing neuer more to obey the King of Arragon, they had set vp the banners
of Castile: the citty was very rich, and greatly furnished with men and munition,
very strong in their walles and towers, and excellently wel prouided of al things belonging
to the sea, by reason whereof they made sundry sallies and skirmishes with the
Kings army, to the great losse and hinderance thereof as well by land as by sea: and
namely they gaue chase to captaine Vilago, who kept the sea from them with eight Gallies
of Arragon: so as the King thought it the best way to raise his seege, after that hee
had beene before it by the space of twenty daies, causing his sonne Don Alphonso of
Arragon to spoile the country round about the citty. From thence the army marched
to Villa-franca, which was taken by force: and there the King caused to be executed
by order of law foure hundred of the Inhabitants; beeing prouoked therevnto by the
death of two French captaines which were slaine at his entery into the towne, which became
such a terror to the rest of the townes thereabouts, as diuerse yeelded, without any
resistance at all.
They beseeged the city of Tarragon,Tarragon yeelded to the king. which at the first made resistance yet neuer sallied
forth of their wals: but when they beheld their fields burnt, and the continual battery and
assaults of the enemies, their courage began to shrinke, especially when the aide, which
was sent them from Barcelona, was at their landing constrained to flie backe to their

Gallies, then with very easie conditions they yeelded to the King, who left Roderigo of
Rebolledo for their Gouernor, he himselfe going backe to Ballaguer.
The Cattelans thus distressed, sent new Ambassadors into Castile, one of them was
the Archdeacon of Girona, who being ioyned to the Ambassador resident with King
Henry, made new offers of submission and full obedience vnto him, beseeching him
to intitule himselfe King of Arragon and Earle of Barcelona, seeing that hee was assured
that those dominions did by all diuine and humaine right belong vnto him, and
that now the voluntary consent of the people did inuite him therevnto, requesting
moreouer aide of souldiars. The King of Castile, beside this publique Ambassage, was
solicited therevnto by sundry Lords, and other cities of Valencia and Arragon; and
to speake truely, hee did greatly incline to their demaunds: but the Archbishop of Toledo
and the Marquis of Villena, the Kings chiefe councellors, after whose appetite
the whole affaires of the Kingdome were gouerned, were of a contrary opinion, and
peraduenture they had intelligence with King Iohn of Arragon, but it was not certainely
knowne whether it were so or no; wherefore the businesse beeing debated on by
the councell, the Ambassadors receiued this answere, that if they ment to haue any aide
of souldiars, it did then behoue them to bring store of money with them, and as for the
title to the crowne of Arragon, and county of Barcelona, King Henry would consider
thereon with more mature deliberation.
The Ambassadors replied, that if it would please the King to take their cause in hand,
and to shew himselfe openly in their defence as his subiects, they would venture
their heads, if within threescore daies after, they did not bring into the Kings coffers
the summe of seuen hundred thousand florins of gold. This seemed a dreame to the
Archbishop and the Marquis, for the summe was exceeding great for those times; and
they two hauing an other purpose, wrought so well, as king Henry not onely refused
their offers, but withdrew himselfe wholy from the warre of Arragon: giuing them to
vnderstand, that he had rather with the helpe of the French King, mediate a good peace
for them.
Now the Marquis and the Archbishop did purpose,The King of Castile attempts to deceiue the Barcelonois, and king Iohn Ekewise. and hope to deale in such sort,
as the Realme of Nauarre, or a great part thereof, should by the treaty of peace fall
to the crowne of Castile: To giue a certaine forme wherevnto, they sent word to King
Iohn and to the Earle of Foix, to send vnto them certaine French captaines, of those
which were in Cattalogna, to conferre about meanes of agreement with the King of
Castile; and they vsed other practizes to giue the French a distast of that warre, seeking
their owne profit, vnder collour of making an agreement betweene the King of Arragon
and his subiects: whilest the broiles continued in Cattalogna, the Earle of Pallars,
and the Lord of Cruillas, with a great number of souldiars, hauing againe beseeged
Girona, were ouerthrowne and put to flight by Peter of Roquabertin Gouernor of the
City,The French refused to fight with the Castillians and they lost many of their people with their baggage. The French marching
towards Morella, brought diuers places on the coast of Vrgel vnder the Kings obedience,
but meeting neere Ixar with the Castillians, hauing good meanes to charge them,
it is said that they gaue them to vnderstand, that in regard of the friendship and perpetuall
confederacy betweene the Kings of France and Castile, they would couch their
Launces against the Castillian standard, and thereof they excused themselues to
the King of Arragon, saying that they were so commaunded to doe, and therefore
besought him to take in good part, if they went about to appease the differences betwixt
them.
The King of Arragon fashioning himselfe to their aduice, and hauing great hope
in the good iudgement of the French king in those businesses, hee did consent that one
of the French captaines should passe into Castile to the towne of Mountagu, where
king Henry should meete to conferre with him about fit meanes to compose all those
differences: the Archbishop of Toledo, and the Marquis of Villena brought the king
thither vnder collour of hunting: and it was agreed vpon, that the French king should
be entreated, to send an Ambassador into Castile, to cause the warre to cease. The
captaine being returned, related to the king of Arragon and to his sonne in law the

Earle of Foix, what hee had concluded with the King of Castile: and at their entreaty
the French King Lewis the eleuenth, sent an Ambassadour to the King of Castile,
who found the Court at Almacan; and hauing had audience, a day was taken for
the enterview of the three Kings of France, Castile, and Arragon, vpon the frontiers
betweene Fontarabie, and Saint Iohn de Luz: and in the meane time there was a cessation
from armes on all sides; the Cattelans were excluded from this accord remayning
doubtfull betwixt hope and feare, attending the issue of that enterview.
The King Don Iohn allowing all these things, came to Saragossa, with intent to meet
at the day appointed for the Kings enterview. The Earle of Foix, the presumptiue
heire of Nauarre in the right of his wife went thither, being very honourably receiued,
especially of the Beaumonts faction.
Now the time of the enterview being come, the King of Arragon, for diuers reasons,
could not* or would not appeare, relying in the Archbishop of Toledo, and the Marquis
of Villena, with the King of Castile, and vpon his sonne in law Gaston of Foix, who
knew very well how to maintaine his honour and to increase his profit with the French
King. About the end of March in the yeere 1463. the King Don Henry arriued at
Saint Sebastians in the Prouince of Guipuscoa, and king Lewis came the same time
to Bayonne, vnto whom were sent as Ambassadours from the king of Castile, the
Archbishop of Toledo and the Marquis of Villena, with Aluar Gomes of Ciudad-reall
his principall secretary (they hauing so councelled him) to the end to treate with
him about the agreement and pacification of the troubles betweene the kings of Castile
and Arragon,The Marquis of Villena, becommeth pention^r to the King. the vncle and Nephew, and betweene the king of Arragon and the
Cattelans his subiects. It is reported, that the Marquis of Villena made an agreement
with the French king, being by him recompenced with a yeerely pention of twelue thousand
crownes.
Matters beeing then thus handled by them, king Lewis as Iudge and arbitrator betweene
both parties, set downe his sentence in this manner: That King Henry of Castile
should wholy abstaine from medling in the businesse of the Cattellans; that within
twenty daies hee should call all his souldiars out of Cattalonia and that for the
expences which hee had beene at in the same warre the King of Arragon should giue
vnto him the towne of Estella with all the demaines belonging therevnto, which is
one of the fiue members of the Kingdome of Nauarre, with a certaine summe of doublons
of gold, all which he should be bound to performe within sixe monthes, in which
meane time, Queene Ioane of Arragon should bee held as ostage in the towne of Larraga
vnder the safe keeping of the Archbishop of Toledo: That the Cattelans should
become obedient to their King, vnto whom a generall pardon should bee graunted
of all that was past; for assurance whereof King Iohn should giue them sufficient ostages.
This sentence, hurtfull to the Kingdome of Nauarre, odious to the Cattelans,
and little to the King of Castiles honour, was allowed of and receiued by the three
Ambassadors aboue named, who wrote to King Henry, aduising him to set forward
with his Court and traine to Fontaraby, and at that instant the Marquis of Villena
arriued, bringing along with him the Earle of Comminges Admirall of France, who
came from the King his Maister to entreate the King of Castile that they might
see one an other vpon French ground; the which they had before concluded vpon at
Bayonne.
King Lewis beeing come to Saint Iohn de Luz,Enterview of King Lewis the eleuenth and King Henry the fourth of Castile, at Enday^. the two Kings met at the riuer of
Vidaso, which in that place parteth both the Kingdomes: the which riuer (as the
Spaniards say) which all that which the flowing of the sea couers, belongs to Spaine.
King Henry with diuerse great Lords and Knights beeing in diuerse boates did passe
the riuer, amongst whom were Don Pero Goncales of Mendoza Bishop of Calaorra,
Don Iohn de Pacheco Marquis of Villena, Don Gomes of Caceres Maister of
Alcantara, Don Iohn of Valencuela Prior of Saint Iohns, Don Lewis de Acugna
Bishop of Burgos, Don Bertrand de la Cueua Earle of Ledesma, with others verie
brauely and richlie appointed; The French King and his Courtiers beeing meanly
cloathed, were by the Spaniards derided and scorned. These two great Princes hauing

louingly saluted and imbrased one an other vpon the shoare, with diuerse kinde speeches
and ceremonies vsuall at such times; King Henry speaking first, they went to a village
called Endaya belonging to the French King, where in the presence of the two Kings,
the arbitratiue sentence was read by the secretary Aluar Gomes, the Ambassadors being
present: and after sundry complements, and friendly speeches, they departed the one
from the other with great content, and so returned each of them into his owne territories.
King Henry being come to Fontaraby called the Ambassadors of Cattalonia into his
presence,The Cattelans complaine of the sentence and treachery of th^ king of Castile. who had followed him in that iourney, and declared vnto them the contents of
the sentence, and that which they were bound to doe by the same, whereat they were
much amazed and discontented; so that being ouer-come with impatience, by reason
of the indignity which they thought was offered them, they vttered in choller many
proude and high words, presaging misery and future calamity to the Realme of Castile,
accusing the King of carelessenesse, for consenting to the same sentence, and his councellors
and Ambassadors of treason. According to this sentence, the King withdrew his
souldiars from Cattalonia, and did wholy giue ouer the warre.
 Whilest the King remained at Fontaraby, it happened that a certaine Iew named Gaon,
who was a farmer of his reuenues,Castile. comming from the towne of Victoria where he
dwelt,A Iew collecter to the kings reuenues slaine Guipuscoa by the nobility. to exact, by reason of the kings presence, the tribute called Pedido, in the Prouince
of Guipuscoa (which was euer denied and resisted by the nobility of the country) was
slaine in the city of Tolouse, the gentlemen being mooued to commit such an outrage,
to the end it might serue as an example to other exacting receiuers, not to attempt vpon
their antient liberties and priuiledges: whereat the king was greatly offended so as after
the enterview, he came to Tolouse with diuers men at armes being resolued seuerely
to punish such an act: the Inhabitants being very fearefull, left the city and retired themselues
into the mountaines giuing place to their Princes fury, who at his first arriuall into
the towne, commanded that the house wherein the Iew was murthered, should be ouerthrowne
to the ground: but proceeding on, hee was fully and certainely informed,
that the tribute, then in question, was a thing not due, not neuer paied by the gentlemen
of that country, so as hee conuerted his wrath into clemency, and gaue a generall pardon
to them all, decreeing, after the example of the Kings his predecessors, that
from thence-forth on account should bee made of such like money; and hee did
for euer acquit his receiuers, treasurers, and exactors of his reuenues, of any such
receipt.
 Hauing ordered the affaires of that Prouince, he went to Segobia and the Archbishop
of Toledo came to Larraga,Nauarre, and Arragon. a towne in the Kingdome of Nauarre, there to receiue
the Queene Donna Ioane, who, according to the sentence of King Lewis, was to
remaine in his keeping, till the King of Arragon her husband had fully performed all
that which by the same hee was bound vnto. The Estates of Nauarre were much displeased
with the alienating of the towne of Estella, it being a portion of the Kingdome:
but they knew not the drift thereof, for none of the parties did gaine so much by the
sentence, as the king of Arragon, who held himselfe assured of the King of Castile,
by meanes of the good offices which the Archbishop of Toledo and the Marquis of
Villena performed for him,The king of Castile, thinking to deceiue, is himselfe deceiued. they being wholy at his deuotion: in so much as hee tooke
no great thought for the committing of the Queene his wife into their hands. As for
Estella, he neuer ment to giue it to the King of Castile, and the better to couer his intent,
he caused the whole body of the Estates to protest against that sentence, as giuen
by an incompetent Iudge, the parties beeing not heard, and directly preiudiciall
to the patrimony of the crowne of Nauarre: Therevpon Don Pedro of Peralta,
who was Constable of Nauarre, seized vpon the towne and castle of Estella,
as though it had rebelled against the King: then the king of Castile beganne to bee
very highly displeased with his councell, and in some sort to discouer their practizes,
greatly repenting that hee had forsaken the Cartelans. The Archbishop of Toledo
and the Marquis of Villena hauing had experience of his choller, thought for to
redresse all by giuing the king and the Archdeacon of Girona (who was one of

the Cattelan Ambassadours) to vnderstand, that all was well, and that now there was
greater hope of good successe, then at any time before: Wherefore the Arch-deacon
was sent away to carry that newes to the Cattelans, and to encourage and assure them
in the King of Castils name, that they should shortly receiue greater ayde from him then
they had done in times past:Don Pedro of Portugall* elected king of Arragon. but the Arch-deacon arriued too late: for the Estates of
Cattelogna beeing greatly discontent, that King Henry had so deceiued them, had abandoned
all hope of helpe from Castile, and put themselues vnder the protection of the
house of Portugall,Descent of Portugal. electing Don Pedro, Constable of that Realme, for their king, who
was grand-child to King Iohn the first, and sonne to the Infant Don Pedro Duke of Coimbra,
being descended by the mothers side from the kings of Arragon, for his mother
was daughter to Iames Earle of Vrgell, and to Donna Leonora of Arragon, daughter to
King Peter of Arragon the fourth of that name.
The Marquis of Villena on the other side, acquainted King Henry with the reuolt of
those of Estella, and with the difficulties which hindred the execution of the sentence,
propounding other recompences to be made, rather then to fall out vppon so slight an
occasion: the which the king did not very well taste, yet for all that beeing desirous to
play with least losse, hee sent into Nauarre Don Bertrand de la Cueua, Earle of Ledesma,
and Don Pedro Goncales of Mendoza Bishop of Calaorra, who afterward was Cardinal,
and Arch bishoppe of Toledo, to deale with King Iohn, and the Queene his wife about
these matters, who excused themselues by reason of their subiects rebellion, which (as
they sayd) was the cause why they could not performe that which they had purposed:
they discouering these dissimulations, aduertised King Henry thereof, who aduised them
to negotiate as well as they could; who after diuers conferences returned without doing
any thing at all, disposing the King of Castile to a truce, which soone after was effected.
The King of CastileCastile. beeing at Madrid, an obseruant Friar named Fernand de la Place,
with other of his zealous companions, did greatly trouble him and his Councell, by giuing
foorth, that diuerse Christians of his countrey were become Apostata's, forsaking
the holy Catholicke faith, and were become Iewes: whereof if hee would make diligent
search, the crime would bee auerred. And this audacious Monke did constantly affirme
in one of his Sermons, that hee had in his keeping more then an hundred fore-skins of
Christians children, which had beene circumcised, crying out, that the king ought to punish
them very grieuously: the King caused him to bee brought into his presence, and
commaunded that he should deliuer vp those fore skinnes: the Friar sayd that hee had
them not* but that he was so informed by diuers of good name and place, the king willed
him to tell their names, the which he could not, or would not doe, and so was dismissed
without any other punishment, then to be held a notorious lyar.
The Arch-bishop of Toledo Don Alphonso Carillo of Acugna, and the Marquis of
Villena, beeing returned from Nauarre, where they had left Queen Ioane at libertie, perceyuing
that the King did smally fauor them, beganne to fore-see some future mischiefe
to light vpon their states, honor, and persons: to preuent which, they entred into leagues,
which the king vnderstanding; did dissemble, committing in the meane time the gouernement
of his affaires to Don Bertrand de la Cueua, and to the Bishop of Calaorra,
whose Neece Don Bertrand had married. The Court beeing at Seuille was very much
troubled with a popular tumult, occasioned by two Prelates, namely, the old Arch-bish.
of the same cittie Don Alphonso of Fonseca,Contentions and seditions caused by two Arch-bishops, the vncle and the nephew. and his nephew, who had made betwixt
them a fained exchange of the Arch-bishoprickes of Seuill and S. Iames, for the reasons
before mentioned, the nephew beeing at that time in possession of that of Seuill, the
which he ought to haue yeelded vp to his vncle, who had caused him peaceably to enioy
that of S. Iames, till then held by D. Lewis Osorio and his faction: Now Alphonso of Fonseca
hauing brought all matters to the passe which he promised, thought to re-enter into
his former dignitie of Arch-bishop of Seuill: but the nephew, who found himself well
at ease, would by no meanes leaue it, albeit that the Pope vpon paine of Excommunication
had enioyned him so to do, so as thereupon arose a very dangerous sedition, each
of them hauing his partakers amongst the Nobility, Clergie, and the common people,

the vulgar sort in generall held with the Nephew, and had seazed vpon the great church
and other strong places of the cittie, holding it against the Gentlemen, and the Clergie,
who fauoured the old Arch-bishoppe, and the rescall multitude had well-neere gained
the hauen with the Galleys that lay there, intending to fight both by sea and land, had
not the King speedily preuented it, who hauing made inquirie of the matter, apprehended
sundry of the Rebells, who were seuerely punished: the Nephew Arch-bishop was
committed to prison in his owne house, and within sixe dayes after, the old Arch-bishop
 was restored to his former Sea, and diuers of the offenders were hanged out at the windowes
of their owne houses,An outrage of a Moore committed in Seuil vnpunished. and some others sent to receiue punishment at Madrid. An
other outrage was there committed at the same time, which did incite and stirre vp diuers
against the king: for his Court beeing greatly frequented with Noblemen Moores,
whome he did highly fauour, one of them named Mofarras, (who did lodge in the house
of an honourable Citizen called Diego Sanches of Orihuela) was so farre transported
with a libidinous appetite, as his host and hostesse beeing absent, hee rauished and carried
away with him into Granado a very beautifull daughter of theirs, keeping her with
him so long as he pleased. The sorrowfull father and mother at their returne home finding
their house disfurnished of their best ornament, accompanied with diuers of the
best Cittizens, went to make their complaynt to the king, who told them that the fault
was their owne, in leauing their daughter behind them, and so put them off with this
impertinent answer: whereunto the parties grieued did reply, crauing iustice, but the
King beeing displeased with their importunate exclamations, commaunded that they
should be thrust out of his gates, set vppon asses, and publikely whipped vppe and downe
the Cittie: this vniust sentence should haue beene executed, had not the Earle D. Goncal
of Guzman, gone to the King and asked him, what reason the Officer should giue to
the multitude for the whipping of those innocent people: then the King finding his
owne errour, was ashamed thereof, and went into his chamber, making him no answer
at all, the Moores fault remayning vnpunished, to the great scandall not onely of that
Cittie, but of the whole kingdome.
Not long after, the King made a iourney to Gibraltar, newly conquered and sacked,
where he gaue another proofe and testimonie of a mind little ^auouring of equitie, for
he tooke away the gouernement thereof from Pedro de Porras, whome hee had placed
there at the request of the Duke of Medina Sidonia, who had taken the same cittie, and
did giue and appropriate it to Don Bertrand de la Cuena, Earle of Ledesma, who placed
there for Gouernour Stephano de Villacreces, who had married an Aunt of his: the which
the Duke tooke very impatiently, and so it continued all the time of the troubles of the
kingdome, vntill he had brought it againe vnder his owne power and iurisdiction, and
ioyned it to the other possessions belonging to the house of Medina Sidonia, who hath
alwaies enioyed it, till the entire conquest of the kingdome of Granado: at which time it
was for euer annexed to the Crowne.
The same time the King Don Alphonso of Portugall making warre vppon the Moores
of Affricke, came from Ceuta to Gibraltar at the intreatie and perswasion of King Henry,
where these two Princes remayned and continued together the space of eight dayes,
eating at one table, and shewing great tokens of loue and brotherly friendshippe one
to the other.
 This yeare 1463. the Infant Don Henry of the house of Portugall, the kings Vncle,
Master of the Order commonly called of Christ,Portugal. of the age of three-score and seuen
yeares, dyed in the cittie of Sagres in Algarbe, who was buried in the Church of Lagos,
and afterwards translated and carried away from thence to the Abbey of Battayle,
built by his father king Iohn the first, and they report in Portugall, that this Prince dyed
a virgine: he out-liued all his breethren that were legitimate, to wit, Don Iohn Master
of Saint Iames, Don Fernand Master of Auiz, and Don Pedro Duke of Coimbra: their
elder bastard-brother Don Alphonso Duke of Braganca dyed also not long before,House of Bragansa.
leauing behind him for his successours in the Dutchie, his sonnes Don Fernand, Earle
of Arrojolos, and the Marquis of Villa-viciosa, who was (by lawfull succession, and by
the right of inheritance) the second Duke of Braganca, begotten on Donna Beatrix,

daughter to Don Nugno Aluares Pereyra Earle of Barcellos, and first Constable of Portugall:
Now the losse of these great personages was very grieuous to the King Don Alphonso,
who at that time by reason of his warres against the Moores, had great need of
their helpe and Councell:Expedition into Affricke against the citty of Tanger. hee had conducted a great army into Affricke against the citty
of Tanger, beeing followed by all the Nobility of Portugall, namely, by his brother the
Infant Don Fernand Duke of Viseo, his brother-in-law Don Pedro the third Constable
of Portugall, sonne to the Infant Don Pedro, Duke of Coimbra aboue-mentioned, D.
Edward de Meneses Earle of Viana, Don Goncal Coutin the first Earle of Marialua, the
Earle of Villa-reall, and other great Lords: but Don Pedro the third, Constable of Portugall,
was at that time sollicited by the Cattelans to name himselfe King of Arragon, for
the reasons heretofore declared, who consented thereunto, and went with the Ambassadors
of Cattalonia to the cittie of Barcelona, where he was proclaymed King of Arragon,
and Earle of Barcelona, vnto whom the Estates were sworne: but hee had to deale
with a boysterous aduersarie, passing ouer his dayes in difficult warres, and finishing
them by poyson (as it was thought) as shall be hereafter more at large declared. After
the departure of the Constable Don Pedro, the King Don Alphonso came to Gibraltar,
and in his absence his people receiued an ouerthrow as they went about to scale the
towne of Tanger, where diuers men of worth were slaine and taken. Among the prisoners
were the Earle of Marialua, and Gomes Freyra, who were afterward redeemed for
great ransomes.
After his returne from Gibraltar into Affricke, hee entred in person into Benaca, a
mountainous and woddie countrie, from whence hee was constrayned to retire to his
great losse, where he left behind him D. Edward de Meneses Earle of Viana, who to saue
the kings life being in great danger, lost his own. The Earle of Villa-reall did at that time,
by his valour, saue the army, fighting brauely in the rere-ward, defending it against an infinite
multitude of Moores:King Alphonsos misfortunes in his expedition into Affricke. insomuch as the king beeing desirous to acknowledge his
prowesse, did publikely prayse him, and gaue him the honor of beeing the shield and defender
of the faith the same day: or to speake more properly, Gods instrument for the
deliuerie and helpe of the Portugals. These aduerse fortunes caused King Alphonso to returne
into Portugall with small honor, where he applyed himselfe to vowes and pilgrimages,
thinking hereby to appease the Saints, patrons and conductors (as he thought)
of his vnhappie and disastrous enterprises.
King Henry of Castile at his departure from Gibraltar,Castille. came to Eccia, where he gathered
together all the cauallerie of the garrisons and countries neere about, ioyning them
to his great armie, which he commonly carried about with him, wherewith he entred into
the territories of Granado, where the Ambassadours of king Ismael the Moore met
with him, and presented vnto him the tribute, with sundrie other gifts, so that he passed
on no further, but dismissed his forces, and came to Iaen, whose Gouernor was the Constable
Don Michael Lucas d' Irancu. At Iaen remayned Don Pedro Giron, Master of Calatraua,
who beeing desirous to offend the Earle of Ledesma, and to set him at variance
with the Constable Don Michel Lucas, he told the King that he heard say, that he meant
to bestow the Mastership of S. Iames, (which the Infant Don Alphonso held onely in
name) vppon the Earle of Ledesma: and thereuppon shewed him diuers reasons to perswade
him to giue that dignitie rather to the Constable, who was a valiant Knight, and
one greatly affected to his seruice: but the King seemed to giue no eare to his speech,
knowing very well whereunto it tended. Don Pedro perceiued by many other reasons,
that he was not very welcome to the King, who (as he supposed) did suspect him to bee
of the league with the Marquis of Villena his brother, and the Arch-bishop of Toledo:
wherefore he returned thence, and then began they to treate of great leagues and confederacies,Prodigious winds and other tokens of future calamities.
to the preiudice of the estate of Castile, presaged by great tempests of wind,
which at Seuile did ouerthrow a great quantitie of the citty walls, and did blow away a
great bell out of the Church of S. Augustine, aboue a bowes shot from the place where
it did hang, tooke vp into the ayre a payre of Oxen yoaked together at the plough, and
plucked vppe by the rootes diuers sorts of trees, scattering them here and there in very
fearefull manner: In the ayre was seene the proportion of armed men fighting, and three

Eagles striuing together, with great furie fell downe dead to the ground. Matters standing
in these tearmes, the King returned to Madrid, where he continued still carelesse of
that which concerned the good of the Realme: there was no audience nor admittance
for petitioners, nor any administration of iustice: he permitted his porters, and those of
his guard to offer indignities to such as he did not loue and to those that did sue vnto
him, and he would winke at them when as many times they would shut the gates against
the Arch-bishoppe, and the Marquis of Villena, who were oftentimes sent from thence
with many iniurious speeches. These things with other of greater importance would he
giue ayme to, so as he willingly made a readie way to the greatest miseries and calamities
that could be imagined. And hearing that the king Don Alphonso of Portugall was
entred into Castile to visit,Enterview of the kings of Castile and Portugall at Guadalupa. for deuotion-sake, the Monasterie of Guadalupa, he departed
from Madrid with the Queene his wife, and the Infants his brother and sister, and went
to meet him at a place called the Arch-bishoppes bridge, not making the Marquis of
Villena, nor the Arch^bishop of Toledo acquainted with any thing to bee treated of in
that enterview.
There were newly strengthened and confirmed the auncient leagues and allyances
betweene the two kingdomes, by the agreement of future marriages with the king Don
Alphonso who was a widdower, and Donna Izabella sister to the king of Castile, and betweene
the Infant Don Iohn of Portugall, eldest sonne and heire to that Crowne, of the
age of eight yeares, and the Queene of Castiles daughter, who was tearmed the Princesse
Ioane. These things promised and agreed vppon, the king of Portugall returned to
Guadalupa to finish and performe his vow, and from thence into his owne countrey. In
the meane time the Arch-bishop and the Marquis beeing forewarned by the tokens of
disgrace, which they well perceyued, and by their own consciences, absented themselues
from the Court, fearing to bee taken and punished, and with drew themselues to Alcala
of Henares, where they sollicited their friends, and strengthened their league, into the
which, by the meanes of the Arch-bishop, entred very secretly the Admirall Don Fredericke,
the Earle of Benauent, Don Alphonso Pimentell sonne-in-law to the Marquis,
Don Roderigo Manrique Earle of Paredes, Don Inigo Manrique Bishop of Coria, with
all his breethren: on the other side the Marquis of Villena went in person to draw into
their league Don Garcia Aluares of Toledo, Earle of Alua de Tormes, and Don Aluaro
of Estuniga, Earle of Plaisance, whom he drew into the number. In like manner the Master
of Calatraua played his part thorough the whole countrie of Andalusia with great
secrecie:D. Ioane borne in adultery, the subiect of all the stirs in Castile. for their desseigne was to get the Infants, Don Alphonso, and Donna Izabella
from the Court into their power, to serue for a colour to their proceedings, not caring
at all for Donna Ioane, who was tearmed the Princesse of Castile, whom they all held to
be begotten in adulterie by Don Bertrand de la Cueua of the Queene. The king wanted
no aduertisement and information of the progression of these matters, but he was negligent
and carelesse.
At his returne to Madrid hearing of the Arch-bishoppes and the Marquises retreate,
hee beganne to thinke vppon their dangerous practises, and sent to commaund them
to come to the Court, to vnderstand what hee had agreed vppon and concluded with the
king of Portugall, but they excused themselues, and desired to talke with the king in a
place and companie not suspected. The King and the Marquis did see one another, and
talked and conferred together betweene Madrid and Alcala of Henares, without any
conclusion.
Soone after it was decreed, that the Marquis of Santillana, and the Earle of Haros
sonne should be giuen as hostages to the Arch-bishoppe of Toledo for the Marquis of
Villena his safe-comming to the Court, who gaue the king to vnderstand, that he would
not come, vnlesse hee would commit the Arch-bishop of Seuile Don Alphonso of Fonseca
to prison, for the reasons which hee had shewed vnto him: endeauoring by his persecution,
to keepe the rest of the kings seruants in suspition, the which came to passe:
for the King who did alreadie distrust the Arch-bishoppe of Seuille, sent Iohn Fernandes
Galindo, Gouernour to the Queene to take him, who beeing aduertised thereof by the
Marquis himselfe, who played with both hands, escaped, whereat all the Lords of the

Councell, and others which were employed and negotiated in matters of State, were
greatly offended: and then the violences and tyrannies which did afflict the kingdome
during this kings life, began to appeare.
After this tricke the Marquis came to Court, and with him the Earles of Benauent
and Paredes, and Don Alphonso Henriques, eldest sonne to the Admirall, euery one
of them well accompanied with their acquaintance, friends, and seruants, with intent and
purpose to seize vppon the persons of the King, the Earle of Ledesma, and the Infants.
The King, as ill aduised as he was, did distrust them, and therefore caused the Infants to
be shut vp in the tower of homage, with sufficient guard: and as hee was doing hereof,
the confederates, who should execute that enterprise, came hastily to the Pallace, and
violently breaking open the gates, entred into the hall: then the King fearing and distrusting
what might happen, withdrew himselfe by a priuie way, with the Earle of Ledesma,
hauing made the Infants safe. The Marquis who was wise and subtill, perceiuing
their proiect and purpose to faile, with a stedfast and assured countenance, as though he
had had no hand therein, presented himselfe to the King, and was one of those that did
sollicite him rigorously to punish such an offence, which the King might easily haue
done in himselfe, if he had beene possessed with an heroicke spirit: but all that hee sayd
vnto him, was: How now Marquis, do you thinke that this which is attempted in my
house, is well done? assure your selfe that I will be now no longer patient. The Marquis
who was thoroughly acquainted with his humour, found meanes to appease him,
and so returned to his lodging. But this senslesse King thought that he should be sufficiently
reuenged if hee should giue sharper spurres to those who were alreadie to much
gauled with enuie and emulation to see the Earle of Ledesma so honored, aduanced, and
enriched.
His determination then was, in despight of all his enemies, to honour him with the
Mastership of Saint Iames, which was kept, since the death of the Constable Don Aluaro
de Luna, by the King Don Iohn, and by this King Don Henry his sonne, as an appendix
to the Crowne, with the dispensation of the Popes Nicholas the fifth, and Calixtus the
third, vntill that time. And for to obtaine the consent and Bull of Pope Pius the second,
he dispatched one of his Chaplaynes called Suero de Solis to Rome, who caried with him
fourteene thousand golden Henryes, to get expedition. Before this Chaplayne returned,
the Secretarie Aluar Gomes, who had written the Kings letters to the Pope, went
and reuealed it to the Marquis, whose familiar friend and partisan he was, the which did
the more enflame the consederates to the ruine of the King, his Minion, and the whole
kingdome.
The Marquis who was very expert in all points belonging to a cunning Courtier,
perswaded the King to remooue to Segobia, saying, that there the affaires in hand might
bee better managed then at Madrid: but the truth was, he did it of purpose to haue him
neerer vnto the countries of the Confederates, if the matter should happen to come to
strokes. And he dealt in such sort, making so great a shew of distrust, as the Bishoppe of
Palenca, brother to the Earle of Ledesma, was giuen in hostage to the Master of Calatraua,
and kept in the towne of Pegnafiel. When they were all come to Segobia, the
Marquis fained to beare a great grudge to the Earles of Plaisance, Alua, and others: in
which meane space arriued the messenger from Rome, bringing with him the Popes
Bull for the Master-shippe of Saint Iames for the Earle of Ledesma, whereat the king
greatly reioyced, and told the Marquis that now he must needes allow and tolerate the
Popes graunt to the Earle: who answered, that hee was well contented so to do: neuerthelesse
hee shewed vnto him diuers reasons of the manifest and apparent wrong done
therein to the Infant Don Alphonso, the which the King sleightly passed ouer, and did
not regard: and the day following hee did inuest the Earle in that place and dignitie, giuing
and willingly surrendring vnto him the Ensignes and Ornaments thereunto beelonging.Conspiracie against the K. Queene, her daughter, and D. Bertrand, de la ^neua.
This deed did so highly displease the Marquis, as from thencefoorth hee did sollicite
the Confederates to arme themselues, and to practise how they might take the king,
Queene, her daughter, together with the Infants Don Alphonso, and Donna Izabella,

and to kill the new Master of Saint Iames: and the better to execute their plot, they
dealt with a Captaine of the Kings named Fernand Carillo, that his wife (who was one of
the Ladies attending on the Infanta Donna Izabella) should in the night open a doore
of the Queenes lodging: and it was decreed amongst them, that the Earle of Paredes
should take the King, the Earles of Plaisance and Alua should seize vpon the Queene
and his daughter Ioane, the supposed Princesse, the Marquis should leade away the Infants,
and his brother, the Master of Calatraua should dispatch the Earle of Ledesma.
These matters thus concluded,Treason discouered ^ut not punish^d. they were discouered and reuealed to the King some three
howers before they should haue beene executed, who was as slacke in redressing this, as
other former matters, for if he had so pleased, hee might easily haue taken or slaine the
Marquis beeing in the Court but he sayd, that he would keepe the promise which hee
made him, and so he onely sent Goncal of Sahauedra, and the Secretarie Aluaro Gomes
vnto him to reproch his trecherie, which did much trouble the Marquis, who neuerthelesse
denyed the matter, and sayd, that God forbid, that euer he should be partaker in so
vile a treason, whereof he would enquire, and if he found any of his people to haue a
hand therein, that hee would deliuer them ouer into the hands of Iustice: and with this
shew hee departed from the Kings house, and went directly to the Abbey of Parrall,
where hee gathered together great companies of his followers and partisans, meaning
to keepe the same, and not intending any more to enter into the Cittie, so that if the
king meant to talke with him, it behooued him then to come foorth willingly and meete
him.
The Confederates perceiuing this enterprise of theirs to prooue vaine and of no effect,
did intreate the King to heare the Marquis speake, and to come foorth of the cittie
into some place not suspected, but their intent was to seize vppon him abroade in the
Countrey, since they could not bring it to passe in the cittie: The King consented, and
appointed to meete them betweene Villa Castin, and the Monasterie of Saint Peter de
las Duegnas, to the which Monasterie the King came, but he had there notice giuen him
of two things: the one, that the Admirall Don Frederick had in Vailledolit erected banners
in the name of the Infant Don Alphonso, naming him king, and that the towne had
withstood it, and in such sort resisted the Admirall, and his people, as they had driuen
him thence: The other was, that hee should by no meanes go on to meete with the Marquis
of Villena, because the Master of Calatraua, and diuers of the Manriques were in
the fields with sixe hundred horse to take him.
The king beeing highly mooued at these practises, did prouide a remedie in time: for
hee dispatched Concal of Sahauedra with fiue hundred horse of his owne Guard for to
succour those of Vailledolit, and for the present danger, he sent the Bishop of Calaorra
to Villa Castin, and the Licentiat Diego Henriques del Castel, his Councellor and Chronicler
to the Earles of Plaisance and Alua, to discouer that which was done there. These
hauing met with others, who came to warne the king of the selfe same danger, they separated
themselues, and the Licenciate returned with speed to the Monasterie, to cause
the king to dislodge, who at that instant departed from thence and returned to Segobia,
entring into the cittie with fiue thousand men gathered together from the places thereabouts.
The Bishoppe went on, and met with the Earles, who marched in Armes and
militarie Order, with whome he had some speech and conference to no purpose, and so
returned to Segobia. The new Master of Saint Iames, besides his owne people, hauing
with him the kings Guard, came neere to the Master of Calatraua, beeing in a place fitte
for a fight, and was resolued to charge him, if the night had not hindred him, notwithstanding
that he had commandement from the king not to do so, wherefore he brought
backe his troupes to Segobia.
The knights of the League seeing their enterprises to bee discouered,Burgos in the power of the confederates. marched towards
the Cittie of Burgos, the Castle whereof was vnder the commaund of Don Aluaro of
Estuniga, Earle of Plaisance, one of the Confederates. The Cittie being mooued with
these strange newes, would not consent to ought that they propounded: but Don Iohn
de Pacheco Marquis of Villena, could so well set foorth the iustice of his cause in eloquent
tearmes, as they did beleeue that hee and his complices were in the right, but diuers of

the inhabitants who were of good iudgement, did very well perceiue, that each of these
confederate Lords, was carried away with enuie, hatred, iealousie, and other diseases of
Court, and with a desire of their owne priuate good, rather then that of the Commonwealth.
Now at the request of the Marquis certaine chiefe men of the citty met together, who
signed the letters which they wrote to the King, which contained foure principall accusations,Accusations propounded by the colleagues.
which they required to haue redressed: The one was, that the king kept ordinarily
in his Court Moores which were enemies of the faith, whome hee did animate to commit
infinite out-rages which were vnpunished: as the rape of the daughter of Diego Sanches
of Orihuela d'Seuill. Againe that the places of Iudges with other Offices were bestowed
vppon persons wholy vnworthy of them, by meanes whereof diuers exactions
and tyrannies were committed: Thirdly, that to the manifest contempt and hinderance
of the Infant Don Alphonso, vnto whome that dignitie did belong, he had bestowed the
Master-ship of Saint Iames vppon Bertrand de la C^eua Earle of Ledesma: The fourth,
and most important,The king reproched with the adulterat birth of (...)* which could not be excused, was, that he caused Donna Ioane to be
sworne vnto, as Princesse and heire of the kingdomes of Castile and Leon, whome hee
very well knew to be none of his daughter, highly wronging the Infants Don Alphonso,
and Donna Izabella, by depriuing them of their patrimonie and inheritance: to remedie
which, it was requisite to cause the Estates of Spaine to make a new oath, in the behalfe
of the Infant Don Alphonso, and to restore to him the Master-ship of Saint Iames. These
reasons were indeed of great moment, if they had beene prosecuted by lawfull and iust
meanes, and with a true zeale of the good and reputation of the Crowne of Castile, but
there is seldome any good order kept in such rash proceedings.
The letter was presented to the King at Vailledolit, whither he was come with a great
traine: but notwithstanding that most of the articles contayned matter of truth, wherein
his honour was highly touched, he neuerthelesse made such small account thereof, as
most of his Councell, and seruants were greatly ashamed thereof: and yet for all that he
had then about him forces sufficient to dissolue and scatter that league without any danger
at all but it was Gods will to punish both the king and the people. The chiefe poynt
that the Confederates stood vppon, was, that Donna Ioane the supposed Princesse,
wrongfully reputed Princesse of Castile, should be declared to bee the daughter of Don
Bertrand de la Cueua.
The opinion of the Bishop of Calaorra, of Friar Lopes de Barriento, of the Master of
Saint Iames, and others which were present at the reading of the letter, was, to go presently
and find out the rebells, and to offer them battaile, alleadging diuers reasons, as
namely the small forces which they had then together: but the King would not consent
thereunto, desiring perhaps to bee reputed meeke and gentle, rather then warlike and
valiant: whereuppon the Bishoppe of Calaorra,The King will rather seeme meeke than rigorous. told him plainely, that hee very well
perceyued, hee did not desire to raigne peaceably, seeing that hee made so smal account
of the defence of his honour, in not reuenging the wrongs and iniuries which were done
vnto him,Sharp speeches of the Bishop of Calaorra to the king. and that for his part he did verily beleeue, that hee would neuer leaue behind
him the fame and report of a generous and magnanimous King, but that he was assured,
that hee would become the most vnhappie King that euer raigned in Spayne, and that
he would repent his cowardize when it was too late. Notwithstanding this free admonishment,
hee remayned cold, and gaue eare to the agreements which they offered him:
Hee sent word to those of the League to meete at Duegnas, the which they did, and thither
came the Admirall, and the Arch-bishop of Seuill. There they beganne to treate
of diuers matters: but the better to conferre, it was thought fit and conuenient, that the
King should come to Cabecon, and the Confederates to Cigal^s, and places thereabouts,
which beeing done, the King and the Marquis of Villena spake and conferred
together in the open fields, each of them beeing accompanied with three persons, and
fiftie horse on each part, to discouer, visite, and make sure the Countrie round
about.
After long conference together, it was concluded, That the king within twelue daies
after, should deliuer into the Marquis his hands, the person of the Infant Don Alphonso,

who should be acknowledged for Prince and heire of the kingdome of Castile, and oath
made vnto him in that nature at the same instant according to the custome of Spaine, by
the Lords and Deputies of the townes and Prouinces that should be there present: and
that the Lords and Knights should promise, that the Infant Don Alphonso, who was then
eleuen yeares old, should marrie Donna Ioane the Queenes daughter, so soone as shee
should come to age:Ar^icles agreed vpon for the pacification of the troubles. againe, that the Earle of Ledesma should giue ouer the Mastership
of Saint Iames, the which should be restored to the Infant Don Alphonso: That for the
gouernement of the affaires of State, and other great businesses of the kingdome, two
Knights of each side should be chosen, Don Alphonso of Oropeca Generall of the Ieronomites
should be as vmpire betweene the two parties: on the Kings part for the assurance
of the deliuerie of the Infant, should be giuen in hostage for the kings fidelitie, the
Master of Saint Iames, and the Earle of Benauent for that of the confederates.
These things beeing agreed vppon, the King came to Segobia, in the castle of which
cittie, the Queene and the Infants lay, and he caused the Infant Don Alphonso to depart
thence to be deliuered to the Lords of the League, albeit it was fore-told him, that the
Infant should be declared King of Castile: but the Secretarie Aluar Gomes, who was wholy
at the Marquis his deuotion,Don Alphonso the kings brother acknowledged heire to the crowne. assured him of the contrarie: vnto whome the charge to
conduct the Infant to Sepulueda was committed, where he deliuered him into the hands
of the confederate Lords. The King returned to Valiodolit, from whence the next day,
he returned to Cabecon. The confederates on the other side, brought the Infant into
the fields, where he was sworne vnto, and acknowledged Prince and heire of those kingdomes,
being eleuen yeares of age.
The Prelates and Knights of the league which were present at this ceremony, were D.
Alphonso Carillo of Acugna, Arch-bishop of Toledo, Don Alphonso of Fonseca Arch-bishop
of Seuile, Don Inigo Manrique Bishop of Coria, Don Frederick Henriques great
Admirall of Castille, Don Aluaro of Estuniga Earle of Plaisance, Don Garcia Aluaro of
Toledo Earle of Alua, Don Rodrigo Manriques Earle of Paredes, the Earles of Saint
Marta and Ribadeo with others, who promised that the marriage betweene the Infant,
and Donna Ioane should be accomplished. And on the Kings side to consult vppon the
administration of the affaires was chosen, Don Pedro of Velasco, eldest son to the Earle
of Haro, Don Pedro Fernandes of Velasco, and Goncal of Sahauedra: the Confederates
appoynted the Marquis of Villena, and the Earle of Plaisance: and for a third person
Friar Alphonso of Oropesa was named.
The King beeing come backe to Valiodolit, did handle the matter so with the Earle
Don Bertrand de la Cueua, as he for quietnesse sake renounced the Master-shippe of Saint
Iames, and yeelded it vp into the Popes hands: For which deed of his, the King vsing his
accustomed bountie,Don Bertrand de la Cueua, created Duke of Albuquerque gaue him in recompence the towne of Albuquerque, with the title
of Duke, with the townes of Cuellar, Roa, Molina, Atienca, la Pegna d'Alcacar, and
besides all this, three millions and fiue hundred thousand Marauidis of yearely rent, to
be leuied vppon Vbeda, Baeca, and other places of Andalusia: we will therefore hereafter
call him Duke of Albuquerque, and Earle of Ledesma.
Those things beeing accomplished, the king went to Olmeda, and the Iudges or arbitrators
which wer chosen to Medina del campo, where whilest they conferred and disputed
about the affaires, the Confederates had inuented new meanes to continue the
troubles. The Arch-bishop of Toledo, and the Admirall Don Frederick made shew to
be displeased with the Marquis, and made a craftie reconcilement with the King, making
him beleeue, that they had both will and meanes to ruine the Marquis: the King receyued
them very fauourably, and for ioy thereof sent to Don Gomes of Caceres, Master of
Alcantara, and to Don Pedro Puerto Carero Earle of Medellino, whome hee very much
trusted, to come to him with as many souldiers as they could leauie. Thereupon hee was
aduertised, that the arbitrators had giuen vp their sentence, by the which there remayned
nothing to him but the name of King only: for the Marquis beeing a man very
wise, eloquent, and well experienced, did so handle the other Deputies, as he made them
to condiscend to whatsoeuer he pleased, hauing the Secretarie Aluar Gomes wholy at his
deuotion, by whose meanes he drew Gancalo of Sahauedra to his party.

The King being greatly troubled therewith, sent for Aluaro and Goncalo to come and
speake with him: but they beeing kept backe with shame, and their owne euil conscience,
durst not appeare in his presence,The King betrayed on all sides. but secretly tooke an other way, where by chance they
met with the maister of Alcantara and the Earle of Medellin who were going to the
King with a thousand horse, whom these two run-awaies made beleeue, that the King
had giuen charge to take them, and that he did greatly distrust them, and therefore aduised
them not to shut them-selues vp in a place from whence they could not escape at
their pleasures.
They knowing the king, by many like examples, to be apt enough to do such a matter,
did easily beleeue what the secretary and Goncalo had told them, and at their intreaty
they went altogether and ioyned them-selues with their confederats, the which did wonderfully
trouble the King, who had great cause to complaine of the ingratitude of Aluar
Gomes de Cite Reall aboue the rest,Aluar Gomes perfidious and disloyall to his King. because hee had (...) him with his greatest
secrets, and had highly aduanced him, hauing giuen him the Lordshippe of Maqueda,
and enabled him, by meanes of his fauour, honours and offices, to purchase Saint
Siluester and Torr^son de Velasco, and other-waies aduanced him, although hee were of
no Noble parentage. Apprehending then this treason of Aluar^, hee confiscated all
his goods, and gaue the towne of Torrejon de Velasco, to Pedro Arias de Aui^a, sonne
to Diego of Segobia, his high treasorer. And afterward made an edict, whereby hee
declared the deputies and arbitrators,The King disanuls the Arbitratots sentence for the peace. assembled at Medina del Campo, suspect, and enemies
to his crowne, reuoking, and declaring their sentence to bee of no force. Afterthat,
hee came to Segouia, and the confederates went to Playsantia, carrying with them
the Prince Don Alfonso.
Matters being broken of, the Maister of Calatraua went into Andalozia to drawe
the Lords of that country into the league. In the meane time the Arch-Bishoppe of
Toledo and the Admirall, the better to assure the king of their fidelity, remayned in
their houses, making no shew of cleauing to any side in those latter tumults, and
they sayd, that they stayd there expecting when the King wo^ld send for them:
Now the King, the better to oblige them to his seruice, had promised to giue vnto the
Archbishop la mota of Medina del campo,King Henry ill aduised giueth his enemies meanes to war vpon him. and the Citty of Auila, and to the Admirall
the Captenship of Valiodolit, and of Val de nebro, with a certaine summe of Henries of
gould to pay their soldiors, to weete the Arch-Bishoppe fourteene hundred Launces,
and the Admiral eight hundred, the which they obtained within few daies after. The king
hauing left in Segobia, with a good and fure guard, the Queene his wife, with her daughter,
and the Infanta Donna Isabell, hee went to Madrid whether the Arch-Bishop came
as it were flying, because, (as hee sayd) the Marchiones of Villena had caused him to bee
pursued by the commandement of her husband, and the other confederates: beeing receaued
and welcommed by the whole Courte, the King, the day following, held a
councell, wherein hee complayned of the disobedience and rebellion of the Marquis
and his confederats, who had made sundry attempts against his person, and the welfare and
quiet of his realmes, which was wholy diuided in armes, and was so troubled, that without
a fit and speedy remedy, both he himselfe, who was King, and the Lords, Citties, and other
estates, should bee exposed to the appetite of such as gaped after their liuings, places,
and dignities: wherefore hee craued aduice what was to bee done in a time so troublesome,
wherein hee himselfe, with his faithfull friends, and councellors, were ready to fall
into extreame daunger.
The Arch-Bishop as a Prelate of greatest authority, and who was the mouth of the rest,
aunswered, and gaue the King counsell to demand the Prince Don Alfonso of the confederate
Lords, saying that hee should liue better according to his dignity, beeing with
him than in their company, seeing that the troubles were encreased by meanes of his
deliuery vnto them, were as peace and quietnesse was expected: and if that they should
refuse to send him, that then the King should proceed against them by rigor of armes,
as rebells and guilty of treason.
This counsell was receyued and allowed of them all: and therefore the King went towards

Salamanca, supposing to take the Rebels vnprouided. By the way, the Earle of
Alua,The Earle of Alua forsaking the league, (...) to the King. who was in his house, lodged and entertayned the King and his Court very sumptuously,
and with great magnificence, and did sincerely reconcile himselfe vnto him, vtterly
forsaking the League, vnto whome the King promised to forget what was past, and
great fauours in time to come: The fourth day after hee went from thence and came to
Salamanca, with the Arch-bishop of Toledo, the Bishop of Calaorra, the Duke of Albuquerque
with others of his priuie Councell, from which place he did write to the confederate
Lords, according as he was aduised by the Arch-bishop of Toledo. Then did the
Arch-bishop sollicite the King to giue vnto him and the Admirall, Auila, and the other
places, with the money promised for the leauying and payment of their men at armes:
the King promised him the places, and willed them in the meane time to assemble their
forces.
The Lords of the League who were at Plaisance, hauing receyued the Kings commandement,
answered him, that they would serue him no longer, and there withall aduised
him not to marrie the Infanta Donna Izabella to the King of Portugall, without the
consent of the three Estates of the Kingdome. The letter beeing read, diuers told the
king that he should well consider the tenour thereof: for albeit the Confederates sayd,
that they would no longer serue him, it was euident by the discourse thereof, that they
did not intend to sequester themselues from the seruice of the Crowne, but onely from
that of his owne person, and that they would for a certaine elect his brother Prince Don
Alphonso for their King. And moreouer, they did aduise him not to trust ouer much to
the Arch-bishop of Toledo; for they were sufficiently aduertised, that the Admirals intent
and his was, so soone as they could get the castles and places, which they demaunded,
in their owne power, to retire then with all their forces, to his enemies: but the
King who was not suspitious, but by accident, and by nature credulous, did for all that
giue the Arch-bishop whatsoeuer he demanded. Hauing then debated how to beginne
this warre, the Councell was of opinion, and amonst the rest the Arch-bishop, that Areuallo
should bee beseeged, a cittie belonging to the Confederates, who before they
would loose that place, would perhaps come to any honest agreement: this being so set
downe, the Arch-bishop was sent away to gather his forces together, with commaundement,
that he himselfe and the Admirall should with their troupes meete before Areualo:
in the meane space the Bishop of Calaorra, and the Duke of Albuquerque remayned
at Salamanca, to giue order for things necessarie for the seege: that beeing done, the
King departed thence accompanied with the horse-men of his guard toward Medina del
Campo,Prodigious wind. but before his comming foorth of Salamanca, there arose so terrible a tempest
of wind, as blew vp the whole roofe in the great place there, bearing it more then a
stones-cast from thence, the which was held prodigious by the Mathematicians and Astrologians
of the same place.
The King caused the Queene his wife, and the Infanta Donna Izabella, to come to
Medina del campo, and Donna Ioane his supposed daughter was left in the castle of Segouia,
vnder the keeping of Perucho of Musarras, Gouernour and Captaine thereof.
The King came from Medina del campo to the campe before Areualo, and perceiuing
that the Arch-bishop came not, he sent one of his Secretaries to bid him make hast. This
Secretarie called Fernand Badajos,The Arch-bishop of Toledo betrayeth the king his master found the Arch-bishoppe with his troupes going towards
Auyla, where after he had deliuered his message, the Arch-bishop sayd vnto him,
Tell your King from me, that I am wearie both of him and his affaires, and that shortly the
true King of Castile shall be knowne. The Secretarie hauing reported these speeches to the
King, at the same instant newes came, that the Admirall Don Fredericke, had made himselfe
Master of Vailliodolit, where he had openly proclaimed Don Alphonso King: and
that the the Marquis of Villena, and all the Lords which were in the cittie of Plaisance
were come to Auila, there to make the Prince Alphonso king. Then this miserable and infortunate
King Henry,K. Henry d^stitute of humane helpe, hath recourse to God. being touched with the feeling of his offences, and acknowledging
the iudgement of God, all sorrowfull and humbled with-drew himselfe apart, (as the Licenciate
Diego Henriques who wrote his life and deedes doth report) kneeling vpon the
ground, and lifting vp his hands to heauen, he prayed in this manner:


O Lord God vnto whome belongeth the defence and protection of Kings, and by
whome they raigne, I recommend my cause vnto thee, and commit my life into thy
hands* I yeeld thee infinite thankes, for that it hath pleased thee to punish mee in this
sort for mine offences, which are worthie of a sharper scourge, and I confesse that the
same which I suffer is very small in respect of my deserts: May it please thee (O Lord) that
these troubles may diminish the paines which are due to my soule in regard of my sins,
and if it be thy will that I shall passe thorough these miseries and afflictions, I beseech
thee from the bottome of my heart to giue me patience to endure them, and reason and
vnderstanding to guide my selfe in them.

This prayer beeing ended, he commaunded to sound to horse-backe, and rode to Medina
del campo, from whence hauing taken the Queene his wife, and the Infanta, hee
came backe to Salamanca. At the same time the Arch-bishoppe was busied in taking of
Auila, whether the confederates came, to wit, the Marquis of Villena, the Master of
Alcantara, the Earles of Benauent, Paredes, Plaisance, and Medellin, with others. There
in a playne field without the cittie a great scaffold was set vp, vppon the which was placed
an effigie or picture representing King Henry in a mourning habite,King Henry shamefully (...) in (...), at Auila. sitting in a regall
throne, the Crowne vppon his head, the Scepter in his hand, and the sword laid before
him. Into the same fields the Lords and Knights of the league came, bringing the
Prince Don Alphonso with them: the Marquis, the Master of Alcantara, the Earle of Medelin,
Goncalo of Sahauedra, and the Secretarie Aluaro Gomes, stood a great space from
the scaffold: the rest went vp, and standing round abut the statue, a certaine writing
was read, by the which King Henry was degraded, and condemned to loose his royall dignitie;
contayning foure chief points, according to which, and as each of them were reading,
the Arch-bishoppe of Toledo, did first take the Crowne from his head, as deseruing
to bee depriued from the dignitie of King: then the Earle of Plaisance tooke away
the sword, when they read the Article, that he was no more worthy to administer iustice:
afterward, the Earle of Benauent, euen as the Cryer pronounced, that he was vnfitte to
gouerne the kingdom, took the scepter out of his hand: and finally, when they came to
the chiefe point, which did depriue him of his royall throne, the statue was thrown down
from his seate, with many vnworthie and outragious speeches, by Diego Lopes of Suniga,D. Alphonso the kings brother declared king of Castile.
or Estuniga a brother to the Earle of Plaisance. After that this ceremonie was ended,
the other Lords drew neere with the Prince Alphonso, and mounting the scaffold, they
tooke and lifted him vp on their shoulders, and began to cry, Castile, Castile for the king
Don Alphonso: then the trumpets did sound, and they all were to kisse his hand, as their
King.
This was done in the moneth of Iune, in the yeare 1465.1465. which when King Henry vnderstood,
he tooke it very patiently, and rehearsed the verse of the Prophet Esay: I haue
nourished and brought vp children, and they haue despised me: but although these trecherous
and disloyall seruants, haue so wronged and scorned me by the statue which they
haue degraded, and throwne away all respect and duty which they owe vnto me: yet they
cannot keepe me, who am the true king from hauing strength and courage to chastise
and disperse them: for I hope in our Lord Iesus Christ, which is the iust Iudge of Kings,
that their wickednesse shall be destroyed, and my innocencie made knowne to the whole
world. Then he wrote to the three Estates, citties, and communalties of Castile, concerning
these disorders, and leauied men at armes from all parts, promising exemptions, liberties,
priuiledges, and recompences to such as would serue him in that extremity; for
he knew very well, that Toledo and Burgos had erected Don Alphonso's banners, and that
the Master of Calatraua, who was strong in Andalusia, had caused Seuile and Cordoua
to rebell, and had drawne the Duke of Medina Sidonia, the Earle of Arcos, and Don Alphonso
of Aguilar, with many others, to their league: wherefore this poore vnfortunate
King would oftentimes say: Naked I came out of my mothers wombe, and the earth
must receiue me naked:Patience of king Henry. no man can become so poore as he was born: and if God do now
chastise me for my sinnes, he will comfort and preserue me hereafter; for his infinite power
killeth, and giueth life, hurteth and healeth, giueth kingdomes, and taketh them away,
lifteth vp kings, and throweth them downe againe euen as he pleaseth.
 Whilest that Castile was thus troubled, the kingdome of Arragon was not at rest:
for King Iohn hauing made a truce with the King of Castile,Arragon. and Nauarre. since the yeare 1464. being
contented to liue at peace on that side, albeit he was depriued of that which was adiudged
him by the sentence of the French King Lewis the eleuenth, he did notwithstanding
since continually presse the Cattelans, and other Rebels by force of armes, to the end to
reduce them to their former duties and allegeance: This truce was sworne vnto by Commissioners
on either side, namely, by Gaston the Earle of Foix, in the name of the king
Iohn his father-in-law, and by Donna Leonora his wife, heire to the Crowne of Nauarre,
who to obtaine the right of succession (if we may beleeue the Spanish Authors) was not
affraid to cause Donna Blanche the Queene of Castile,A cruell appetite of (...) in the Countesse of Foix her eldest sister, to be poysoned,
who was kept for a time by her and her husband prisoner at the towne of Lescar in the
Countrey of Bearne, by the consent of King Iohn her father, to the end to keepe this
poore Princesse from marrying any more.
 As concerning the warres of Cattelogne, the estates of that Country did not faint,Continuance of the warre of Cattelogne.
although they were forsaken by the King of Castile, nor abated any jotte of their hatred
against their Prince, but reiecting him as a wicked murtherer of his owne sonne, they
chose (as hath beene alreadie sayd) Don Pedro the third Constable of Portugall, sonne
Don Pedro Duke of Coimbra, vnto whom for the same effect they sent Ambassadours
to Ceuta, where he remayned with the King Don Alphonso of Portugall, warring vppon
the Affricane Moores: whilest they attended his comming, (the Spaniards sent to their
ayde by the king Don Henry, not beeing yet departed) the warre continued cruelly in the
countries of Cattelogne and Arragon with variable successe.
The Knights of the Order of Montesa taking the Kings part, did greatly trouble the
towne and countrey of Tortosa, and tooke the cittie of Esmereta, which the Castillans
had wonne in the last warres, who had giuen many ouerthrowes to those of Tarrassona
and Borja, and others which were on K. Iohns side. Those of Barcelona, being masters of
the sea, and strong enough by land, did obtaine sundrie victories, and defeated the Prior
of S. Iohns. Those of Lerida rebelling againe, constrayned the king to besiege their
towne, wherein commanded as chiefe Pedro de Deca, who dared to offer the king battell,
where they fought so valiantly, that albeit the king obtained the victorie, yet hee lost
more men then the beseeged, who made diuers furious sallies vppon the Kings armie,
leauing still behind them bloudie markes: but in the end beeing constrayned by famine,
they yeelded with condition, to haue their liues and goods saued, which the king graunted
them, because he would not appeare ouer rigorous, and to the end that hee might
bring others to do the like, by that example of clemencie. Iohn de Lazcano a Knight born
in Guipuscoa was left Gouernour of Lerida;Don Ped^o of Portugal crowned king at ^^^c^lona. the army marching against Ceruera, to inuest
which place Don Alphonso and Don Iohn of Arragon the kings bastard sons were
sent before. In the meane time, D. Pedro of Portugall beeing arriued, receiued, and crowned
King at Barcelona, according to the vsuall ceremonies of Arragon, hee determined
with the forces which he found in Cattelogne, those which he had brought from Portugall,
and with certaine Castillan Knights who of their owne accord remayned in that
countrey, to succour Ceruera: but beeing come to Igualada, and vnderstanding by his
spies, that his forces were not sufficient to raise Kings Iohns army from before that place,
he returned to Barcelona with great difficultie. Afterward to diuert the Earle of Pratas,
who did furiously batter the towne of Tarraga for King Iohn, he brought his army into
his countrie, where he tooke Pratas, and committed diuers spoyles there, which king
Iohn hauing notice of, he caused the Earle to depart from before Tarraga, and sent him
more souldiers, conducted by his sonne Don Fernand, with commaundement to meere
with Don Pedro, whose armie consisted of sixe thousand and fiue hundred men at the
most,Don Pedro and the Cattelans defeated neere to Calaf. beeing Cattelans, Portugueses, Nauarrois, Burgondians and others: with these
forces he came foorth of Pratas, and met with the enemie about Calaf. As both the armies
were in sight, an infinite multitude of storks appeared flying in the ayre, which trobled
the minds of all men on either side, reputing it as prodigious: The battayles beeing
ioyned, D. Pedro was ouer-come, and saued himselfe by fauour of the night in Pratas,
where he had left a sufficient Garrison.

To this battaile of Calaf came Don Henry of Arragon, sonne to the Infant D. Henry,
and Lady Beatrice Pimentel who was surnamed the fortunate Infant. D. Pedro who intituled
himselfe King, left Pratas; and retired himselfe to Manrresa, from whence he sent
a captaine named Bertrand of Almendrades, to the succour of Ceruera, and he himselfe
entred into the Prouince of Ampurdan, where he fortefied his campe with new succours
from the towne of Besalu; he battred and tooke Tibrana, and came to beseege
Bisball,D. Pedro and the Cattelans againe defeated before Poblin. the which hauing beaten to no purpose, and spent many great shot, hee raised
his seege, and came to Poblin: thither on euery side came King Iohns people in such
numbers, as D. Pedro was constrained to fight againe, where againe he was ouercome,
and lost a thousand foot men, and two hundred and threescore horse.
As these exploits were performed in Cattalonia, the Earle Gaston de Foix who gouerned
Nauarre, with his wife Donna Leonora, called the Princesse of Viana, by
the aduise of those of his councell, resolued to enterprise something vpon Castile, in
counterchange of the townes of La Garde, Arcos and Saint Vincent, which the Castillans
had withheld since the last warre, against the sentence giuen by the French King.
Hauing then with great dilligence and secrecy assembled great forces, he forced easily
and without losse of his people,Calaorra taken by Gaston de Foix from the Spaniards. the City of Calaorra to yeeld, wherein he did a thing
very pleasing and agreeable to the confederate Knights against King Henry, which were
within Auila with Prince Don Alphonso, whose Ambassador remained in the Court of
Nauarre.
This being done, the Earle was aduised to send to the King of Castile, to giue him
to vnderstand, that what he had done, was not to breake the peace betweene Castile and
Nauarre, but onely in manner of reprisall, in steed of the aboue mentioned townes,
which hee withheld, belonging to the Kingdome wherevnto he had right: and if it
might please him to send some one or other to him, to agree vpon some good composition,
according to right and equity, he would then submit himselfe therevnto. King
Henry sent forthwith thither the licenciat Diego Henriques, who spake proudly and audaciously
to the Earle and the Princesse his wife about the taking of Calaorra: They
were chiefly ruled by the counsell of Nicholas, of Echauarri Bishop of Pampelona, and
by his aduise Diego Henriques was sent backe, and with him an other of the same coate,
to intreate King Henry to redeliuer the three townes of La Garde, Arcos, and Saint Vincent
and that Calaorra should be forthwith restored backe: and besides, that the Earle
and the Princesse should aide him with forces from Nauarre against his owne rebels,
and would in no sort fauor nor aide them. This Ambassage deliuered to the King of
Castile, at Segobia, did much content him, and he sent backe the licenciat Diego with
the Ambassador of Nauarre to accomplish these restitutions, so that for assurance
of what the Earle and the Princesse should promise, they should giue their children D.
Iohn and Donna Mary for ostages: The two Ambassadors being on their way, he of Castile
staied at Logrogno, and he of Nauarre came to the Earle, vnto whom hee gaue account
of his charge: and according to that which was set downe, the Earle and Diego
Henriques met since in a certaine place, yet they agreed vpon nothing, the Earle of
Foix being importuned to the contrary, by the league of Castile.
The Castillan Ambassador foreseeing that the Earle ment to beseege Alfaro, hee
gaue order speedily, that a hundred horsemen, with store of victuals, should enter into
the same towne: within a while after, the Earle being at Tudela, he sent for the Castillan
Ambassador, to the end to treat againe with him about an agreement, and he caused the
Bishop of Pampelona, and Martin de Peralta to deale with him; but there was lesse
done at this meeting then before, for the Bishop vsed many iniurious speeches against
King Henry, so as all men were ashamed of him: but the Ambassador of Castile did carry
himselfe so modestly, and did refute the Bishops words with such good reasons, as
in the end he made him to acknowledge his fault, and to excuse himselfe. In conclusion,
the end of their disputation, was, that the Earle would not send his children, and that if
the King of Castile would not yeeld vp the towne, which hee held in Nauarre, he would
then beseege Alfaro: with this resolution the Ambassador departed, and in foure daies
space that he remained at Alfaro, he caused it to be fortified with rampiers and defenses,

as much as his short stay would giue him leaue: from thence he went into Soria, and leauied
souldiers there, for the defence of the same place. Alfaro being beseeged and furiously
battered by the Earle, did hold out, notwithstanding that it is scituated betweene
Calaorra and Tudela, wherein were great garrisons of French-men and Nauarrois, so
as within the space of twelue daies, the succors of Castile appeared, consisting of one
thousand three hundred horse,The B^shop of Pampeloa^ ca^seth the townes o'L: Garde, Saint (...) and (...), to remaine vnder the power of Castile. and fiue thousand footmen, conducted by Alphonso de
Areillan Lord de los Cameros: by reason whereof the Earle raised his seege, and
brought backe his people to Tudela: and soone after he receiued newes that the Inhabitants
of Calaorra had massacred the French Garrison there, and returned to the obedience
of their Prince King Henry. These disorders did greatly displease the Earle, the
Constable Lord Peter of Peralta, and others, who laide the whole fault vpon the Bishop
of Pampelona who was the cause that the townes of La Garda, Saint Vincent and
Arcos, which of old times belonged to Nauarre, haue euer since remained in the power
of Castile.
King Iohn after the victory, which his sonne had obtained at Poblin, receiued diuerse
Inhabitants of the Prouince of Ampurdan, which yeelded to him, some willingly, others
for feare. And desiring straightly to beseege Ceruera, a strong place by nature, hee
sent thither the troupes of D. Alphonso, and those which the Queene held before Valdecona,
a towne seated within a mile of Tortosa:Igualada surprised by meane^ of the d^scord of the Inhabitants. but D. Alphonso, before he marched to the
campe, vnderstanding that the Inhabitants of Igualada were at dissention among themselues,
some of them cleauing to the new King D. Pedro, the others to King Iohn: hee
drew nere to it, and found meanes to take it whilest they were at variance: Hauing gotten
in, he vsed them kindely that held with King Iohn, the others hee seuerely punished:
then he went to Ceruera, which was so speedily battred and assailed, as in the end it yeelded
vpon composition to haue their liues and goods saued, and their priuiledges entirely
maintained: the which was graunted. The gouernment of that place was giuen to Iohn
de Carraxona, then they went to Pratas, where the new King D. Pedro had left a garrison,
he himselfe being retired to Barcelona: Pratas was yeelded, and Rodona likewise vpon
conditions, and the army passed on to Tortosa, the Prince D. Fernand conducting the
formost troupes, who beganne to encampe before Amposta, hauing with great difficulty
passed the riuer Ebro, hich was greatly swelled and risen. The seege of Amposta
was long and difficult, winter drawing neere, which prooued that yeere so exceeding
cold,A cold winter. beyond the custome of the country, as it is reported that wolues came into the soldiars
tents and cabanes as though they had beene tame: and great numbers of sundry
sorts of snakes were found in the fields, which did no hurt at all, which did greatly amaze
the souldiars who held those things for strang prognostications:Snakes among the army in the dead of winter. so as King Iohn was
constrained to comfort and animate his people with orations and friendly speeches,
wherein a Sicillian Gentleman named Scipio Patello, who was wise and eloquent, did him
good seruice. By the great labour of the souldiars, and extreame dilligence of the
captaines, Amposta was taken by force, where the King executed some of the principall
Inhabitants,Amposta take^ by King Iohn. and pardoned others, as namely the Gouernor who with diuers others had
taken the castle.
After this they beseeged Tortosa which the King greatly desired, who sent thither D.
Alphonso his son, to shut in the Inhabitants, and to prepare things in readinesse to batter
it. The townes-men perceiuing it was in good earnest, sent forty of their Citizens
to the King, to perswade him to desist from that enterprize, and to assure him that Tortosa
would not rebel against him, if the other townes of Cattalonia would compound
and yeeld: therefore they entreated him to go to some other place, and to leaue them in
peace; other-wise, he should thinke, that if the taking of Amposta cost him so deere, that
Tortosa, which was much stronger, and greater, would stand him in no lesse. The King
knowing that the Tortosans were none of the valiantest, answered them, that if they did
not submit themselues to his obedience, he would seuerely punish them: which they refusing,
the warre beganne to be very sharpe in euery place about the City, with the dayly
losse of many on either side: the towne was battered with great fury on all parts,
and the beseeged made diuerse braue sallies vpon the enemies. D. Pedro who named

himselfe King, did desire to succour Tortosa; but being with his forces on the way, he
died by poison (as it is reported) in the City of Granol,D. Pedro of Portugal poysoned. fiue miles distant from Barcelona.
King Iohn being aduertized of the death of his enemy, did not dissemble the ioy
that he felt, not the Barcelonois their griefe and sorrow: but those of Tortosa were especially
greeued for the hope of succor which they expected from him:Tortosa yeelded to King Iohn. so as being out
of hope of helpe, and extreamely beaten euery day, they yeelded vpon reasonable
termes.
These things were done in Cattalonia, at the same time that the Prince Alphonso was 
proclaimed King of Castile at Auila,Castile. and King Henry degraded by the confederate
Lords, vnto whose seruice and readuancement, from sundry parts of the Realme diuers
Noble men resorted: but Don Garcia Aluares de Toledo Earle of Alua de Tormes was
he that shewed the greatest loue and affection towards him, for he brought to his aide
one thousand footmen, three hundred men at armes, and two hundred light horse or
genets: he dwelt nere to Salamanca. The King sent the Earle of Alua and his troupes to
Zamora with Iohn Bernandes Galindo, who had commaund of the residew of the army:
he himselfe with the Queene, and the Infanta Isabella, went to Ledesma, where he was
sumptuously entertained and feasted by the Duke of Albuquerque for the space of eight
daies: from whence hauing assembled three hundred men at armes and two hundred
genets, they accompanied the King to Zamora. The Queene and the Infanta Isabell
went into Portugall to request aide of the King, whereof there was great need, but their
labour was in vaine. At Zamora daily arriued great numbers of souldiars for the Kings
seruice. The Earle of Transtamara brought thither two hundred men at armes, and
two hundred genets, the Earle of Valencia, a hundred men at armes, and two hundred
genets, others brought more or lesse according to their habilities. The King sent three
hundred Launces to Segobia, to accompany the Lady Ioane his supposed daughter to
Zamora, where with great pompe hee entred the City vnder a canopy and in a Kingly
habit.
In the meane time the Maister of Calatraua,D. Pedro Gyron, Maister of Calatraua, stirsin Andeluzia against the King. stirred vp all Andaluzia for the contrary
part, and drew some by perswations, guifts and promises, and others by theatnings, force
and violence. Hauing done his best (but in vaine) to enduce D. Iohn de Valencuela to
ioyne himselfe with the confederate Lords, he tooke him prisoner and would not release
him, till he had snatched diuers fortresses from him, with the which not being satisfied,
he tooke from him all the places belonging to the priory of Saint Iohn, and gaue
them to D. Aluaro de Estuniga third sonne to the Earle of Playsance; He dispossessed
also the Bishop of Iaen, the Kings faithful seruant, from all that he held, notwithstanding
that he vsed his goods and houses, boldly and familliarly as his guest. The Constable
of Castile D. Michael Lucas de Irancu, D. Pedro de Cordoua Earle of Cabra and his
children, the Marshall of Castile D. Diego; the Commandor de Estepa D. Martin, and
Martin Alphonso Lord of Alcaudete, did oppose themselues against the Maister of Calatraua.
The intent of the confederate Lords was to goe and beseege Simancas, and
being gone from Valiodolit for the same purpose with great store of men and munition,
by the way they tooke Pegnafleur: where whilest they were busied, the King caused Iohn
Fernandes Galindo to enter into Simancas with three hundred horse: and not long after
the towne beeing inuested by the enemy, it was a hard matter to say, whether the beseegers
or the beseeged were in most feare.
In the meane space whilest they lay before that towne,The Archbishop of Teledo chiefe of the rebels derided. the knauish boies and lackies
which were within the same did gather themselues together vpon a day, and in derision
of the league, they made an image representing the Archbishop of Toledo, which they
named the new D. Opas the Apostata, in the daies of Count Iulian, who brought the
Moores into Spaine against King Rodericke: then they made one amongest them a
Iudge, who sitting in a seate, commanded the image should bee imprisoned: and afterward
he pronounced sentence, which was, that Alphonso Carillo Archbishop of Toledo,
following the steps of the old Bishop Opas, the ruine of Spaine, for that he had betraied
the King his naturall Lord, rebelling against him, and detayning his money,
townes and fortresses which he had committed to him, was condemned to be drawne vp

and downe the streets, and publike places of Simancas, a trumpet going before, who
should proclaime, that the King did command this iustice to bee done to the traitor Opas,
as a recompence due for his treacheries and treasons, and that then it should bee
burned. This sentence being pronounced aloud, the image was carried forth of the
towne, accompanied with more then three hundred boies and lacquaies, and burned
nere to the confederats army and in their sight. The Lords of the league perceiuing that
they could not take Simancas, did raise their seege and brought their forces backe to
Valiodolit.
The Kings army which was assembled at Toro did daily encrease, to the which their
ioyned the Earle of Medina Celi, with fiue hundred Launces, the Marquis of Santillana
with seuen hundred, D. Pedro de Mendoca, Lord of Almacan, with two hundred, and a
great number of footmen; diuers others also came thither, so that there were reckoned
to be foure score thousand footmen and foureteene thousand horse, as well men at armes
as light horse: who were all of them very desirous to fight and to doe the King good seruice,
who by the aduice of the Lords and captaines of his army, caused the campe to
dislodge, and to aduance towards the enemies, the Earle of Alua de Tormes leading the
vantguard, and the battaile was conducted by D. Pedro Goncales de Mendoca Bishop of
Calaorra.
The army marching neere to Tordesillas, a captaine of the Vantgarde, named
Garci Mendes of Badajos, disbanding with about two hundred horse, met neere to
Valiodolit with Iohn Carillo, a Knight of the Admiralls, leading a band of fifty horse,
whom he fought with, vanquished, and tooke Iohn Carillo prisoner, beeing grieuously
hurt, who was brought into a Chappel thereby, where hee entreated to speake with the
King before he died, for he felt himselfe wounded to the death. The King at the intreaty
of his friends came to visit the prisoner, whose end drew neere: he craued pardon of the
King for bearing armes against him, and told him that he was come from Valiodolit the
same day, by the commandement of those that had power ouer him, to finde meanes
to kill him, and he did moreouer reueale to the King sundry other vilde practises; the
King said, that he pardoned him with all his heart, and prayed God to pardon him likewise,
and he enquired further of him, who those were which sought his life, and which did
set him a worke; he entreated the King to send away them that stood by, and then in
great secrecy he told their names, which could neuer after be knowne, for the King neuer
told it to any man liuing: the next day after Iohn Carillo died of his hurts. The
King being at Simancas, his great and mighty army stretched it selfe euen to the gates
of Valiadolit, where the confederats did remaine, neuerthelesse the affaires were drawne
out at length, without any matter of note. Thither came the Queene Donna Ioane,
with the Infant Donna Isabella, who were returned from Portugall, where they had
obtained nothing at all for the good of Castile: for notwithstanding that they had
endeauored for to renew the treatie of marriage mentioned at the enterview of the-Kings
at the Archbishops bridge, neuerthelesse the King Don Alphonso did abhorre
to marry his sonne to Donna Ioane, whoe was begotten in adultery, of the Queene
of Castile his cosin, by the Duke of Albuquerque Don Bertrand dela Cueua
These things standing at a stay, the King and the Marquis of Villena did see one
an other, and by the aduice of Don Diego Hurtado de Mendoca Marquis of Santillana,
and of Don Aluaro of Estuniga, chiefe Iustice of Castile, called and chosen on
both parts, it was concluded, that euery man should lay by his armes and returne
to his owne house: and that during the truce, which should continue for the space
of some fiue monthes following, they should treate of a peace, and of the meanes
how to giue content to all men; but chiefely, to cause the Prince Don Alphonso to
renounce his royalty. This was proclaimed through the campe, neere to Montejo
in the territory of Areualo, signed and sealed by the King, the Archbishop of Toledo,The King knowes not how to profit himselfe by his great forces.
and the Marquis of Villena, and vnderneath by the secretrary Garcia de Arcareso
de Montdragon.
The King had small reason to yeeld to these things, hauing an army of a hundred
thousand fighting men; whereas his enemies were very weake in respect of him, and

vnprouided of money, victuals, munition and other things necessary for such an enterprise,
but God would haue it so. The King being come backe to Simancas, dismissed
his souldiars with liberall payment; then at Medina del Campo, whether hee came
soone after, he recompenced the Lords after this manner: He gaue to D. Peco Goncales
de Mendoca Bishop of Calaorra the thirds of Guadalajara with the reuenue thereof:
to his brother D. Diego Hurtado de Mendoca Marquis of Santillana, he gaue the towne
of Saint Andrew,Recompences made by the King to the Lords that followed him. ioyning to the lands of his Marquisat, with a yeerely pention of seuen
hundred thousand Marauedis: to the other brother D. Inigo de Mendoca, and to Don
Lorenzo de Suares Vicont of Torreja, and to D. Iohu Hur^ado de Mendoca, pensions according
to their degrees, to D. Lewis de la Cerde Earle of Medina Celi, the City of Agreda
with the territory: to D. Garci Aluares de Toledo Earle of Alua, Carpia, with sundry
places nere to Salamanca: to D. Aluar Peres Osorio Lord of Villalobos and Earle of
Transtamara, the City of Astorga with the title of Marquis, to D. Iohn de Acugna Earle
of Valencia, the Earldome of Prauia and Gijon, with the title of Duke of Valencia: to
D. Pedro de Mendoca, Lord of Almacan, a yeerely pention of 300000. Marauedis, assigned
him, on the hill of Mountagu: to D. Aluaro de Mendoca, captaine of his men
at armes, the City of Requegna, with the reuenue and proffit of the port and hauen
thereof. Other guifts and recompences did the King make to his Knights, the which,
or at least the most part of them, haue euer since remained in their families.
The end of the twentith Booke.




SEMPER EADEMTHE ONE AND TVVENtith
Booke of the Generall History of Spaine.

The Contents.
1 COntinuance of the troubles in Castile.
2 The vnworthy marriage of the Infanta Donna Isabella, Agreed vpon by her brother
King Henry, and hindred by the sodaine and vnlooked for death of Don Pedro
Giron.
3 Societies of Castile, vnion of the Prouinces and communalties holding together for the administration
of iustice.
4 Assembly at Madrid: tumult in the same towne: Behauiour of those of Mendoca: The
Marquis of Villena promoted to the Maistership of Saint Iames. Battaile of Olmedo.
5 The Pope vseth all dilligence to procure the peace of Castile. Censures, the rebells appeale
to a future Counsell. The taking of Segobia. The King D. Henry forsaken.
6 Agreement betwixt the King and the confederate Lords. Euil behauiour of Donna Ioane
Queene of Castile.
7 Strife for the Bishoprike of Siguenca, Murthers at Burgos.
8 Seditions in Toledo: magnanimity, and equity of the Infant Don Alphonso chosen
King.
9 D. Alphonso de Primentel, Earle of Benauent, enterpriseth against his father in law Don
Iohn de Pacheco Marquis of Villena.
10 Practises of those of Toledo against the Infant Don Alphonso in the behalfe of King
Henry: Rashnesse of the Bishop of Badajos, and of Donna Maria de Silua and of that which
happened.
11 Death of the Infant D. Alphonso: wisedome of the Infanta Donna Isabella: Peace betwixt
the King and the confederate Lords.
12 Infamous life of Donna Ioane Queene of Castile: the Lords of Mendoca practice against
the peace: the Infanta Donna Isabella declared Princesse of the Asturis, and presumptiue
heire of Castile.
13 Continuance of the warres of Barcelona: Renee of Aniou chosen King of Arragon by the
Barcelonois, Exploits of the French in Cattalonia: death of the Duke of Calabria.
14 Gaston Earle of Foix desirous to reigne before his time, stirreth vp troubles in the Kingdome
of Nauarre.
15 Queene Ioane of Arragon dies, and confesseth her fault.
16 Gaston of Foix the younger dies at Liborna. Beginning, and continuance of the house
of Foix.

17 Couenants betwixt King Iohn of Arragon and his daughter the Countesse of Foix heire
of Nauarre.
18 Assembly at Ocagna: New deseignes of King Henry of Castile.
19 The King of Castiles iourney into Andaluzia.
20 Marriage betwixt the Infanta Donna Isabella, and the Prince D. Fernand heire of Arragon,
Sicill, Naples etc. Articles and couenants of the same.
21 A rash act of D. Alphonso de Aguilar against the Lords of Cabra. The taking of Simancas,
with other outrages.
22 Spanish superstitions.
23 Practices, pursutes and quarrels betwixt the Lords of Castile. Alua erected into a
Dutchy.
24 Muley Alboacen King of Granado, whose posterity remaineth in Spaine till this day.
25 Treaty of Marriage betwixt King Henry of Castiles supposed daughter and the Duke of
Guyenne, brother to the French King Lewis the eleuenth. Lands of Infantasgo giuen to the
house of Mendoca.
26 Donna Isabella Princesse of Castile disinherited: King Henry forsweares himselfe:
Donna Ioane and the Duke of Guyenne betrothed together by Ambassadors. The
duke dies.
27 The Archbishop of Toledo raiseth new troubles.
28 Quarrels betwixt the Earles of Haro and Treuigno.
29 Affrican expeditions, and other affaires of Portugall.
30 Enterview of the Kings of Castile and Portugall.
31 End of the warre of Barcelona.
32 Rash and succeslesse enterprise of the Princesse Leonora Countesse of Foix against the city
of Pampelona, and those of Beaumont.
33 Second marriage of the Marquis of Villena Maister of Saint Iames.
34 Roderigo Borgia Cardinal and legat in Spaine.
35 New Christians massacred at Cordoua and Iaen, where the Constable of Castile Don
Michael Lucas of Irancu was murthered: The same dignity giuen to the house of
Velasco.
36 Enterprise of the Maister of Saint Iames against D. Andrea de Cabrera: D. Pedro Goncal
de Mendoca made Cardinall.
37 Parliament at Madrid, determinations thereof. Outrage and insolency of the Maister of
Saint Iames: Enterview of King Henry of Castile, and of the Princesse Donna Isabel his
sister, and likewise of Prince Fernando her houseband. Priuiledge of the Earle of Ribadeo.
Suspitious banquet.
38 Death of Earle Gaston de Foix husband to Princesse Leonora of Nauarre: her titles:
hard suspitions of her chastity: the Bishop of Pampelona murthered.
39 King Iohn of Arragon and Lewis the eleuenth the French King, quarrel about the Earledome
of Rossillon.
40 Quarrels betweene the houses of Mendoca, and Pimentel.
41 Death of D. Iohn de Pacheco Maister of Saint Iames: Three maisters of the same Order
contend together at one time. Last acts of king Henry of Castile.


The one and twentith Booke of the History
of Spaine.
NOtwithstanding the agreement made at Montejo, the Kingdome of Castile
was neuer the more at quiet: for the Infant Don Alphonso called
himselfe King neuerthelesse; and in his writings and letters pat^nts
(diuers of which are to be seene in Spaine at this day, as namely at Valiodolit
and Areualo) he named himself King of Castile, Leon, Toledo,
Galicia, Siuil, Cordoua, Murcia, Iaen, Algarua, Algezire, and Gibraltar,
and Lord of Biscay and Molina: neither did the confederate Lords lay downe their
armes, according as they had sworne and promised: perceiuing very well that all King
Henries great forces and meanes would come to nothing through his negligence and
carelesnesse: by meanes whereof the Realme of Spaine grew infamous through the
robberies and oppressions which the souldiars did dayly commit in euery place without
any punishment at all.
 It happened on a day as the confederates went out of Valiodolit to Alfaro, they were
no sooner out of the towne but the Inhabitants shut their gates against them,Those of Valiodolit free themselues from the confederates subiection, and submit to the King. putting
themselues againe vnder King Henries obedience, and did driue all those out of their city
which had any correspondence with the league. The King being aduertized thereof,
came sodainely thither, where hee was receiued with great ioy. In recompence of the
losse of Valiodolit, the confederates made an enterprise vpon Simancas, thinking to
haue taken it by scalado, but they themselues were taken, and diuers of them sent backe
to Valiodolit, where they were cut in quarters. The King did for all this harken to the agreement
which had bin resolued among them, and did bend his eare to whatsoeuer was
propounded by the Marquis, whose onely drift was to take him, if hee could haue but
drawne him into any place fit for the purpose: but the King hearing thereof, stood still
vpon his guarde, and when at any time there was any occasion of meeting to conferre,
he alwaies sent the Bishop of Calaorra and Iohn Fernandes Galindo vnto them. They
concluded vpon nothing, so that many Lords which followed the Court, tooke their
leaues, and returned to their owne houses. There remained continually with the King
the Bishop of Calaorra the Marquis of Santillana and his bretheren; the Earles of Haro,
Valence, and Cabra, the new Marquis of Astorga, the Constable D. Michael Lucas
de Irancu, and the Duke of Albuquerque.
 The King hauing left a good garrison in Valiodolit, returned to Segobia: at the same
time the affaires of the confederates,The Prince D. Alphonso chosen King, in miserable captiuity in the keeping of the confed^rates. were in bad termes, and if the King or they which
were neere about him had truely vnderstood themselues, he might very easily haue dissolued
that league, for the Marquis through want of meanes, was very badly and vnwillingly
followed by those which were about him.
The Prince Don Alphonso distrusting the end of their enterprises, would willingly
haue made an attonement with the King his brother: but they held him very short,
and threatned him, that if hee made but the least shew to bend that way, to present
him with a cuppe of poison: therevpon by meanes of the Archbishop of Siuill, a
very vnseemely agreement was made, to the which neuerthelesse the King gaue eare
willingly: which was, to marry the Infanta Donna Isabella his sister to Don Pedro
Giron Maister of Calatraua vpon condition that hee should promise to cause Prince
Alphonso to giue ouer the title of King,An other agreement not wel digested. and to furnish a certaine summe of money

with three thousand launces for the Kings seruice: besides this, it was concluded that
the Bishop of Calaorra and the Duke of Albuquerque should leaue the Court, who
forthwith without any contradiction did so. The Infanta Donna Isabella was wonderfully
afflicted with griefe when she vnderstood these newes,Magnanimity of the Infanta D. Isabel. considering the inequality
of the marriage, and the indignity offered her by the King her brother, and like a noble
and couragious Princesse, she determined rather to kill her selfe then euer to yeeld vnto
it: but first of all, shee thought it fit to trie all possible meanes how to ridde this new
husband of his life: shee had a very trusty Gentlewoman named Beatrice of Boadilla,
who offered with the help of her husband Andrew de Cabrera, to kill the Maister vpon
the wedding night, as soone as hee should offer to lie downe by the Princesse: this
Lady was by the Infanta at her comming to the crowne of Castile created Marquesse
of Moya.
These things being thus plotted;Death of Don Padro ^yron Maister of Ca^atrau^. it happened that as the Maister D. Pedro Giron was
on his way to the Court to sollemnize his marriage, bringing with him great numbers
of horsemen, he was taken with a greeuous sicknesse, whereof hee died at Villa-rubia, hauing
held the Mastership of Calatraua one and twenty yeeres: whether this happened
accidentally, or otherwaies, it remaines doubtfull; but his death was very displeasing to
the King, who thought by meanes of this marriage to giue an end to all the miseries
and troubles of his Kingdome, and to re-enter into his former authority and quiet. In
his place, his sonne Don Roderigo Tellez Gyron was chosen Maister of Calatraua, by
vertue of a grant which he obtained from Rome, who was the last Maister of that order
sauing one: a brother of his called Don Alphonso Tellez Giron succeeded in the Lordship
and Earledome of Vruena, both of them remayning vnder the gouernment and
protection of their vncle D. Iohn de Pacheco, Marquis of Villena. These things happened
in the yeer 1466.An. 1466. A Prodigie. at which time there were seene in Castile such huge numbers of Storks,
as they did darken and hinder the light of the Sunne, the which did greatly asright the
people, who did interpret it for a signe of misery and mishap to the kingdome.
In these times liued D. Roderigo Sanches of Areualo, who was very familliar with Pope
Paul the second, and by him made captaine of the castle of Saint Angelo, where he wrote
an History of Spaine, which at this day is common with euery man, and is called the
Palentine History, because a Bishop of Palenca was author thereof, and it was dedicated
to this King Henry. The city of Victoria, for that it had, during all the troubles, remained
faithfull to the King, did obtaine this yeere a free market, once euery weeke vpon
the Thursday, whose priuiledge was despatched by the Secretary Pedro Arias: it is one
of the most frequented markets in the whole country.
After the Maister of Calatraua's death: the troubles were a little calmed, by reason
that no man was resolued what to doe: the Earle of Benauent acknowledging the offence
which hee had committed against the King, did secretly withdraw himselfe from
the league, and returned to his seruice: the King to recompence him, gaue him the
towne of Portillo, which hee had taken a little before his reconcilliation. About the
same time, the Prince Don Alphonso, who was termed King, accompanied with the
Archbishop of Toledo, and many other Knights, came to Portillo, where being receiued,
hee was lodged in the castle, and the others in the towne: on the morrow as the
Archbishop and the other Lords came to waite vpon the Prince at his rising, they
found the gates shut against them, and they were willed to get them thence, for that
Don Alphonso did no longer regard their company, whereat the Archbishop was
greatly troubled, and from that time did conceiue an extreame hatred against the
Earle, who had put that trick vpon him, the better thereby to infinuate himselfe
into the Kings fauour: yet for all that the Marquis of Villena, who was very wise
and subtill, and did desire for to maintaine the league vnited, vsed diuerse meanes
to reconcile them, and to applie a plaister to that wound, which in some sort did heale
outwardly.
The Earle in recompence of the good seruice which hee had done to the King, demaunded
of him the Maistership of Saint Iames, at that time vacant, the which was
granted to him: but perswading himselfe to make vse of the Marquis of Villena's fauour,

who was his father in law, whom he made beleeue that he was still of his side, he inwardly
found the contrary.
The continuall robberies and outrages committed ouer all Spaine by these Lords
and their followers, not onely suffred in the country, but euen in townes and houses,
by reason the warres did constraine the Inhabitants of the townes and citties to make
societies, and fellowships, to oppose themselues against these tyrants and robbers; and
the better to bring it to passe, they drew certaine chiefe points and Articles, and chose
places to meet at, at daies appointed, the King backing and assisting them therein, notwithstanding
that sundry of his followers, as well as of the league, did goe about to
hinder so proffitable an enterprise,Hermandades, or brotherhoods in Castile, vnion of the Prouinces and communalties holding together for the administration of iustice. whereby the Realme was defended from many euills;
it being Gods pleasure that the King should persist in his determination to maintaine
his communalties, and to doe Iustice, which beganne to be sincerely administred.
The conclusions of these societies was made in the City of Tordesillas, where the Deputies
of all the Prouinces were assembled, where that of Guipuscoa, most of all shaken
and troubled by the factions of the Gamboins and Ognazins, did receiue the greatest
benifit. They did establish captaines and gouernors ouer each of them: these are the
Hermandades or brotherhoods (as they call them) who in some sort may be likened to
the Prouincial prouost Marshalls in sundry places of France; but that they execute their
duties with greater care.
During the assembly at Tordesillas, the King remained at Coca, a towne belonging
to the Archbishop of Siuill, conferring with the confederates vnder the Bishops safeconduct:
but there was nothing of worth concluded on; so as the King returned to
 Segobia, and the league to Areualo. An other assembly,Assembly at Madrid. at the request of diuers, was
assigned at Madrid, the same towne being for sixe monthes giuen to the Archbishop
of Siuill, to the end that euery man might come thither in safety and without suspition:
The King Henry, the Marquis of Villena, and the chiefe Lords of either faction did meet:
the Prince D. Alphonso remained in the meane time at Ocagna, whether the Archbishop
of Toledo (who was reconciled to him) had brought him: This other conference was
as frutelesse as the former. The Lady Leonora Pimentell Countesse of Playsancia
came to Madrid, beeing called thither by both sides to mediate the peace: this Lady
was held to be greatly affected to King Henries seruice. The Lords beeing busied about
these affaires,King Henry oppresseth his trusty seruants, and dares not touch the rebels. the Marquis beeing desirous to entertaine the troubles and to extract
discord from discord, went about to corrupt Pedro Arias de Auila the Kings good
seruant: finding him firme and constant, he handled the matter so, as the Archbishop
of Siuill, by slanderous and falce reports, did excite the credulous King in such sort aagainst
him, as he committed him to prison beeing sore hurt, and caused him to bee
shut vp in the base court of the castle of Madrid. And not contented therewith, the
King went expresly to Segobia, thinking there to surprise the Bishop of the same City,
called Don Iohn de Arias, brother to Don Pedro, but the Bishop hauing notice of
what was done to his brother, retired himselfe thence: wherefore the King seeing that
he was escaped, dissembled his intent; neuerthelesse all honest people were greatly offended
to see the King without discretion to oppresse his faithfull seruants, and not dare
to lay hand vpon rebels.
The Deputies of the townes, and the captaines of the communalties made meanes
for Don Pedro's deliuerance, which the King granted, all men beeing pleased therewith,
except the confederates, who neuer left practizing with the King till they drew him
to condiscend to goe along with them to Playsance, there to conferre with more ease
and better commodity: which beeing allowed of by diuers of his councell, hee would
needs depart thence with the Queene his wife, the Infanta Donna Isabell, and Donna
Ioane his supposed daughter, vpon the safe-conduct of the Earle of Playsance. This
resolution being vnderstood by others of the Kings faithfull seruants,Tumult at Madrid. which were not
made acquainted therewith, they assembled in the Church of Saint Gines, where it
was resolued, that seeing that the King would needs goe on to his destruction, the lower
Colonells or Captaines of the communalties, with foure other of his owne seruants
should bee sent vnto him, to aduertize him of the daunger of such a conference, at the

place whether he ment to goe and if he would persist in his determination, then to protest,
that they would hinder his iourney by armes. The King tooke this message in
good part, and feigning to consent thereto, debated againe with those which did allow
of that iourney: wherefore holding his purpose, there arose such a tumult in the City
as the Archbishop of Siuill and the Countesse of Playsance, fearing that the people
would fall vpon them, in all hast ranne out of the towne, and waited for the King on the
other side of the riuer, right ouer against the castle, accompanied with three hundred
horse: the King being ready to come forth, the mutiny did so encrease, as the people
and those of the Court who were discontented with that iourney,The king will held by force and kept ^^em the amo^^shes of (...) whereinto he headlong ran. running to arme
themselues, went out of the towne, crying out, kill those traitors that lead away the King,
whom they compessed about and withheld by force. The Archbishop and the Countesse
being in great feare, fled to Illesca, where the Infant Don Alphonso lay, with whom
they passed ouer the mountaine, and retired to Areualo. King Henry being brought
backe to his lodging, receiued a guarde to preuent the practizes of the confederates.
The Court soone after remooued to Segobia, whether Pedro of Hontibero was sent,
by the league, hauing in charge to trie if hee could draw Pedro Ari^s de Auila to their
party, but he lost his labour: and where force could not preuaile, treasons and deceits
were set on foote of all sides, for Pedro de Silua captaine of Olmedo deliuered vp that
place to the confederates, who presently lodged therein: by reason whereof the King
sent to will the Marquis of Santillana to lie with fiue hundred horse at Saint Christofers,
a Bourrough halfe a mile distant from Segobia. The King at the request of the Marquis,The house of Mendoza at this time, gouerne the kingdom of Castile.
committed Donna Ioane, whom he maintained for his daughter, to the keeping of
D. Inigo Lopes de Mendoca Earle of Tendilla his brother, who vnder good guarde, placed
her in the castle of Buytrago: the Marquis of Santillana, the Earle of Tendilla and
the Bishop of Calaorra brethren, were at that time of the councell of State and did rule
the Kingdome.
Those of Medina del Campo, beeing continually vexed by the garrisons of the
confederats which held La Mote; demaunded aide; wherefore the King in their behalfe
drew neere to Cuellar. Thither came secretly D. Pedro de Velasco, eldest sonne to the
Earle of Haro, by the commandement (as hee said) of his father, who craued pardon of
the King for offending him, protesting euer afterwards to become his faithfull seruant,
and to bring seuen hundred horse to his seruice, three hundred of which should bee genets;
and a certaine number of footmen for the succour of Medina. The King, who of
his owne nature was but to milde, and at that time had need of men, did freely pardon
him, and sent him backe for those men which hee offred. Other Noblemen were also
sent for by the King, namely the Earle of Alua who made no great hast.
Don Pedro de Velasco beeing returned with the seauen hundred horse, all the forces
came to Cuellar. It is reproted, that Don Pedro vsed these speeches to the King. Sir, the
Earle my father hath commanded mee to present this writing vnto you (it was a gift for the
tenths at sea) beseeching you to signe and grant it, and to receae from him this ayde of
horse and foote: and if you shall refuse him this grant, hee hath put it to my choyce to doe as
I shall thinke good. The King did very easily yeeld to his request, considering what
great need hee had of his seruice. By this time the Kings Armie was very stronge, and
diuerse of the great Lords of the Kings Councell, being tired with such toyles which
were to no purpose, and would neuer bee ended, vnlesse some violent proceedings
might be vsed, were of opinion to seeke meanes to come to blowes, and therefore they
drew neere to Olmedo, prouoking the confederates (who had there assembled their
forces) to battaile: the which was resolued and determined, albeit the King withstood
it.
As the army marched to Olmedo, there arriued in the Kings campe a King at armes,
sent by the Archbishop of Siuill to D. Bertrand de la Cueus Duke of Albuquerque, to
giue him to vnderstand that there were forty Knights of the confederates of Prince
Alphonso's traine, that had vowed vpon the daie of battaile to seeke him out in the
middest of the rankes, and to kill him: wherefore hee wished him to fight that day in
disguised armor.

This valiant and generous Knight, whom King Henry with better reason might
haue made a sharer in his Scepter then in his bed; answered the Herauld, that he did
highly thanke the Archbishop for the good will which hee seemed to beare him, but yet
neuerthelesse he would not disguise himselfe: then he lead him vnto his lodging and
shewed him the armour and coate of armes which he ment to weare on the day of battaile,
saying that he esteemed his honour before any daunger, and therefore he intreated
him to view and marke dilligently the fashion of his armes, and the blason and deuices
about them, to the end hee might make the better and more certaine report thereof to
the forty Knights, who by that meanes should be sure to know him in the battaile: then
giuing him a garment of silke with a good handfull of duckats, he dismissed and sent him
backe, who did not faile to relate what he had seene, or heard the Duke say: Beside this,
as King Henries army drew neere within two small leagues of Olmedo, D. Garcia of Padilla
being come forth of the towne, with fifty light horse to discouer their forces, the
Duke sent to speake with a certaine Knight of that troupe who was borne in Vbeda, who
with his captaines leaue came and talked with him.
The Knight being come into the Dukes presence,The Duke of Albuquerque desirous to come to battaile. was by him questioned what the
confederate Lords in Olmedo ment to doe, and whether that to his knowledge they
would come to fields to offer battaile: he answered him, that he did not onely beleeue
it, but that he did assuredly know, that if they came nere the city, they would then present
them battaile: the Duke againe asked the same question, and was againe by him answered
in the same manner: and if they doe so quoth the Duke, I will giue you ten thousand
Marauedies of yeerely rent. The Knight accepted the offer, and gaue him great thankes,
and was staied their, vntill the Kings whole army arriued, to the end that he might see it:
Now the Duke had notice, that halfe the confederates forces were not ioyned, and
therefore he was the more curious to vnderstand their resolution: but soone after there
came vnto them the Admiralls troupes, with those of the Archbishop of Siuill, of the
Earle of Playsance, and his daughter the Countesse of Belalcacar, they themselues remayning
at home in their owne houses, whilest these things were a doing, the Marquis
of Villena, who was a great vndertaker and very pollitike in all his enterprises, hauing
drawne the prior of Vdes and the thirteene Electors of the order of Saint Iames to Ocagna,The Marquis of Villena D. Iohn de Pacheco causeth himselfe to bee chosen Maister of Saint Iames.
he caused himselfe to be chosen Maister of the same order, in cannonicall manner,
without the councell aduise or consent of King Henry, Prince Alphonso, nor the Sea
of Rome, and without any approbation of the Estates of the Kingdome, and intituled
himselfe Maister of Saint Iames, to the great admiration of the Earle of Benauent, who
laied claime therevnto by reason of the Kings promise: yet in processe of time the Marquis
Don Iohn de Pacheco was confirmed therein by the Pope.
The confederate Knights who were within Olmedo, with the Infant Don Alphonso,
being assured that the Kings army came vnder the walles of Olmedo with intent to giue
them battaile, if occasion were offered, came forth to fields to make resistance, and
then diuers messages and negotiations for peace were sent from side to side, but to no
purpose.
Amongst those which endeauored to pacifie matters and to keepe them from fighting
was Don Pedro of Peralta,(...) of Olmed^. Constable of Nauarre, whose daughter was married to
Troylus Carillo of Acugna sonne to the Archbishop of Toledo: all treaties ceassing,
the two armies made themselues ready to fight, being deuided (as the manner then was)
into sundry ^squadrons, the one following the other, the King was not there in person,
but the Infant Alphonso appeared armed at all points, mounted vpon a strong
braue courser, riding from troupe to troupe encouraging his army. The Archbishop
of Toledo did weare vpon his armor a white stole, poudered with red crosses, leading
a squadron of three hundred and threescore horse, where Alphonsos standard
stood, and that day hee approued himselfe a better souldiar and man at armes then
an Ecclesiasticall pastor, for he was hurt in the left arme, and yet for all that hee would
not giue ouer fighting so long as he could sit on horse-backe, the battaile beeing cruell
and furious for the space of three houres, inclining to neither side.
On the other side the Duke of Albuquerque behaued himselfe verie valiantlie;

but if he had not beene rescued in time by his father-in-law the Marquis of Santillana, he
had remayned a spoyle to the Knights which had conspired his death, who did furiously
poursue him: but he freed himselfe very nobly, and slue with his owne hand D. Fernand
of Fonseca, who dyed within foure dayes after.
Those which write of this battell fought in the yeare 1467.1467. two and twenty yeares
and three moneths after another fought in the same place,An vncertaine victorie. do not certainely affirme
whose side got the victorie: for they of the Kings part tooke Don Alphonsos standard,
with Don Diego de Melo that carried it, who was sore hurt: the Standards of the Earle
of Plaisance, and his daughter the Countesse of Belalcacar, those of the Arch-bishop of
Seuill, and Don Garcia of Padilla, who conducted the troupes of the Marquis of Villena,
Master of Saint Iames then absent, fell likewise into the Kings power, diuers Knights
of these bands were slayne, and about threescore and tenne taken, among whome was
the Earle of Luna, and likewise Don Henry Henriques, third sonne to the Admirall Don
Frederick. The Confederates also tooke King Henryes banner, although it was not displayed,
but found wrapt vp among the baggage, a great part whereof they brought to
Olmedo, and besides that, they tooke seauen other standards, they slue two hundred and
eight horse-men, and tooke more than foure hundred prisoners, and yet for all that, the
one side as well as the other, published the victorie for his owne, and bone-fires were
made in token of ioy, as well at Medina del campo, as at Olmedo. All men affirme that
they fought there in great disorder, and in manifest contempt of all martiall discipline:
the footmen on either side were rascally people, who thought vpon nothing but pillage,
or flight.
The King who was absent from the Battell, hauing gathered his people together,
made the same night a triumphant entrie into Medina del campo, giuing rest to his
souldiers who had need thereof, the guard of the towne beeing committed to the inhabitants,
against those which held la Mote. The Ensignes and Standards which were won,
were carryed by the councell of the Bishoppe of Calaorra, against the Kings will, into
the Church of Saint Andrew and there left.
The victorie published and beleeued generally to bee on the Kings side, drew diuers
Lords to his seruice: neuerthelesse others did ioyne themselues with the Confederates,
in the number of whome was the Earle of Alua, whome the King had a long time expected
in vaine, hoping to meet him at that encounter, who receyued of the Arch-bishop
and the Marquis the townes of the Arch-bishops bridge, and Montalban, for the which
he was greatly blamed. The Master of S. Iames, who was absent from the battell, being
come from Ocagna to Olmedo, was greatly discontented that they had fought, and did
greatly complaine of them that had giuen consent thereunto.
Certaine dayes after, Antonio de Veneris Bishop of Leon arriued at Medina del campo,
sent as Legat from the Pope and the Consistorie of Rome,The Pope sends a leg^te to treat of peace. with ample authoritie,
but no way limited, especially to treate about the pacifying of the warres of Castile: king
Henry receyued him very honorably, and with great modestie and reuerence to the Sea
of Rome from whence he was sent, he did answer his Legacie, telling him neuerthelesse
that he doubted his iourney would prooue fruitlesse, because of the rebels obstinaci^.
First of all the Legate enioyned both sides vppon paine of excommunication, to lay by
their armes for one whole yeare, to the end they might the better treate of peace: but the
Confederates thinking that these State-matters and temporal differences were no game
for the Pope,The confederat Lords contemn the censures. made no account of Ecclesiasticall censures in that point. It was thought
fit that the Legate should conferre with the confederate Lords betwixt Medina and Olmedo.
The appointed day beeing come, the Legate came to the place, where with great
insolencie, he was compassed about with aboue three hundred horse of the league, which
did greatly amaze him, for he was none of the stoutest Prelats. Presently after, Don Iohn
de Pacheco,The Master of S. Iames contradicts the Popes authoritie ouer the temporal states Master of Saint Iames, the Earle of Luna, the Bishop of Coria, with other
Lords of the same faction came in place, vnto whome the Legate shewed his faculties
and authoritie, to do in Spaine what he thought good: Wherupon the Master of Saint
Iames made him this answer, that those which had informed the Pope, that hee had any
power or authority to dispose of the estate of the Kingdomes of Spaine or Leon, had

deceyued him: for that did belong onely to him, and to the other great Lords of the
same countrie.
At this meeting, nor yet at another which was made nere to Montejo de la Veja, was
there any thing concluded on: Wherefore hee beganne to proceed against the Confederates
by Ecclesiasticall censures;Appeale from the Pope to the next generall Councell. but the Lords of the League did appeale to the first
generall Councell, the Licentiate Iohn d' Alco^er, and the Doctor Alphonso of Madrigal
throwing in their appeales. The Lega^e perceyuing his labour to bee lost, would haue
gone backe to Medina, but diuers of the Rebells followed after him, crying out, Wee appeale,Insolencie against the Legate.
we appeale, and with great outrages brought him backe to Olmedo: the Arch-bishoppe
of Toledo, and the Master of Saint Iames seeming to bee discontented therewith,
tooke vppon them to defend him: Whilest the Legate was thus handled, the Confederates
practised how to draw to their side Pedro Arias of Auila, and the Bishop Don
Iohn of Segobia his brother, who beeing alreadie offended with the wrong, which the
King had offered them, (whereof wee haue spoken heretofore) were easily perswaded
thereunto: the chiefe doers in this businesse were Lewis de Mesa, Pedro Arias his familiar
friend, Perucho of Munsaras Captaine of the Castle of Segobia, Fryar Rodrigo of Mesa
Abbot of Parral, and brother to Lewis, with other Monkes and Church-men, who did
lay a plotte to deliuer the cittie of Segobia to the Confederate Lords.
Queene Ioane, Donna Izabella, with other Ladies and Gentlewomen of great place,
were lodged in the pallace of the same Citie, where they had notice of this practise, some
of them with great feare beganne to dislodge: the Queene withdrew her selfe into the
Cathedrall Church,The citty of Seigo^ia deliuered to the confederate Lords. where thinking her selfe not safe enough, shee entreated to bee receyued
into the Castle, with the Dutchesse of Albuquerque and other Ladies: but the
Infanta Donna Izabella had no will to remooue: for beeing incensed against king Henry
her brother, shee had intelligence with the Prince Don Alphonso, and did wholy adhere
to the Confederates, who entred into the Cittie in armes, through a false port of the
Bishoppes lodgings, and made themselues master thereof without any resistance, to the
great griefe of the Inhabitants.
The Lords of the League went directly to the pallace to salute the Infanta, who committed
her selfe wholly into their hands. The king hauing notice hereof, departed very
melancholy from Medina, with such troupes as hee could get about him, and marched
towards Cuellar, where in the mid way, the Castle of Iscar was assayled (at the intreatie
of the Earle of Treuigno) in which Castle the Earle of Plaisance kept the Earle of Treuigno's
mother in dishonest manner: the place beeing taken, the Countesse was sent away
prisoner by her sonne into his countrie. The losse of Segobia did much grieue the
the King: for his aboade there pleased him aboue all other, as well because hee was
brought vp there from his infancie,The King forsaken of his people. as for the wood of Balsain, and other places thereabouts
fitte for hunting, and also in regard of his treasure which lay in the castle thereof:
and the griefe and feeling of his aduersities, did so oppresse him, as beeing desperate and
almost besides himselfe, he was contented to be drawne by the deuices of the Master of
Saint Iames to the towne of Coca, vnder the promise and assurance of the Archbishoppe
of Seuille, not telling, or making it knowne to any of the Lords or Knights of
his trayne, and taking but a very few of his houshold seruants with him.
Wherefore all men beeing discontented with these courses, which did manifestly
tend to the ruine of the King, and of those which did him seruice, they with-drew themselues
discontented to their owne houses. The Kings Officers and houshold seruants seeing
themselues forsaken and left in so pittifull and miserable estate, were ashamed to tell
vnto whome they did belong, when they came to any place.
The Licentiate Diego Henriques, the Kings Chronicler, hauing obtayned a safe conduct,Diego Henriques King Henries Chronicler
came to Segobia, where hee had a house, wherin were diuers goods and papers
of great consequence: but neuerthelesse he was taken, and ill intreated, his goods stolen,
and his writings scattered abroade, to the great danger of his person, if God had
not drawne him out of their hands: for the Rebels were greatly mooued against him, because
that in his written memories and chronicles hee had set downe the truth of their
proceedings.

The king beeing come to Coca, they changed the place, and their opinion was to
conferre at Segobia, in the castle of which cittie hee was lodged and entertayned by the
Earle of Alua, and the Master of Alcantara, albeit that Peruch^ de Munsaras, Captaine
of the place, was not well contented therewith.
The King and the Master of Saint Iames meeting afterward in the great Church,Other agreement betwixt the king and the rebels. after
diuers reasons on either side, it was agreed, that the king should consent, that the fort
of Segobia should remayne vnder the command of the Master of Saint Iames, the kings
treasures and mooueables to be kept safe and restored to him, who should send them to
the castle of Madrid, the Captaine-ship of which, with the keeping of those things, the
King should graunt to Perucho de Munsaras: Moreouer, that the Queene should bee giuen
in hostage and left in trust with the Arch-bishop of Seuile for sixe moneths, within
which time the King should be restored to all his former honour and dignitie. These articles
were afterward performed, the treasures transported to Madrid, and Queene Ioane
was sent to the castle of Alaejos,Euill life of Queene Ioan^ of Castile. where holding on the course of life which the King had
taught her, shee fell in loue with a certaine young man, by whome shee had two children,
which was the cause of many vnworthie outrages, as shall bee hereafter declared.
After this treatie, the King beeing in as lamentable an estate as before, went vppe and
done his kingdome, no otherwise than if hee had beene a poore Gentleman. In this
meane equipage, he arriued in the territories of Don Aluaro of Estuniga, Earle of Plaisance,
who with the Countesse his wife did intertaine him very honorably, according to
his degree, much compassionating his miseries and aduersities, wherewith beeing mooued,
they comforted him as much as lay in their power: but it stood him in no stead
against the power and obstinacie of the Master of Saint Iames.
This yeare 1468. died Don Fernand of Buxan,An. 1468. Bishop of Siguen^a: the Deane of the
same Church, named Don Iohn of Madrid,Contention for the Bishopricke of Siguenta. seized both vppon the goods of the partie 
deceassed, and vppon the Cittie likewise, and hauing learned that a good Bishoppricke
is a thing worthie to bee desired, hee caused himselfe to bee chosen Bishoppe by the
Chapter, strengthening himselfe with the partie of Don Alphonso, and the Confederats:
but Pope Paul the second reiected this election, and gaue the Bishoppricke to the Cardinall
Don Iohn de Mella Bishoppe of Zamorra, who poursuing the possession thereof
by armes, (the Deane not obeying, and appealing from the Pope to a Councell) dyed.
Then the Pope bestowed it vppon Don Pero Goncales of Mendoza, Bishop of Calaorra,
the kings loyall and faithfull seruant, and excommunicated the Dean and his Chanons,
graunting their benefices and Prebendshipps to others. For all this the Deane would
not yeeld, but made greater resistance than before, notwithstanding that the King offered
him, if he would leaue the Bishoppricke of Siguenca, to giue him that of Calaorra
with the Abbey of La Huerta to boot.
Now seeing that neither right, force, threatnings, nor kind and louing proffers
would preuayle with this Deane, a polliticke deuise was thought vppon: for they practised
with an houshould seruant of the Deanes named Goncal Brauo, who on a night shold
find meanes for Pedro d' Almacan, Captaine of the Castle of Atienca, to scale the fort
of Siguenca, where the Deane and his brother were taken and brought to Atienca. The
Bishop Don Pero Goncales hauing notice hereof, poasted thither in all hast, and made
himselfe Master of the cittie and fort: the King confirmed to Pedro of Almacan the Captaine-shippe
of Atienca, and the Pope gaue him a good Channonrie in the Church of
Siguenca in recompence of the good seruice which hee had done to the king and the
Apostolike sea of Rome.
In the meane space that these Ecclesiasticall businesses were mannaged with such violence,
the Earle of Plaisance had oftentimes treated with the Marquis and the Confederates
in the Kings behalfe, that the matters agreed vpon at Coca and Segobia might
be performed, but they had no desire thereunto: Wherefore hee sent vnto them a gentleman
of his, named Pedro d' Ontiberos to draw them to some conclusion, beeing then
at A^eualo with the Prince Don Alphonso. This Gentleman brought backe no answer:
for after that hee had negotiated with the confederate Lords, as hee returned towards
Plaisance, hee was vppon the way assayled and slaine by Gyles of Biuero, the quarrell

beeing about their wiues, and at the same time Garcia Mendez of Badajos, one of the
Kings Captaines, was slayne at Burgos by the people, for as he had made warre vppon
the inhabitants,Garcia Mendez de Badaio slaine in Burgos. who held the part of the League, his friend Pedro de Macuelo drew him
into the towne to conferre together about the peace: his death did greatly displease his
friends, and other good men, but the rude and tumultuous people could not be contained
within any bounds.
Pope Paul hauing notice of the small respect which the Confederates in Castile had
made of his Legate Don Antonio de Venerie, Bishoppe of Leon, was highly displeased
therewith: but hee wrote neuerthelesse to King Henry, aduising him to pardon his rebels
if they did acknowledge their faults, and returne to his obedience, comforting him besides,
concerning his aduersities, by examples drawne from the holy Scriptures to the
same purpose: he sent likewise a briefe to the Confederates, enioyning them, vpon paine
of his curse, no longer to call Don Alphonso King, but to acknowledge King Henry for
their naturall and lawfull Prince, and to craue his pardon: The Confederates sent the
Abbot of Paraces, and the commannder Fernand d'Arze, the Infants Secretarie to the
Pope, to giue him reason for what they had done, and to informe him of the iustice of
their cause: but for certayne dayes space, the Pope would not suffer them to enter into
the Cittie of Rome. At the last, vppon their great and earnest intreaties to haue audience,
they were permitted to enter, vppon this condition, that they should haue an especiall
care, in any of their speeches, not once to name Don Alphonso King. Hauing deliuered
their message, they were by the Pope sharpely reprehended, who threatened
them and the Confederates more bitterly than hee had done by his briefe, and it is reported,
that in a Propheticall spirit, hee declared the death of the Infant Don Alphonso
to be neere, after which hee told them, they would find themselues greatly perplexed:
with such like speeches the Ambassadors returned into Spayne.
 The Cittie of Toledo taking part with the League, the Secretarie Aluar Gomes of Cite
reall commaunded therein,Se^^tion in Toledo. who stood excommunicate, by reason that hee was one of
the chiefe of the League: it happened vppon a day, that he came into the great Church,
at such time as the Priests sang diuine seruice, who perceyuing him, presently left off
their singing: but hee sent vnto them, and commaunded them to go on, which they refused,
sending a certaine Clearke to him, who vsed many proud words, wherewith a
souldiar of Don Aluars trayne, beeing mooued, drew his sword, and thrust him thorough
the bodie, so as hee fell downe dead in the place: whereupon arose such tumults
and seditions in the Cittie, as after diuers murthers, burnings, and other execrable outrages,
the Cleargie and their partakers remayned masters of the cittie, chasing away and
banishing the opposites. Then they sent the Licenciate Don Fernand Calderon with a
message to the Infant Don Alphonso, to intreate him to allow of that which they had
done, and to request him to graunt vnto them the goods which they had seized on, and
taken from those which were slayne in the tumult.
The Prince hauing heard the demaunds of those of Toledo,Magnanimitie and iustice of Don Alphonso. albeit hee was but very
young, made them a noble and iust answer: First he shewed the Licenciate, that it did
very ill become him, who was a learned man, and therefore ought to be wise, to be employed
in such a message: then detesting the outrages of the Toledains, he told him freely,
that hee would neuer authorize their wickednesse, nor giue away other mens goods
so vniustly: the Licenciate replyed, and told him, that he vndertooke that message with
a desire to do him seruice, and for to acquaint him with the good affection which those
of Toledo did beare vnto him, who would not fayle to reuolt from his obedience to the
King his brother, if hee graunted not their request: Whereunto hee answered, that therin
they might do as they pleased, for he was resolued neuer to commit so vnreasonable
and dishonest an act,The Infant perseueres in being iust. hatefull to God and man, and that they ought to bee satisfied and
contented, that their offences were winked at and not punished, which perhappes time
 would bring to passe.
Wee haue shewed heretofore,Desire to be rich, takes away all natural and ciuill respect. how that Don Alphonso Pimentell Earle of Benauent,
had beene disappoynted of the Master shippe of Saint Iames, whereunto he layd claime
by his father-in-law Don Iohn de Pacheco, Marquis of Villena: from thence arose deadly

hatred against them, which prouoked and stirred vp the Earle to lay diuers traynes to
take away his life: and this yeare, the Earle missed very narrowly of his purpose and determination,
in the Infant Don Alphonso's house at Areualo, but the Marquis hauing intelligence
thereof, did euer after stand vppon his guard, and went abrode secretly, and
well accompanied.
The Earle neuerthelesse dissembled, and spake kindly to his father-in-law, as though
he had no such intent at all, still wayting for a fit time and place to dispatch him: then departing
from Areualo, hee came to Plaisance, where King Henry did lye, and was there
well and kindly entertayned both by the King, the Earle Don Aluaro, together with the
Countesse his wife. There the Arch-bishoppe of Seuille, the Earles of Plaisance, Benauent
and Miranda held a councell: for they had discouered how that the Marquis of Villena,
Master of Saint Iames, sought by all meanes to deceiue the King, and namely, that
hee practised with Perucho of Munsarras, who was Captaine and Keeper of the Kings
Treasures in the Castle of Madrid,A practise against the Master of S. Iames to deliuer vp the place and treasure into his hands. In
this Councell it was concluded, that they would all go thither, and carrie the King along
with them, to disappoynt the Marquis of his desseigne. The Captaine who had some
doubt, that they meant to bee ridde of him, stood vppon his guard, and would let the
King come but seldome, and with a small company attending vppon him into the fortresse.
In the meane time, the Cleargie of Toledo and their Faction, bearing no affection 
to Don Alphonso,The Clergie of Tol^do deliuer the citty to K. Henry. because he was too iust, and did looke for greater modestie in them,
then there was, practised among themselues to deliuer vppe the Cittie to King Henry.
Wherefore they gaue order to Don Pedro de Silua, Bishoppe of Badajos, who dwelt amongst
them, to trie if hee could winne or induce Don Pero Lopes d'Ayala, Gouernour
of the towne, who had marryed Donna Maria de Silua his sister, to lend a helping hand
to their proceedings.
The Bishop hauing sundrie times, with great pollicie, conferred with his sister thereupon,
and shee beeing wholly gouerned and ruled by his councell, they two sent Fernand
de Riuadeneyra to King Henry (not acquainting Don Pero Lopes of Ayala with any matter)
to aduertise him what they had determined for his seruice, and to aduise him for
the better effecting of their purpose,Meanes deuised by the Bishop of Badaios and his sister, to giue the king en^rance into Toledo. to come secretly to Toledo. Now their intent and
determination was, to bring the King secretly into the towne into the Bishoppes house,
and then vnder colour of other businesse, to send for Don Pero Lopes of Ayala, and to
cause him to come suddenly into the Kings presence, thinking by that meanes to make
him easily to graunt whatsoeuer the King would demaund: The King leauing the Arch-bishoppe
of Seuille, the Earles of Plaisance and Benauent in Madrid to looke vnto his
Castle and treasure,Indiscretion of King Henry. came to Toledo, where hee entred by night disguised, by the
gate called Cambron: but as hee went toward the Bishoppe of Badajos house, who dwelt
in the Monasterie of Saint Pedro Martyr, of the Order of the Fryars Preachers, a seruant
of the Marshall Payo de Ribera, who was greatly affectionate to the seruice of Don Alphonso,
knew him, and went and told his master of it. The Marshall went instantly to
find out Don Pero of Ayala, and gaue an alarme thorough the towne: the people put on
armes, and came running in a confused manner to enuiron the house and Monasterie,
where the King did lye, who was in great danger, and without all doubt hee had beene
taken by the mutinous people, had not Fernand de Riuadeneyra employed his best indeuours
for his safetie and deliuerie: Then the Gouernour sent his two sonnes, Pero of
Ayala,VVisedome of the Gouernour Don Pero Ayala. and Alphonso de Silua, with Peralfan of Ribera, sonne to the Marshall Payo, to intreat
the King to depart the Cittie, and to auoyd the present danger, assuring him that
shortly matters would bee brought to better passe, and the Cittie restored vnto him:
Whereunto the king yeelding most willingly, they found meanes about mid-night to
put him out of the towne; and those three Knights kept him companie awhile vppon
the high way to Madrid.
Now before hee came foorth of his lodging,Vnmannerlinesse of Peralfan de Ribera. the King who had ridden sixteene miles
that day vppon his owne horse, intreated Peralfan de Ribera to lend him that which hee
rode vppon, and to take his which was wearie, but hee like an vnciuill and discourteous

Knight, refused it, which the two breethren of Ayala vnderstanding, lighted on foote,
and besought the King to take both their horses, one for his owne person, and the other
for his Page, the which he thankfully accepted of: then these two brothers went with him
out of the towne on foote, with Fernand de Riuadeneyra, who would not go with him to
Madrid, but told him that he would tarrie at Toledo, where he would liue and dye for
his seruice.
As soone as he was come backe into the cittie, the Gouernour Don Pero Lopes of
Ayala, committed him prisoner in the castle, and commanded the Bishop of Badajos to
depart out of the cittie within an howers space: by these diligent meanes, hee like a wise
and discreet person did appease the tumultuous Toledans.Courtesie fully recompenced. Not long after the king sent a
graunt to the two brothers of Ayala, who had giuen him their horses, of a perpetuall
pention of three-score thousand Marauidis, in recompence of their loue and loyalty towards
him.
When all men had layd downe their weapons, and the citie at quiet, the Gouernour
returned home to his house, where he found his wife almost besides her selfe with griefe,
for that the King, hauing come to Toledo by her perswasion, had beene so vnreuerently
vsed and receyued, and constrayned to flie away by night: but like a discreete woman
shee gathered her spirits together, and did in such sort put her husband in mind of his
dutie, as shee perswaded him to inuent some fitter meanes to reduce that Cittie vnder
the obedience of King Henry, their true and lawfull Prince: which Don Pedro much affecting,
after that hee had vnderstood the minds of the Sheriffes and Iurates of the Cittie,
the fift day after the Kings departure,The Gouernor D. Pero of Ayala putteth Toledo in the kings power. hee commaunded the Marshall Payo de Ribera and
his sonne, to get them home to their owne houses: Whereunto they yeelded without
any delay, and foorth-with the whole Cittie beganne to cry, God saue king Henry, and
let the Rebels bee destroyed, so much power hath the presence and authoritie of one onely
man to appease or stirre vp a multitude. The castle gates, bridges, and other strong
places, beeing seized vppon by the Gouernour, and furnished with people at his deuotion
for the Kings seruice, Fernand of Riuadeneyra beeing likewise set at libertie, the
morrow after, the king came to Toledo, and was lodged in the Gouernour Don Pero's
house, where he gaue Donna Maria of Silua great thankes for the good seruice which
shee had done him, and called backe the Bishop of Badajos, who was principall authour
of that enterprise. After dinner, sundry mechanicall tumultuous fellowes, two thousand
in number, came before the kings lodging, crauing confirmation of the citties priuiledges,
and to be freed from the tribute called Alcauales: the king desirous to be ridde
of this insolent crew, graunted their petition.
The next day, the selfe same raskally companie returned, asking other confirmations
of writings, gifts, graunts, and liberties: wherewith the king beeing mooued, the
Gouernour who had assembled men at armes, by reason of the former dayes tumult,
ioyned them with the officers of iustice, and ranne vppon the multitude, who after they
had hurt and ouerthrowne diuers of them, and put the rest to flight, certaine of the principall
were committed to prison, and afterward vppon enquirie of the matter, according
to their deserts, some of them were hanged, and the residue lost their eares, and were
whipped. This tumult beeing appeased, there remayned yet in the tower or steeple of the
great Church, the Abbot of Medina, and other Channons, who tooke the part of the
Arch-bishoppe Don Alphonso Carillo of Acugna, who were beseeged by the Gouernor,
and enforced by famine to yeeld themselues, their liues beeing saued.
All troubles beeing ended, the King confirmed Don Pero Lopes in his gouernement,
enioyning the Toledans to obey him as his owne person, and so returned to Madrid,
where hee beganne to thinke anew vppon the castle and his treasures, which were
in the power of Captaine Perucho of Munsaras, whome hee did not grealy trust, and
not without cause: for the Master of Saint Iames, and the Arch-bishoppe of Toledo, had
wonne him to deliuer vp that place into their hands: But the king vppon a time finding
meanes to enter into the castle, beeing well accompanied, Perucho was constrayned to
giue place, who notwithstanding that he had slayne the Porter, and begunne to rayse
a mutinie, was neuerthelesse taken, and forced to begge pardon; the which, the king

beeing mild and gentle, graunted vnto him, and gaue him leaue moreouer to carry away
what he would, and bestowed summes of money vppon him, sending him home to his
owne house. These newes did greatly trouble the Infant Don Alphonso, who was termed
King: but aboue all, the losse of Toledo did amaze the Marquis, and the Arch-bishoppe
with their Confederates: Wherefore they departed from Areualo, and tooke the ready
way to Auila, giuing out that they went to beseege Toledo. The Infant Alphonso being
arriued at Cardegnoca, a towne neere to Auila, hee was stricken with the plague which
infected the whole country, whereof hee dyed the fift day after, which was vppon the
fift of Iuly, in the yeare 1468. hauing beene declared King three yeares before,Death of ^he In^ant Don. Alphonso. hee dyed 
not without suspition of poyson, the which was prodigiously published and beleeued
thorough the whole Realme three dayes before it was true indeed: by this accident Pope
Paules Prophecie was verified: for the Confederates at that time found themselues in
great perplexity, and wonderfully destitute of counsell: his bodie for that time was kept
in Areualo in the Monasterie of Saint Francis, and since transported to Burgos to the
Abbey of Mirefloure, where his father King Iohn was buried.
The confederate Lords consulting vppon what was best to bee done, now that they
had lost the Prince Alphonso, all of them in a manner were of opinion, that King Henry
was to be resisted, and that Donna Izabella his sister, was to bee proclaymed and crowned
Queene of Castile in her dead brothers stead: the Arch bishop of Toledo beeing deputed
in all their names to go vnto her to exhort her, to receiue this honour and dignitie,
who in a well-composed Oration, hauing propounded vnto her the aduice of all the
Lords of the League: the Infanta, who was endowed with great iudgement and singular
pietie,D Izabella reiecteth the title of Queene of Castile. made him this answer, that shee could not entertaine in her heart any desire of
rule which might preiudice her brother King Henry, vnto whome both by diuine and humane
lawes the Kingdome did appertaine: the which God had manifestly declared, confirming
him therein, as well by the victorie of Olmedo, as by the death of the Infant D.
Alphonso: neuerthelesse, shee did greatly thanke ^hem for their loues, which shee could
feele with more profite, and lesse labour, if it would please them, by agreeing with the
King hir brother, to procure him to declare her heire to his Kingdomes after his decease,
and to commaund, that oath should bee made vnto her to the same effect, according to
the custome of Spayne: the which shee propounded vnto them, not so much for any
desire that shee had to raigne, as by that meanes to keepe the kingdome of Castile from
falling into the hands of strangers, and into any other bloud then that of Castile, meaning
thereby donna Ioane, who was borne in adulterie.
This wise and vertuous answer,D. Izabellas wise answer breakes the League, and procureth the peace of Castil. was of so great waight and consequence, and so admired
by all the Lords of the League, as changing their minds, they resolued to follow the
Infantaes aduice, and to trye if they could winne the King to condiscend thereunto, the
Master of Saint Iames taking vppon him the managing of their businesse, and presuming
to bring it to passe: for (quoth he) I know the kings nature, who doth easily forget
things that are past, and I doubt not but he will accept of this condition, for to liue in
peace, and to recouer his former dignitie, and will graunt a generall pardon for all that
is past.
Vppon the newes of the Infant Don Alphonso's death, the Arch-bishop of Seuile, the
Earles of Plaisance, Benauent, and Miranda, with others which were neere the kings person
at Madrid, did make a new oath of allegeance vnto him, and messengers were dispatched
to the Lords of the League, to admonish them to desist from their wicked practises,
and to submit themselues to the Kings obedience: the confederates answered, that
they would send some man of authoritie to the king, and soon after they did write to the
Arch-bishop of Seuil, intreating him to come to Auila, to treate vpon the meanes of
agreement,The citty of Burgos yeelds to the king. who with the Kings good liking went vnto them. In the meane season the citty
of Burgos, by the meanes of Pedro of Velasco, returned to the Kings obedience. It
was concluded in Areualo, that the Confederates should intreat the king, that the Infanta
Izabella might be sworne vnto, and acknowledged Princesse and heire of his kingdomes,
all other oathes made to the contrarie notwithstanding: Which beeing done,
euery of them would willingly obey him: these things beeing related at Madrid by the

Arch-bishop of Siuill, the King called a Councell thereupon, where the opinions
were diuers, some affecting Donna Ioane, whom the King still called his daughter: but
the Lord Steward Andrew de Cabrera, could so well ioyne reason to his opinion, as it was
resolued to graunt what the Confederates requested: then did they set downe these Articles:
That the Infanta Donna Izabella should bee declared Princesse of the Asturia's,A^ticles of (...) agreed vpon and
sworne vnto, as eldest heire to the Kingdomes of Castile and Leon: That pardon should
bee graunted to the Master of Saint Iames, and to the other Lords his Confederates,
for whatsoeuer they had committed against his royall Maiestie, and free and safe accesse
should be giuen them to come to Court, with restitution of all that had been taken from
them: That the King within foure moneths after should send backe his wife Queen Ioan,
and Donna Ioane his daughter into Portugall, and to be diuorced from her by the Popes
authoritie: and that the citties of Auila, Vbeda, with the townes of Medina del campo,
Olmedo, and Escalona, and the Lord-ship of Molina, should be giuen to the Princesse
Donna Izabella, who might not marrie with any one without the consent of King Henry
her brother,The Lords of Mendoza not call^d to the councel^ of p^ace. whereunto she did sweare. Into this councell were not admitted the Marquis
of Santillana, nor his brother the Bishoppe of Siguenca, who were come to court
to kisse the Kings hand, vppon the newes of the death of the Infant Don Alphonso, for
they fauoured and much respected Donna Ioane, who was resident in the Castle of Buytrago
vnder the keeping of the Marquis: therefore they returned male-content to Guadalajara.
 The Queene remayning in the Castle of Alaejos vnder the power of the Arch bishop
of Seuille, (as hath beene sayd before) became enamoured on a young man,Queene Ioanes dishmest life. who had
charge to keepe her, and as some say, hee was the Bishoppes nephew, called Pedro, by
whome in time shee had two children, namely, Don Fernand, and Don Apostol, who
were brought vp in the Cittie of Tol^^o, in the Monasterie of Saint Dominick the royal,
by the Abbesse of the house, who was Aunt to their father Don Pedro: and it is reported
that the King hauing notice thereof, caused Don Pedro to be taken, to the end to punish
him as he had deserued, but that the Queene shed so many teares, as shee saued his life,
and begged him of the king, who in those matters was the most carelesse person
liuing.
Now these Lords of the house of Mendoza beeing departed discontented from the
Court, thinking themselues to be disgraced, and on the other side, fauouring Donna
Ioane, it happened that the Queene, hauing secret intelligence with certaine of her guard
within and without, with Don Lewis Hurtado of Mendoza, sonne to Ruy Diaz, escaped
from the Castle of Alaejos, causing hir selfe to bee let downe in a basket from the Castle
walles: but the rope beeing too short, and those which let her downe, thinking that
shee had beene neere to the ground, did let her fall a good height, so as shee hurt her
face and one of her feete, indangering also her life: neuerthelesse Don Lewis, who was
at the foote of the wall, tooke her vp, and layed her in a litter, standing there readie for
the same purpose, and so brought her away, the next day, to the Castle of Buytrago,
where her daughter remayned, who was called all ouer Spayne, La Bertraneja, because
shee was reputed and supposed to bee the daughter of Bertrand de la Cueua, Duke of Albuquerque.
The Arch-bishoppe of Seuille thought himselfe highly wronged by the violent
and fraudulent deliuerie of the Queene, therefore hee hastily perswaded and procured
the agreement to the Articles aboue-mentioned, and there was a place appoynted and
determined,Donna Izabe^a ^eclared Princesse and heire of Castille. where the parties should meete, betweene Zebreros and Cadahalso, at a
place called La venta du Tor de Guisando, neere to a Monasterie of Saint Hierome,
the Arch-bishoppe beeing much displeased and discontented with the Queene. These
met at Cadahalso vppon the day appoynted and set downe, the King, the Arch-bishop
of Seuille, the Earles of Playsance, Benauent, and Miranda, together with others of
the Councell on the one side: and the Infanta Donna Izabella, with the Confederates
mette at Zebreros, the chiefe of whome were, Don Alphonso Carillo Arch-bishoppe
of Toledo, Don Lewis of Acugna Bishoppe of Burgos, Don Inigo Manrique Bishop

of Coria, and the Master of Saint Iames, Don Iohn de Pacheco, euery one of these, on
the nineteenth day of September, the same yeare, one thousand, foure hundred, sixtie
eight, in the presence of the Popes Legate Antonio de Veneris, who afterward was Cardinall,
with great solemnitie in the place aboue-mentioned, tooke the oath of allegeance
and obedience to the King, and then they did sweare to, and declare, the Infanta
Donna Izabella, Princesse of the Asturia's, and eldest lawfull heire to the kingdomes of
Castile and Leon, with all the dependances, reuenues, and lands annexed and ioyned
thereunto, the Legate Apostolicke dispensing and absoluing all contrarie oathes, which
had beene made in that nature before, and confirming the present.
Great numbers and multitudes of people came running ioyfully, and with wonderfull
applause, from all parts of the Country to this sollemm^tie, hoping that peace and
quietnesse should be established and planted in Spayne, and that all factions and oppositions
of outragious and ciuill warres ceassing, Iustice should euery where flourish. That
beeing done and finished, the king with the Princesse his sister, and the reconciled Lords
came to Cadahalso, the Arch bishoppe of Toledo excepted, whose mind beeing not at
quiet, returned to Zebreto, with the Bishoppes of Burgos and Coria. The King passing
on, left his sister the Princesse, and the whole Court at Casa Rubias, and went with
the Master of Saint Iames to Pard, and to Rascafria; beeing come thither, hee caused Pedro
Arrias of Auila, together with the bishoppe his brother, to leaue the cittie of Segouia,
which greatly mooued and discontented them, the gouernement whereof was giuen
and made ouer to his Steward Andrew de Cabrera, one newly come into Castile, and
borne at Barcelona, sonne to Iohn Fernandes, and Grand child to Andrew de Cabrera:
Neuerthelesse for that time, hee commaunded no where but in the towne, for the fort
remayned in the power of the Master of Saint Iames, and because the plague was very
hotte within the Cittie of Segouia, the King, nor the Master would not come into the
towne, but retired and went backe to Casa Rubias, whither came Don Lewis of Mendoza,
with a procuration from Queene Ioane, as Protectresse of her daughter, in whose
name hee protested, that the oath made to the Princesse Izabella was of no force nor efficacie,
and appealed to the Pope from the dispensations made by the Legate, but small
account was made thereof.
Now did the Master of Saint Iames consider with himselfe, that the discontentment
of the Marquis of Santillana, and the other Lords of the house of Mendoza, with Pedro
de l'clasco, might produce and bring foorth some bad effects: Hee who seemed to bee
borne to commaund, tooke in hand to appease and qualifie them, and did inuite them
to meere at Villarejo, belonging to the Order of Saint Iames, there to consult and determine
about the affaires of State with the Kings Commissioners. Thither came Don Pero
G^^cales of Mendoza,New treaties of marriages ^se a foot by the Master of S. Iames. Bishoppe of Siguenca, and Don Pedro Velasco on the one side:
and the Arch-bishoppe of Seuille, the Master of Saint Iames, and the Earle of Plaisance
on the other: They did conclude, that the Princesse Izabella should marrie with
Alphonso King of Portugall who was a widdower: and Donna Ioane with his eldest sonne,
called Don Iohn heire to the Kingdome, and her cousin-germaine: with condition, that
if the Princesse Izabella by this marriage should haue no children, that then the issue of
Donna Ioane should succeed in the Kingdome of Castile: for the conclusion and confirmation
of which marriages, there should be an enterview of the King and Queene of
Castile, and the King of Portugall. This agreement did not please the Ladies: for the
Princesse Izabella had no desire to marrie with a widower, and the Queen feared, that vnder
color of this meeting she shold be cast off, and sent home to Portugall, according to
the treatie at la Venta du Tor de Guisando: wherefore both of them resisted this determination
with all their power, by reason wherof the Lords of Mendoza and Velasco were
very angry with the Queene and her daughter. The Master of S. Iames sollicited K. Henry
to send Ambassadors into Portugal, to request the king to meet, thinking by his coming
to win the Princesse to condiscend thereunto. And not long after, the bishop of Siguenca,
and Don Pedro de Velasco beeing with the king, perswaded him, notwithstanding the
Queenes obstinacy, vnder-hand to fauour D. Ioane, not acquainting the Arch-bishop of
Scuill, nor the Princesse Izabella therewith.

These businesses beeing managed with such inconstancie, there arriued daily messengers
at Court, who complayned, for that the King had caused this new oath to be made
to his sister, which most men thought to be a beginning of greater troubles than before,
and also because that diuers other great Lords of the Kingdome were not called to determine
vppon a matter of so great consequence. And indeed all those which were discontented
therewith, did ioyne themselues in league with the Arch-bishoppe of Toledo,
who thought himselfe to bee ill dealt with, for that he had not the Princesse Izabellain
his keeping, as in time before.
In the meane time, disorders were still committed in diuers Prouinces, especially in
Andalusia, where this yeare Don Iohn de Guzman, Duke of Medina Sidonia, and Earle of
Niebla dyed, in whose goods, lands, and dignityes Don Henry de Guzman his bastard-sonne
succeeded. It hapned at the same time neere to Toledo, that as an husband-man of
the countrie called Pero Moro, did reape a corne-field, at the very first stroake which hee
gaue with his sickle, great quantitie of bloud issued foorth of the stalkes, the which his
sons perceyuing, who were at worke in the same field, came running vnto him, thinking
that he had hurt himselfe, but seeing he had no harme, they returned to their labour, and
cut downe the corne in the same place where their father wrought, and at euery stroake
they fetched, great store of bloud issued, which they signified to the Lord of the place,
who caused it to be recorded for a strange prodigie.
 Whilest the affaires of Castile stood vppon these tearmes, King Iohn of Arragon being
ridde of his enemie Don Pedro of Portugall,Arragon. and Nauarre. did labour by all meanes, after the taking
of Tortosa, to reduce the Barcelonois to their duties: but they, like obstinat enemies
to their Prince, would not hearken thereunto. Great were the alterations which they had
among themselues after the death of this Portugois: Some were of opinion to bring
their state into the forme of a Common-wealth, like Genoa, Venice, and other places of
Italy, and others councelled to returne to the obedience of King Iohn. Each of these opinions
being reiected, they elected for their King Renee of Aniou, Duke of Lorraine, and
Earle of Prouence,Renee Aniou made king of Arragon. a Prince of the royall bloud of France, who beeing alreadie old and
decrepite, yet neuerthelesse desirous of the title of King, did accept the offer, and hauing
(with the consent of King Lewis the eleuenth) leauied souldiers in France, sent his
sonne Iohn Duke of Calabria or Lorrayne into Spaine, who at Manreca ioyned with the
Cattelans: and hauing drawne diuers of the County of Rossillon to his deuotion,
he went and beseeged Girona, where Peter of Rocabertin was Gouernour, who foorthwith
aduertised King Iohn thereof, who by reason of his indisposition and blindnes, could
not come thither in person to ayde them, but sent his son Prince Fernand, accompanied
with diuers Lords and Knights, vnto whom, aboue all other things, hee recommended
the Princes person: beeing on his way from Tortosa towards Girona, Queene Ioane his
mother, who loued him dearely, followed him the next day after: vpon the newes of the
Princes comming, the Duke of Calabria raysed his seege, and retired himselfe to Denjat,
from whence he went to Barcelona, and then returned with succors in great secrecie,
and no lesse danger. The Prince D. Fernand, desirous to looke vppon the enemie, being
come neere to the place, and prouoking the French-men to battell, they, being fortifyed
with a great number of men at armes which K. Lewis had sent them vnder the conduct of
the Earle of Armignac,The Arragonois defeated by the French. came forth into the fields, and fought and vanquished the Arragonois,
the Prince Don Fernand narrowly escaping from beeing taken, who had good
meanes offered to saue himselfe, thorough the indeauours of Rodrigo of Rebolledo, who
was taken in his stead, and brought to Barcelona, and afterwards redeemed for tenne
thousand Florens. The King Don Iohn hauing notice of this defeate, came by sea with a
great army alongst the coast of Ampurias, blind as he was, who no sooner set foote on
land, but miraculously he receiued his sight. Hauing ioyned his forces with those of the
Prince his son, he marched couragiously against the French which were in the towne of
Denjat, who putting no great trust in the place, nor yet to the inhabitants thereof, they
dislodged, and withdrew themselues to Perpignan, which by reason of engagement, was
at that time in the possession of king Lewis, where the Duke of Calabria hauing left his
army, returned into France to make new leauies.

The King of Arragon lodged his armie round about Figuera, and there wintered.
These things were done in Arragon, at the same time that the battayle of Olmedo was
fought betwixt King Henry of Castile, and the Lords of the League aboue-mentioned.
The Duke of Calabria beeing afterward returned to Perpignan with a fresh supply of ten
thousand men, obtayned from King Lewis the eleuenth, marched foorth with his forces
to assayle the enemies.
King Iohn on the other side departed from Figuera, and presented himselfe in order
of battaile within two miles neere to the French: but it is not knowne vpon what occasion
he departed thence, to beseege the towne of Peralta, where hauing begunne a furious
batterie, and alreadie made a large and sufficient breach to assayle it, the Duke of
Calabria came suddenly, and vnlooked for, vppon him in the night, not being heard nor
perceyued by the Sentinels which slept,Arragonois surprized by the French. who cut in peeces the first court of guard that
he mette with, and entring furiously into the quarters and lodgings of the beseegers, he
did strike such a terrour amongst them, as euery man leauing all that hee had behind
him, they all betooke themselues to flight in great disorder. The King escaped bare-headed,
gallowping apace towards Figuera: neuerthelesse there were some which put themselues
in defence, by whose valour the artillerie and munition was saued, and the French-men
beeing retired, they held a forme of a seege, vntill that the King with greater forces
was returned to Peralta, the which in the end he tooke. The Authors do greatly prayse
the valour of a certaine Knight of Guipuscoa named Don Iohn de Gamboa in this nightly
skirmish, who with his own hand slue three French-men at armes, who hauing his horse
slayne vnder him in the presse, did yet notwithstanding saue himselfe, hauing receyued
eleuen wounds. Lewis of Mudar, a Castillan Knight, is likewise remembred for his valor
in this fight, where Scipio Patella the Sicillian, mentioned heretofore, beeing a wise and
valiant Knight, was slayne, fighting couragiously. The French beeing victorious, not
caring for Peralta, returned to the seege of Girona, which without any difficulty they
tooke. After this, Duke Iohn of Calabria beeing come to Barcelona to take order for the
affaires of the warres, was tormented with a burning pestilentiall feauer, whereof hee
dyed this yeare 1468. to the great griefe of those of Barcelona,An. 1468. and extreame trouble of
their affaires.
Now let vs returne to Castille,Castile. where the Princesse Izabella beeing discontented with
the marriage which was treated of betwixt her and the King of Portugall, sollicited hereunto
by the Arch-bishoppe of Toledo, shee came to speake with him at Yepes: where
by the perswasion of her master-Pantler named Don Guttiere de Cardegna, he consented,
that shee should marry Don Fernand, Prince of Girona, the eldest sonne of Arragon,
and heire to the same Crowne, who was by the King his father, in fauour of that marriage,
entitled King of Sicill, much about the time of the Duke of Calabria's death, wherby
the affaires of King Iohn beganne to prosper the better: for the French hauing lost
their head, retired themselues to Perpignan, by meanes whereof the armie of Arragon
had leysure to scoure the coast of Ampurias, the Castle of which towne, with other places
yeelded themselues: so did Girona and Don Iohn Ferrier Bishoppe thereof, with the
Vicount of Cabrera, Martorella, and soone after Saint Felix, Palamos, and Vergues,
with diuers Lords and Prelates, who demaunded and obtayned pardon for their rebellion.
Whilest King Iohn was in the same countrey, Don Alphonso of Arragon, his Bastard-sonne,
did greatly molest the Barcelonois, forraging their tetritorie with a thousand
horse, and fiue thousand foot-men.
At this time the Estate of Nauarre was not very quiet:Treaty of marriage betwixt Donna Izabel and Don Fernand. for the factions of Grammont
and Beaumont raigning in the countrey, the Earle Gaston of Foix, husband to Donna
Leonora heire of the kingdome, who did gouerne it, perswaded himselfe, that hee ought
to enioy the kingly title, with all other rights and preheminences of the same, wherefore
strengthening himselfe with the Beaumontois faction, whilst his father-in-law King
Iohn was busied in the wars of Cattelogne, he possest himselfe of diuers strong places of
Nauar, and newly beseeged Tudele, whereof K. Iohn being aduertised, vpon the good hap
of his affaires in Cattelogne, he brought his army thither, which was well exercised in the
former wars, to succor those which took his part, but before he came thither, Don Lewis

seized vppon the Cittie of Pampelona, the Inhabitants whereof were for the most part
followers of those of Beaumont.
Diuers histories, of small authoritie, make mention, that this Earle of Lerin made sharp
warre not onely vppon the Nauarrois of the other Faction, but also vppon the Arragonois,
running on euen to Iaca and Exea belonging to the Knights: hauing for companion
in his counsells and enterprises, Charles of Artieda, hee tooke from the Constable
Don Pedro of Peralta, the towne of Andosilla, and from Don Inigo of Estuniga, Earle
of Nieua, that of Mendauia: then hee tooke Artaxona and Olito, with many other places,
and did many other great exploits, by reason that hee held the cittie of Pampelona,
disposing of it, as if hee had beene Lord and master. At the same time also there was
mention made of a famous theefe called Sancho Rota,Sancho Rotta, a famous t^eef Death of Q. Ioane of Arragon. whose retreate was in a mountaine
neere to Tudele, called las verdenas del Rey, who with thirtie horse that hee kept,
ranne into the country of Arragon, bringing from thence great store of pillage, vsing
all such well as hee tooke prisoners. To suppresse the insolencies done as well by him, as
by the Earle of Lerin, the people of Iaca, and the Nobility thereabouts, made shew of
entring into Nauarre: but the Earle of Lerin sent a great number of souldiers to meete
with them, conducted by Charles of Artieda, Machin de Gongorra Lord of Ciordia, Iohn
d'Ayanc, and Fernand d'Aranc, who meeting with the Arragonois neere to Sanguessa, at
a certaine bridge vppon the riuer of Arragon, they lighted from their horses, thinking
to fight with greater aduantage on foote: and comming to handy-strokes, they did hinder
the Arragonois passage, and constrayned them to returne into their owne territories.
Now King Iohns comming with his army, beeing knowne in Nauarre, encouraged
those of Grammont, and did greatly amaze the Beaumonto is, who knew very well that
they should not be able to resist such great forces: wherefore taking counsell about the
affaires with the Earle of Foix, they aduised him to make an agreement with the King
his father-in-law, who had already resolued, after his death, to leaue the kingdome to his
daughter Donna Leonora, and to permit him to enjoy it awhile, who by reason of his extreame
age could not hold out long, therefore he should be content to haue patience, and
to suffer the King to enioy the title of King of Nauarre, the small time he had to liue. The
Earle was easily drawne thereto, for he saw no hope of victorie, if hee should haue persisted
in his rash enterprise by armes: then they began to capitulate, setting downe articles,Queen Ioane her last confession.
which shall be hereafter mentioned. Before the finall conclusion whereof, King
Iohn beeing alreadie returned to Tarragona, to view his forces, and to take order for the
warre of Barcelona, his wife Queene Ioane, being a long time tormented with a canker,
which consumed her, drew neere her end. It is reported, that when shee kuew shee must
needs dye, fetching diuers sighs and grones, remembring her son Prince Fernand, shee
sayd,Death of the younger Gaston de Foix at Lib^rna. O my son, thou hast cost me deare: and it is constantly affirmed, that ^he did confesse to
haue procured and hastened the death of Prince Charles: wherwith the king was so highly
offended with her, as he would neuer afterward looke vpon her: yet neuerthelesse her ambition
gaue her this content, to see before her death, her son Prince Fernand made king
of Sicill: her body according to her will, was buried in the Monasterie of Pobleta: about
this time in the yeare 1469. hapned the lamentable death of Gaston of Foix the younger,An. 1469.
eldest son to the Earle Gaston, and to the Princesse Leonora, who should haue succeeded
them in the kingdome of Nauarre. There was a great assembly of Princes and Knights
at Liborne nere to Bourdeaux, who there met to honor and accompany Charles of France,
brother to Lewis the 11. newly reconciled to him, and promoted to the Dutchy of Guyenne
after the ciuill war: this young Knight Gaston, running at tilt, which was performed in
most costly and sumptuous maner, was run with the splinter of a lance into the bravres,
wherof he dyed, to the great griefe of as many as knew him, but especially of duke Charles
whose sister he had married, whose name was Magdalen, she being likewise sister to Lewis
by whom he had two children, to wit, Francis Phaebus, who was king of Nauar, and Earle
of Foix, and Catherine his sister, who succeeded her brother dying without heires. Happily,
it shall not be amisse to set downe here the succession of the house of Foix, which hath
inherited the kingdome of Nauar, fetching it as far as Histories make mention thereof,
to the which (as we haue sayd) the Segneury of Bearn was vnited, about the yeare 1286.

Wee finde that the countrey of Foix was erected into an Earledome about the yeare
1462. by Raymond,Originall and continuance of the house of Foix. Earle of Tholousa, who inuested therewith Bernard, youngest sonne
to Roger Earle of Carcassone, and to Adela his wife: of this Bernard, and of Beatrice,
daughter to the Earle of Beziers, was borne Roger, who was second Earle of Foix, who
begat an other Roger his successor in the Countie of Foix, second of that name, father
to Roger the third, whom he had by Eximena his second wife, hauing first of all married
a Lady of Prouence called Estinetta. Of Roger the third, and of Cicelie, daughter to Earle
Raymond of Barcelona, was borne Raymond Roger, who married a Lady called Phillip,
by whom hee had a sonne called Roger Bernard, who succeeded him in the Earledome
of Foix, and a daughter called Esclrmonde, married to the King of Majorca. This Raymond
Roger caused his lawfull wife to suffer many indignities, at the request of a Concubine,
who was of the religion of the Albigeois. Roger Bernard was then Earle of Foix
after his father, the sixt in number, about the yeare 1223. and was surnamed the great.
Hee married Brunixenda daughter to the Earle of Castelbon, by whom hee had Roger
called Rotfer Earle of Foix after him, Esclermond wife to the Vicount of Cardona, and
Cicely, wife to the Earle of Vrgell. Roger Rotfer seanenth Earle of Foix, and fift of the
name, married Brunixenda, daughter to the Vicount, on whom he begat Roger Bernard,
the sixt of that name, and eight Earle of Foix: of him, and of Manigarda of Narbona,
were borne an other Roger Bernard, who succeeded in the Earledome, Agnes who was
wife to Esquibat Earle of Bigorre, and Phillip married to Arnold of Spaine, Vicount of
Conserans. Roger Bernard, seauenth of the name, and ninth Earle of Foix, came to the
Earledome after the decease of his father, about the yeer 1262. who married Marguerit,
daughter to Gaston de Moncada Lord of Bearne, and of Martha de Foix, by whose meanes
he came to vnite the Lordship of Bearne to the Earledome of Foix, by the consent of
the estates of Bearne, to the preiudice of the Earle of Armagnac, who had married the
elder daughter of Marguerite, whom Gaston disinherited, in disdaine that her husband
the Earle of Armignac did not helpe him in certaine warres that hee made, as well as
his other sonne in lawe the Earle of Foix. Now Roger Bernard had by his wife Marguerite
of Bearne foure children, to weet, Gaston the elder, who was Earle of Foix after his
father, the tenth in number, and the first of that house, who enioyed the Lordship of
Bearne, Brunixenda wife to Helie of Perigort, Constance married to Anthonie de Leui,
Lord of Mirepoix, and Ioane who married Peter, sonne to King Iames of Arragon. Gaston
then the first of that name, Earle of Foix, and Lord of Bearne, married Ioane, daughter
to Lewis of France Earle of Eureux, and of Marguerite of Artois, from whom issued
Gaston heire to the Earledome, Roger Bernard Vicount of Castelbon, father of Mathew,
and of Isabell of Castelbon, who succeeded one after an other in the Earledome of Foix,
and Robert Bishop of Vaur. He had also a bastard sonne named the Wolfe, Lord of Arauath,
who begat Blanche wife to Iohn de Gaulti, or Grailhij Capdau de Buch. Gaston the second,
the eleuenth Earle of Foix, and second Lord of Bearne, of this family, had by his
wife Elenor, daughter to the Earle of Comming, Gaston Phoebus, who succeeded his father,
in the yeare 1344. the fourth of that name, and hauing married Agnes, daughter to
King Philip of Nauarre, had by her one onely sonne, whose murtherer hee was, hauing
found about him a box of poison, which his Vncle King Charles of Nauarre had giuen
him to kill the Earle his father, with whom he was offended, the child being in no fault at
all, for he knew not what drugge it was: wherefore at his death, hee left behind him no
lawfull children, but diuers bastards, as Iobbain who was one of those which were burnt
at the Mummery of King Charles the sixt, at the banquet of Saint Marceau, and Gratian,
and possibly that Bernard of Foix, who was maried into Spaine to Lady Isabel de la Cerde,
a Princesse of the blood royall of Castile, the stem of the house of the Dukes of Medina
Celi, if he were not sonne to Gaston the second, this mans predecessor. Then the succession
of the Earldome of Foix and Lordship of Bearne, fel to Mathew of Castelbon aboue-named,
who had no children by his wife Ioane, daughter to the King of Arragon, wherefore
his sister Isabell inherited his Lordships, who was wife to Archambald de Grailtry
Captau de Buch, from which mariage issued Iohn the elder, the sisteene Earle of Foix,
Gaston Capdau de Buch, from whom descended the Lords of Capdolat and Candale,

Archambald Lord of Nouailles Peter a friar of Motlas, since Bishop of Lescar, in the end
Cardinall and founder of the Colledge of Foix at Tholousa, and Mathew Earle of Comminges:
Iohn the fifteenth Earle of Foix (as hath beene said) and first of that name, had to
his first wife Mary of Nauarre, who dying without children, he married Ioane de Albret,
of whom was borne Gaston his successor in the Earledome of Foix and Lordship of
Bearne. The house of Foix hath beene much ennobled by the deeds of this man: for
during the wars betwixt the French and the English, in the daies of Charles the seuenth,
this Earle Gaston was he that made proofe of his valor against the English armies which
held the Dutchy of Guyenne, where he twice tooke Saint Seuer chiefe of Gascony, and
won Dax by force of armes, with great slaughter of Englishmen, who did valiantly defend
those places: he did succor Tartax beseeged seuen monthes by the goue^nor of
Bourdeaux. He restored his vncle Mathew into the Viscounty of Comminges, being dispossest
by the French King, who had installed a Spaniard therein, called Roderigo de Villandrada
Earle of Ribadeo, where he ouerthrew the castle of Rocheford, he made means
for the liberty of the Earl of Armagnac, who was in prison for hauing intelligence with
the English, and caused his goods and lands to be restored to him. Being afterwards
made Gouernor of Guyenne by King Charles, he made such cruell warre vpon the English
as in short time he in a manner dispossest them of all there forces in the same Prouince,
so as Burdeaux, the chiefe city and seat of the warre, was constrained to yeeld to
the French King, in the yeere 1451. and soone after the city of Bayonne, so as the English
were wholy excluded out of all Guyenne. Afterward when the city of Bourdeaux rebelled
against the Earle of Clermont Iohn of Bourbon, the English being recalled by them
(albeit they had possest themselues of diuers places) were by the valor and good conduct;
chiefly of the Earle Gaston beaten back and repulst, Cadillac being the last place that hee
tooke from them: In all which warres, hee was faithfully and dilligently accompanied
and aided by his brother Peter de Foix Viscount of Lautier, the original of the renouned
house of Lautrec, faither to Iohn de Lautrec Posthumus, from whom did spring Odet de
Foix, he that was the famous captaine in the warres of Lombardy and Naples. Andre de
Asperaut, and Thomas called L'Escut: Henry de Lautrec was sonne to Odet. Charles the
seuenth did so greatly fauor the Earle Gaston de Foix, as he gaue in marriage to his eldest
sonne, called Gaston, like him, his daughter Magdalen. At the arrainement of the
Duke of Alancon at Vandosme by King Lewis the eleuenth, he supplied the place of
the Earle of Thoiousa in the ranke of the Peers of France, the which preeminence hath
remained vpon such occasions in the house of Foix, the Lordships whereof were by him
encreased with the Vicounty of Narbona, and with the lands of Capdolat and other purchases,
and in the end with the crowne of Nauarre, by his marriage with Donna Leonora
of Arragon, daughter to King Iohn, of whom we now treat: of this man issued the posterity
which followes: Gaston who should haue succeeded him, who (as we haue said)
died at Liborne at the tilting which was made at the comming of Charles Duke of Guyenne,
brother to King Lewis the eleuenth, left heires behind him, Francis Phoebus, and
Catherine his children: then Iohn Lord of Narbone from whom issued Gaston Viscount
of Narbone, and since Duke of Nemours, who won the batta^le of Rauenna, where neuerthelesse
he died,Gencalogie of Nauarre. and Germain, second wife to Fernand King of Spaine: of Gaston and
Elenor were borne, the third sonne named Peter who was Cardinall, and the fourth,
Iames, a valiant Knight, who died in the seruice of King Lewis the eleuenth: more fiue
daughters, Mary, wife to William Marquis of Montferrat, Ioane wife to the Earle of Armagnac,
Marqu^rit^ wife to Frances Duke of Brittaine, mother to Queene Anne of
France, Catherine married to the Earle of Candale, who had three children, the eldest of
whom was Earle of Candall, men an Archbishop of Bourdeaux and a daughter called
Anne married to the King of Hungary: the fifth daughter of Gaston and Elenor, was called
Elenor, who died vnmarried.
 Now let vs returne to the controuersie betweene Gaston de Foix, father to these, and
his father in law King Iohn.Couenants betwixt King Iohn and D. L^onora his daughter. Hee following the good aduice of his friends and seruants,
and hauing acquainted the King with his intent by message, the King and D. Leonors
his daughter, met at a day appointed at Olita, Gaston being absent in France, where they

agreed vpon these Articles following: First, that the townes, cities, communalties of
Nauarre, nobility and others of what Estate and condition soeuer, should without contradiction
acknowledge and obey King Iohn as their King during his life. That the Earle
Gaston and the Princesse his wife should promise to maintaine the priuiledges, lawes and
liberties of the Kingdome, as they had beene in times past. That the three Estates
should take the oth of alleageance, and doe homage to the Princes the husband and
wife, and acknowledge them for their naturall King and Queene after the decease of
king Iohn, notwithstanding any other act to the contrary: that the married couple should
irreuocably be perpeturall gouernors of the Kingdome during the Kings life, their gouernment
onely to cease, when the King in person should bee in the Realme: That neither
the King nor the married Princes should ingage the Kingdome in whole, nor in
part: That the three Estates should endeauor that the King and the Princes should accomplish
and keepe all that had beene concluded, and oppose against them that should
infring them.
The same promise should be made and sworne to by the King and the Princes, and
that for the peace of the Kingdome, all crimes and offences, how heinous soeuer, should
be generally pardoned that had beene committed til the Kings present comming into
the country, re-establishing by full power and royall authority, euery man in his honor;
goods, and reputation, reuoking and adnulling all sentences and proceedings made to
the contrary. That all places, townes and castles, which had beene taken from one an other,
all offices as wel Ecclesiasticall as secular and vsurped since the taking of the castle of
Morillo, should bee restored to the first lawfull possessors thereof, within the terme of
seuen monthes, excepting the moueables and frutes which were spent, reiecting al guifts,
grants and ingagements made by the King, Princes, or any other: Neuerthelesse herein
was not to be comprehended the differences betwixt the Earle of Lerin, and Lord Iohn
of Beaumont, and Charles de Artieda, against D. Pedro of Peralta Constable of Nauarre,
and the Marshall of Nauarre, who were enioyned to submit themselues to the Kings obedience,
within twelue daies after the publication hereof; to the end to determine those
strifes by way of Iustice, vpon paine, doing the contrary, to be held as contumelious rebels,
and for such to be pursued and punished, as disturbers of the publike quiet: That all
those who had beene wrongfully imprisoned, since the surceance made by the Archbishop
of Saragossa the Kings sonne, in his name, and the Princes, should bee released and
set at liberty, paying their charges: That the truce granted by them or their captaines
should bee kept as well to strangers as the naturall subiects, both in their persons and
goods. That whatsoeuer had beene taken, and retaken, to the preiudice of the same
truce, should be restored and deliuered without other ransome then paying their expences:
that the promises and obligations made in writing, or by word of mouth, betwixt
the naturall subiects, by reason of such prises made since the surcease, should be of
no effect; and the Ecclesiasticall ordinaries should bee admonished to absolue them
from their othes made in that behalfe, enioyning euery one to set the prisoners at liberty
within fifteene daies, and not to ganesay this present treaty, vpon forefeiture of two
thousand royalls of gold to the Kings coffers: As concerning the castle of Leguin, belonging
to the Prior of Rounceual, which had beene taken before, with great store of
goods belonging as well to the prior as the Monastery, they who had taken the same
goods were enioyned to restore them, or the value thereof, seeing the Prior had alway
beene a faithfull seruant to the King and the Princes: That the King and the Princes
should sollemnely sweare to cause all the heads and Articles aboue mentioned to bee
effectually obserued and kept in euery point.
These things agreed vpon were published in the castle or pallace of Olita vpon
Thursday the thirtith day of May in the yeere 1471. and were receiued by the secretary
Iohn of Saint Iordi: the Bishop of Oleron taking the oth, with promise made by the
Princesse Donna Leonora, to cause the Earle her husband to confirme these Articles, an
authenticall coppy whereof, sealed with the Earles seale, she would send to the King her
father. At which were present the Bishop of Oleroni, Pedro Lord of Ros the Earles
Ambassador, Frier Bernard, Hugh de Rocabertin, captaine of the Castle of Amposta,

Roderigo de Robolledo, Gomes Suares of Figueroa, and Iohn Payes the Kings Vicechancellor.
After that, the Princesse, hauing ample procuration from her husband, dated at
the Bathes of Caudes Aigues in the valley of Dosan, sworne in his name to the Bishop
of Oleron to obserue the aboue named couenants, in the presence of the captaine of
the castle of Amposta, Iohn Payes the Vicechancellor, and D. Fernand of Baquedan vickar
generall of the Church of Pampelona. All these capitulations were not of force to
cease the troubles of Nauarre, which continued along time after.
 As concerning the affaires of Castile, King Henry, after resolution taken about the
marriages of the Princesse his sister,Castile. and of Donna Ioane in Portugall, beeing desirous
to set downe some good some of gouernment in his Kingdome, called a Parliament
at the city of Ocagna, where the deputies of the townes and communalties did meete,
except those of Andaluzia, the great Lords of which Prouince were not well pleased
with the dealings of the Maister of Saint Iames, whereat the King was much mooued,
but most of al, whe^ he vnderstood of the marriag which was intended, against his wi^, betwixt
the Princesse his sister, and the new King of Sicil, Fernand of Arragon which made
him now more then before, desirous to aduance Donna Ioane, whom hee st^ll aduo^ved
for his daughter, notwithstanding he hated the Queene her mother, by reason of her bad
life, which he himselfe had taught her: wherefore with his owne hand hee wrote a letter
to the Pope, intreating him not confirme the succession of the Kingdome of Castile,
sworne to the Princesse Isabella, but to grant it to Donna Ioane: Hee wrote also to his agent
at Rome, Doctor Roderigo de Vergara, borne in Logrogna, and likewise to King Alphonso
of Portugal, to the end that he should make the like request to the Pope: this was
not done so secretly, but that the Archbishop of Siuill had notice thereof, who had it
not beene for feare of the Maister of Saint Iames, who delt in this businesse, would willingly
haue dashed that matter. The King leauing Ocagna came to madrid, where hee
found Iohn Fernandes Galindo, captaine and gouernor of the fort of Madrid, and keeper
of his treasures sicke to death, at whose entreaty, hee gaue the charge of the fort, and of
that which was in it to Andrew of Cabrera his Steward, whom hee did dayly aduance,
and made partaker of his greatest secrets. The city of Leon, about that time, had like to
haue beene surprised by Diego Fernand de Quignones, Earle of Luna; but the practize
being discouerd, Aluar Garcia, Citizen of the same towne, with whom the Earle had intelligence,
was taken and beheaded as a traitor. At the intreaty of the Maister of Saint
Iames, the King returned to Ocagna, where hee gaue the title of Marquis of Villena to
Diego Lopes Pacheco his eldest sonne,Diego Lopes de Pacheco sonne to the Maister of Saint Iames, made Marquis of Villena. a braue knight, who soone after Married the Countesse
of Saint Stephen de Gormas, daughter to Don Iohn de Luna, Earle of Saint Stephen,
and grand-child to the Constable Aluar de Luna, who was in the keeping of the Maister
of Saint Iames, who was at the same time confirmed in his Maistership by the Pope and
possessed more riches then any Lord of Spaine. The King of Portugall sollicited by
King Henry about the marriage of the Princesse Donna Isabella, sent his Ambassadors,
the Archbishop of Lisbone, and two other Lords, who were at the Court more then
twenty daies without concluding any thing by reason that the Princesse had placed her
affection vpon Prince Fernand, and so returned home, leauing the King highly displeased
with his sister, who dissolued the Parliament at Ocagna, not suffering the peeres to sweare
to his sisters succession in the kingdome.
 The assembly at Ocagna beeing broken vppe, the king beeing very desirous to pacifie
the Country of Andaluzia,The King of Castiles voiage into andala^ia. which was full of dissentions, hee went thither in person,
leauing for Viceroies in Valiodolit, the Earle of Benauent and Don Pedro de Velasco,
with the President and Chauncery; the Princesse Donna Isabella remayning at
Ocagna, who promised not to dispose of her marriage till the returne of the King and
the Councell.
There went with the king, the Mr. of St. Iames, the Archbishop of Siuil, the Bishop of
Siguenca and others of the councel, but the Archbishop remained sick at Ciudad-real:
the king came to Iaen, where hee was receiued and entertained by the Constable Michael
Lucas d'Irancu, who protested to him that he would not suffer any one of the rebels in his
traine to come into the city: wherefore, the Mr. of St. Iames to be accou^ted one of

the number, staied at Osuna; but Roderigo of Vlloa, beeing more foolish hardy then the
rest, receiued the disgrace to be rudely repulst by the Constable, who couched his launce
against his brest sending him thence with many bitter speeches: this Constable was very
faithfull to the King his Maister,D. Micha^ Lu^as de Iransu Constable of Castile, a free and Generous Knight. and was a liberall and generous Knight. To Pedro
Goncales de Mendoza Bishop of Siguenca, and to the whole house of Mendoza, who entred
with the king, the Constable gaue openly a singular testimony of their fidelity with
a loude voice as they passed thorow the gate. The King and the Lords of his traine,
were for the space of three daies feasted at Iaen, from whence he went to Castro del Rio,
where D. Pedro of Cordoua Earl of Cabra met him with a thousand horse, bringing with
him his children, and Martin Alphonso Lord of Alcaudete his sonne in law, who were all
of them faithfull and good seruants to the King: With this company the King went to
Cordoua, wherein remained Alphonso de Aiguilar, one of the faction of the Maister of
Saint Iames, the city gates were opened to him, and Alphonso in recompence receiued
certaine pentions: betwixt whom and the Earle of Cabra had beene old grudges, but
the King went about to make them friends: the Gouernment of Cordoua, which in
times past did belong to the Earle of Cabraes predecessors, was giuen vnto him, and the
office likewise of Marshall. Vpon a seditious petition presented by those of Cordoua,
mentioning that Peter Earle of Cabra, and Martin Alphonso his sonne-in-law, and Alphonso
de Aguilar, should deliuer vp certaine places belonging to the city and communalty
of Cordoua held by them during the troubles, it was determined that they should
giue caution for the deliuery of them by a certaine day: this was a tricke of Don Alphonso
de Aguilar, who stirred vp the people to constraine the Earle, and his sonne-in-law,
to restore that which they had vsurped, hee himselfe perceiuing, that he could no
longer hold the places, which hee had taken during the trouble, the which did greatly
nourish and increase the hatred which the Earle and his sonne-in-law did beare vnto
him.
Whilest the King lay at Cordoua, there arriued Ambassadors from the French King
Lewis the eleuenth, the Cardinall of Albj, beeing the chiefe: the effect of his message
was, to breake the league betwixt the King of Castile and the English, which was very
preiudiciall to King Lewis his Maister: After audience, he obtained what he demaunded,
the Maister of Saint Iames working the matter, who perhaps was a faithfuller seruant
to the French King, then to his Maister the King of Castile. This yeere 1469. died
Friar Lopes of Barjentes Bishop of Cuenca, the Bishoprike of Leon beeing likewise
voide, Anthony de Veneris the Popes Legat had that of Cuenca, and that of Leon was
giuen to Doctor Roderigo de Vergara, the Kings agent at Rome.
The Princesse Donna Isabella, during the Kings stay in Andaluzia was ruled by the aduice
of the Admirall and the Archibishop of Toledo, and forgetting the promise which
shee had made to the King her brother, shee inuented meanes to surprise the towne of
Areualo, held in the name of the Earle of Playsance by Alua^o de Beacamont, with
whom she practized: but shee was disapointed of her purpose, which was discouered by
the Earle, who preuented the Princesse, and committed the captaine to prison. The
Earle possest this place, as a pawne, engaged vnto him for a certaine summe of money,
when the Infant Alphonso was chosen King. The Princesse being deceiued in her hope,
came to Madrigall, and from thence to Valliodolit, vnto whom the King sent the Cardinall
of Albit the French Kings Ambassador, and the Archbishop of Siuill, to possesse her
with a distaste of Fernand King of Sicill, which marriage did highly displease him,
fearing that by reason of the warres of Cattalonia, and former matters betwixt him
and King Iohn of Arragon his father, some great losse might happen to Castile by
that match.
The Cardinall, and the Archbishop did their best, and made offer of a marriage betwixt
her and Charles Duke of Guyenne, brother to the French King, but shee made no
account thereof, persisting in her first resolution, wherefore they returned backe without
effecting that which they went about: the king iournying thorough Andaluzia, was
continually sollicited by the Maister of Saint Iames (vnto whom he could deny nothing)
to remoue and displace the captaines, gouernors and other officers of towns and castles,

to the end to place therein such as were of his owne faction,This Maister of Saint g^^i^ out to displace the captaines of the gorris^^s in An^^^zia, and to pla^^ ^^^rei ^^ch ^^w ^^at his deuotion. which was granted to him at
Eccia, where hee displaced Martin of Cordoua and put in Doctor Garcia Lopes of Madrid,
one of his councel, and Frederick Manrique, and to recompence Martin, he assigned
him certaine pentions hard to be recouered. And thinking to doe the like to Hernandes
of Narbaez, the old Gouernor of Antiquera, he found himselfe deceiued, for the Gouernor
would not suffer the King to enter into his Fort with aboue fifteene men, and the residew
of his traine were constrained to take vp their lodging in the country villages
there^^abouts.
These things did not displease the King, who albeit he knew very well, that it was an
vniust thing to displace the captaines that had beene faithfull vnto him, at a traitors motion,
yet he had not the courage to reiect the importunities of the Maister, who would
haue had his friend Alphonso de Aguilar to haue commanded in Antiquera. The King
being come to Archidonna had conference with a Moore of Malaga called Alquizote, an
enemy to the King of Granada, who presented him with certaine Barbary horses and other
Moorish presents, vnto whom the King promised fauour and assistance against the
King of Granado, as to his vassall. From thence he came to Carmona, where he remained
a space: In the same towne there was three castles, two of which were at the commandement
of the Maister of Saint Iames, but the third was held by Gomes Mendes de
Sotomajor, a Knight wholy leagued with those of Siuill, whom the Maister had a great
desire to dispossesse, and did greatly importune the King to consent therevnto, and hee
did promise Gomes Mendes a large recompence, the which hee refused, saying, that hee
could not leaue that place without the consent of the Knights of Siuill, vnto whom hauing
declared the wrong that the King would haue done to him (onely to satisfie the
Maister of Saint Iames) the Duke of Medina Sidonia, and Roderigo Ponce of Leon, Pedro
de Estuniga, and Alphonso Henriques Gouernor of the frontiers, sent to aduertize the King,
that they could not consent to so vnreasonable a matter, hurtfull to the crowne, as to alienate
from the same, the town of Carmona; which the King at that time tooke in good
part, but afterward hee was ouer-ruled by the Maister of Saint Iames, and would haue
constrained Gomes Mendes to haue left the same place: wherefore the Duke of Medina,
and the other Knights with the Inhabitants of Siuill, armed themselues, and assailed the
castle of Triana, from whence hauing driuen Hernandes Arias of Sahauedra, they placed
therein an other captaine, then, their power increasinge, they came into the field, giuing
the King and the Maister of Saint Iames new matter to thinke on, who with the whole
Court left Carmona and came to Alcala of Guadiaira, and from thence the King sent
to command the Duke to disarme himselfe and to send away his people: who answered,
that hee had taken armes for his seruice, as also to defend himselfe from his enemy the
Maister of Saint Iames: The Maister fearing that this fire would kindle to his owne
hurt, sought meanes to conferre with the Duke, which the other Lords and Knights, with
those of Siuill would not agree vnto, saying that the Maister was a crafty wicked man,
and that their talke would come to no good effect, and so sent backe to the King, intreating
him not to alienat Carmona from the crowne, and to confirme Gomes Mendes in his
captaineship. The King, to auoide farther mischiefes, made means himself, that the Duke
and the Maister might talke together betweene Siuill and Cantillana. At this meeting
it was onely determined, that the King should enter into Siuill; and that the Maister
should stay at Cantillana, where they should agree vpon those things.
 The King beeing receiued with great ioy into the city of Siuill, whilest hee remaines
there, about the appeasing of those differences, the Princesse Isabella his sister, being
continually sollicited by her Maister Pant^er Guttieres of Cardegna to harken to the
marriage of Fernand Prince of Girona, the heire of Arragon, and to reiect that of Portugall,
and Duke Charles of France, with the King of Englands brother who was an other
sutor, at the last she gaue her full consent therevnto: wherefore the Archbishop of Toledo
and the Admirall D. Frederike, wholy addicted to the seruice of this Princesse, and
likewise to Prince Fernand King of Sicill, thinking that this marriage was most conuenient
and proffitable for the affaires of the Kingdome, did consent and conclude therevpon,
causing the Bridegroome in a disguised habit to come into Castile, whether hee was

conducted by D. Pedro Manriques Earle of Treuigno,Donna Isabella of Castil^ marrieth Fernand of Arragon. who afterwards was Duke of Nagera,
and others, who brought him to Valiodolit. Where beeing presented before the
Princesse amongst others, very few (nor yet she her selfe) did know him: but her faithfull
seruant Guttiere de Cardegna shewed her him, saying in his Spanish tongue, Esse^es.
This is he: to whom the Princesse readily replied and Esse shall be thine armes: for this
cause, the house and posterity of this Knight, beareth yet to this day, amidst there blazons
and deuises an S S: The royall aspect and graue countenance of Prince Fernand
did soone certifie the Princesse that it was he, therefore without any more delay, the marriage
was sollemnized and accomplished at Valiodolit, the eighteenth of October 1469.
in the house of Iohn de Biuero, where at this day the Kings Chancery is kept, King Henry
not knowing thereof, who would rather haue hindred it then otherwise, for the small
good which he wished to King Iohn of Arragon his father.
These newes were presently carried to the Maister of Saint Iames, who wrote to the
King that he should forthwith without delay come to Cantillana; the which he did, not
knowing the cause why he was so hastily sent for: there, to his great griefe; he vnderstood
of his sisters marriage: wherefore vpon the instant hee departed out of Andaluzia, leauing
those of Siuill some-what mooued, vntill they knew the cause: and taking the
ready way to Trugillo, hee was there staied, by the refusall of Garcia de Sese captaine of
the fort of that city, who would not yeeld the same place vp vnto him, the which hee
ment to haue bestowed vpon the Earle of Playsance, in recompence of the good seruice
which hee had done vnto him. This captaine had agreed with the townes-men
(who had foreseene the Kings intent) to hold out and not to permit the same to bee alienated
from the crowne, and giuen to a priuate Lord. The King perceiuing that hee
could not gratifie the Earle with Trugillo, confirmed vnto him, and left for Inheritance
to him and his heires for euer the towne of Areualo, which was pawn'd vnto him; with
title of Duke, doing thereby manyfest wrong to the widow Queene Isabella, vnto whom
that towne did belong.
Being at Trugillo, Gomes de Caceres Maister of Alcantara came vnto him, and
craued pardon for his offences, the which hee freely obtained: and besides that hee
was confirmed in the gouernment of Badajos, and Caceres, which hee had vsurped during
the reuolts: and at his intreaty, and of the Maister of Saint Iames, hee gaue to his
brother Guttiere de Caceres the city of Coria, with the title of Earle. To Alphonso
Monroy, who had beene faithfull vnto him, and followed the warres at his owne charges,
hee gaue many great guifts: so this King did good both to his friends and enemies.
At the same place of Trugillo, hee receiued letters from the Princesse his sister, by
the which shee gaue him reason for her marriage with Prince Fernand, and for her
refusall of the others, intreating him to beleeue that it was done, for the good quiet
and commodity of the Kingdome of Castile in time to come, and to assure him
both of her good will and her husbands, who would for euer remaine his affectionate
seruants, without inclyning to any thing that should displease him; beseeching
him to consider with what hearty affection shee loued and honoured him, seeing
that when it was in her power to take vpon her the regall dignitie, which was offered
her, by the decease of Prince Don Alphonso, shee had refused it, and exhorted the
confederate Lords to serue and honour him as their King: complayning besides of many
other greeuous wrongs offered as well vnto her selfe, as to the widow Queene Isabell
her mother yet liuing. The letter being read before the councell, the messenger receiued
this answer, that the King would be shortly at Segobia, where all matters should be debated
on with reason and equity, and in deed the Court remooued thither presentlie
after, where the Ambassadors of the Princes Fernand and Donna Isabella did
arriue, who were Don Pedro de Baca, and Diego de Ribera, who had brought vp
the Infant Don Alphonso deceassed: and on the Archbishop of Toledos part, Lewis
of Antecana, who besought the King to approoue the marriage, and to excuse
the Princes, for that they had not acquainted all the great Lords of the Kingdome
therewith, who by reason that they were deuided into diuerse factions, could not
choose thereby but nourish greater occasions of discord: As for themselues, they

wished nothing more, then to be obedient vnto him, and for such to be reputed, desiring
to imploy themselues for the maintenance of the peace of the Kingdome, and administration
of Iustice, which in a maner was chased away, in steed whereof al manner of outrages,
extortions and confusions did reigne. Lastly they entreated him to appoint some
place where the Princes might come and visit him, to the end to certifie him in person
of their sincere affection and desire to doe him seruice.
Besides these demaunds,Matrimoniall Articles betwixt Fernand of Arragon, and Isabel of Castile. they declared vnto the King the Articles and Couenants,
wherevpon this marriage was contracted, which were these.
1 First of all, Prince Fernand King of Sicill did promise to be a deuout and obedient
sonne to the Sea of Rome, and to honour and well intreat the Ecclesiasticall Persons and
Ministers of the same.
2 That hee should honour and acknowledge King Henry for his King (if it pleased
him to accept thereof) and should imploy his person and meanes to cause all his
subiects to doe the like.
3 That he should likewise honor the widdow Queene Isabella, mother to the Princesse.
4 That he should cause Iustice to be established, and should assist the King therein, obseruing
the lawes and good customes of the Kingdome.
5 That he should endeauor, with his vttermost power, to maintaine the peace betwixt
the King, Himselfe and the Princesse.
6 That hee should not depart out of the Kingdome of Castile, nor carry away the
Princesse, nor the children that God should send them, especially the Prince his heire,
without expresse deliberation and consent of the councell.
7 That in the letters and royall charters, the Prince and the Princesse should bee named
both together, as well in those which concerned Castile and Leon, as those in the
Kingdomes and Lands which the Prince now possesseth, or may enioy hereafter.
8 That the naturall borne of the Kingdome should be admitted into the councel and
offices of either of them, with consent of the Princesse.
9 That the Princesse should receiue the othes of homage and fidelity, and should
haue power to place officers, captaines and guards, in the cities, castles and fortresses of
the Kingdome, as well by her presently possessed, as in others, which might hereafter fall
vnto her, placing therein persons borne in the Kingdome of Castile, and appurtenances
thereof and none others.
10 That all guifts and pentions granted by the Princesse, should bee approued and
confirmed by Prince Fernand.
11 That he should not procure the hurt of any one of the Kingdomes of Castile and
Leon for the occasion of the warres, quarrels, and outrages past, betwixt Castile and
Arragon.
12 That he should not enterprise, nor make warre, league, nor confederacy, with any
neighbour King, Lord or Knight of this Kingdome, without the consent of the Princesse,
and her councell.
13 That for the increase of the Princesse dowry, he should giue to her Borja and Magallon
in the Kingdome of Arragon: and in that of Valencia, Elche and Euillen: and in
Sicill, Siracuca and Catanea, according as those places had beene assigned and giuen
from time to time to the Queenes of Arragon.
14. Besides, that the Princesse should euery yeere, during her life, receiue the rents and
reuenues of one towne in the said Kingdoms which she should best like of, prouided that
it were not a capitall or chiefe towne of the Kingdome, or principallity, the gouernors
and officers whereof should neuerthelesse be natiues of the same country.
15 And if the Prince should happen to die first, the Princesse should neuerthelesse, during
her life, enioy those places; after whose decease they should returne to the crowne,
and to the heires thereof.
16 And if it should be found, that greater dowries, profits, lands, authority and preeminence
had bin giuen to Queene Ioane of Arragon the Princes mother, or to Queene Mary
wife to King Alphonso, daughter to King Henry the Princesse grand-father, that the
Prince should supply that defect within two monthes after.

17 That within the terme of foure monthes he should giue to the Princesse in ready
money a hundred thousand florins of the coyne of Arragon for hir expences, and to bestow
as she pleased.
18 That if any warre or strife should arise in the Kingdome, the Prince did oblige
himselfe to serue in person with foure thousand Launces til the war were ended, and if he
should not furnish so many launces, that he should then pay with his owne money, such
forces as should serue vnder him.
King Henry hauing heard the Ambassadors, answered, that the businesse being of
great consequence, it was requisite to aduise thereon with mature deliberation, and that
after he had consulted with the great Lords of his Court and councell, hee would then
answere their message, and so sent them backe.
In the meane space a notable Insolency was committed in Andaluzia, which caused
great stirres: for albeit that through the Kings meanes and authority it seemed that the
Bishop of Siguenca, had made an agreement and pacified Alphonso de Aguilar with the
Earle of Cabra and his children, neuerthelesse their hatred slept not in their hearts, so as
Alphonso vpon a time hauing inuited to a banquet in the towne-house of Cordoua called
Casa del Cabildo,A rashact of Alph^nso de Aguilar, against the children of the Earl of Cabra. D. Diego the Marshall of Cordoua, eldest sonne to the Earle, who
held the place of Alguazil Major of the same city, hee kept him there prisoner, and sent
him away with great indignity, with a sure guard, to his sort of Cagnete, he tooke also
his brother Sancho, and kept him prisoner likewise, hauing the Magistrates of the city at
his deuotion: whereof complaints being made to the King, he did write in great cholle^
to Alphonso, commanding him without delay to release the brethren; otherwise hee
would come in person into Andaluzia and inforce him to doe it, punishing him as a
rebellious person: wherefore the Marshall was released and sent to Baena, who resenting
this iniury, wrote a letter to the King full of accusations, crauing leaue of him to
defie his enemy, and to prouoke him to single fight, thereby to constraine him to repaire
and satisfie his honour and reputation: The King hauing heard the messenger
and read the letter, would by no meanes allow of the combate, because sundry disorders
arise thereof; as also for that those matters of Duell or single combate, are contrary
both to diuine and humaine lawes, especially betwixt subiects belonging to one and
the selfe same Prince, who hath hath power and authority, to bring them to reason by
way of Iustice:Duello granted by the King of Granad^ to Diego of Cordoua against Alphonso de Aguilar. herevpon the Marshall published infamous libels and declarations, against
Alphonso, and he obtained free liberty of the King of Granado to enter the combate
in his country, assigning Alphonso to meet in the plaine of Granada, and sending
him a safe-conduct from the Moore King: The day appointed for the fight beeing
come Alphonso would not appeare: wherefore after that the Marshall had made the acts
and protestarions which are accustomed in in such cases, about the setting of the Sun,
he tooke a picture representing Alphonso de Aguilar, and hauing tied it to his horse taile
with the face to the ground, he gallopt vp and downe the plaine, dragging it after him;
crying aloude: This is the traitor Alphonso de Aguilar, who durst not meet me in single
fight, nor venture his body against mine: Then the King of Granado adiudged him a
victor, and condemned Alphonso: diuerse draughts of that picture were afterward sent to
sundry Lords and Knights of Spaine to Alphonso's great disgrace.
The city of Simancas,The Admirall of Castlile surpriseth Simancas. with the castle thereof, were in this meane time surprised against
the Kings authority, by the Admirall, wherewith the King was greatly troubled, in
regard that the Maister of Saint Iames was very sicke, without whom he was not able to
negotiate or resolue vpon any matter of importance: This yeere King Lewis the
eleuenth, demaunded Donna Ioane in marriage for his brother Charles Duke of Guyenne,
whose Ambassadors were put in good hope that it should bee accomplished.
An other Ambassage was sent to King Henry from the same King Lewis, to induce him
to ioyne with him about calling of a councell against Pope Paul the second: but his
councell was of opinion that the King should not medle in a matter so displeasing to the
Pope, by whom, and by the Sea of Rome his progenitors had beene alwaies fauored,
wherefore the Ambassadors were answered in this manner, that the King would not harken
to their request, and that hee did wish King Lewis to desist from his purpose, and to

assure him that al the meanes of Spaine should be emploied for Gods vickar, vnto whom
King Henry, besides the dignity which hee held, was particularly obliged, for that he had
aided and comforted him in his troubles. At the same time the Knights of Alcantara,
conducted by the treasurer Alphonso de Mont Roy, rose in mutiny against their Maister
D. Gomes de Caceres, and pursued him to death: so as after they had taken from him Badajos,
Alcantara, and Valence of Alcantara, they fought with him and ouercame him in
battaile, so as hee could neuer after raise himselfe againe: his brother Guttiere Earle of
Coria, hauing for his succor demaunded souldiars of the Earle of Alua D. Garci Aluares
of Toledo his father in law, engaged to him the city of Coria for money to pay them,
who being gathered togither in great numbers, their passage was hindred at the riuer of
Taio by the dilligence of Alphonso de Mont Roy, and the other Knights his aduersaries,
who brake all the bridges, and sunke all the boates, so as they could not passe: wherefore
they returned without doing any thing, and Coria remained to the Earle of Alua. By
this euill hap, the Maister wholy ruined and in dispaire, died soone after in great pouerty
and misery: the Maistership whereof was begged of the Pope, by Donna Leonora Pimencell,Donna Leon^r Pimentel Countesse of Playsance a woman of manly courage.
Countesse of Playsance, for her sonne D. Iohn de Estuniga. The King did willingly
consent to the pursute of the Countesse, whom he honored aboue all others, and allowed
and confirmed the Popes Bul. And albeit that the treasurer, Alphonso of Montroy, and
the Knights did oppose themselues against such an irregular election, the Countesse who
had more then a womans heart, tooke Alcantara with other places by force, and delt in
such manner, as her sonne possest the Maistership: and was the last that had the title of
Maister of that Order.
Roderigo Bishop of Zamora at that time florished in Spaine for his learning: but
whilest the Prelats and Gouernors of the Church gaue themselues ouer to worldly
greatnesse,Spanish superstitions. and to nourish and sow discord and diuisions, Religion it selfe was mannaged
according to euery mans deuotion. There is in the Prouince of Guipuscoa in the mountaine
of Aloya, in the territory of Ognate a Couent of Friars, the originall, whereof began
about this time: for it is reported that a certaine herdsman called Roderigo Balcategui
who dwelt in Vribarri, keeping his goates vpon that mountaine, went down the same
hil into a rocky place, which was nere to no high-way, where he found by chance an Image
of the Virgin Mary vpon a green thorn. This seemed vnto him a wonderful matter
because of the desertnesse of the place: therefore he fell to saying his Aue Maries, and other
such like praiers as he had beene taught: then night drawing on hee couered the Image
with boughes and other things, and went home to his village, and told this great
wonder: The rumor thereof being spred thorow the towne of Ognate, the Ministers of
Iustice,The people of Ognate superstitious. the Clergy, and the common people, being guided by the shepheard, went to the
same place, where they found in a hedge a very little Image of the Virgin Mary, holding
her Sonne in her armes, before which they all kneeled downe and beganne to sing many
songs and hymnes, thanking God that had sent them so pretious a iewell, thinking it
a great miracle to haue found it in so desert and remote a place: wherefore they consulted
together about building a Chappell there, and whilest prouision was made for the
manner and matter of that building, they resolued to enclose it with boords, notwithstanding
it was seated very discomodiously, they not daring to vndertake to transport
it from thence, nor to build an house for it in any other place then where it first appeared,
and they named it the hermitage of our Lady of Arancacu, which is to say, of the
thorne; the which in short time was held for a very religious place, beeing visited, and
indowed by diuerse deuout people. Wherefore those of Ognate and Mondragon,
which are the neerest places to it, seeing that great numbers of pilgrims came thither,
they beganne to make the waies plaine; and to cut the rocke to make the passage thither
more easie. Vpon this beginning, grounded vpon the simple credulity of a sort of rude
people, it came to passe that this Image beeing famous and greatly visited, certaine of
the religious of La Merced were greatly desirous to build a Couent there, wherein one
of them named Frier Peter of Ariaran did greatly imploy himselfe, whose mother was so
superstitious, as shee dedicated her whole life to the seruice of this Couent: but these fathers
being kept there a certaine time, as well by the almes of the good people of the

country thereabouts as also by the bounty of the pilgrims, in the end by reason of the
extreame cold of the winter, and barrennes of the place, they grew weary and left it: in
whose roomes came certaine religious people of the third Order of Saint Francis, or
Tercerones (as they call them) who did enlarge the Couent begonne by the Friers of La
Merced,Friers tranformed to Iacobins. who were by the Popes prouided of diuerse pardons and indulgencies for those
which should visit it, and doe them any good: now, in the reigne of the Catholike King
and Queene Fernand and Isabella, vpon the occasion of reforming the religions of
Spaine, these Friers Tercerons were admonished by this Obseruantines to turne to their
rule: which is, say they, the true rule of Saint Francis, which they refused, and being vrged
therevnto by way of Iustice; these fathers resolued to giue ouer their first religion,
and did put on the habit of the Iacobins, or Friers Prechers of Saint Dominike: then
there arose an other strife betwixt the Friers of Saint Francis, and the Dominicans, about
the possession of this Couent, the Friers saying that it belonged vnto them, and to
none others, seeing that the brethren of their Order had held it so long a time without
contradiction of those of La Merced: Therefore they beganne by ordinary and extraordinary
meanes to contend about this possession, and at the last fell to blowes: but the
Dominicans being vpheld by the Inhabitants of Ognate, the friers withdrew themselues,
not attempting it any more by such meanes, then they beganne their sute about it at
Rome, whether they sent for their soliciter, a frier called Martin Gartbay, who vsed such
dilligence, as the right was iudged to the brethren of his order, and the Couent restored
to the Obseruant friers: So at the returne of friar Martin into Spaine, who brought
with him the execution of that sentence, the Dominicans came forth, and left the possession
to their aduersaries, who at this present doe enioy it, and haue greatly augmented
it with building; and it is said, that it is an harbour and retreat for many afflicted people
specially of Marriners, who come thither to pay their vowes: to the great commodity of
the friers: these exercizes of religion are greatly vsed in Spain: but in the yeere 1552. vpon
the sixth of December, the whole Cloister, with the lodgings and other buildings
were burnt downe to the ground by casualty: but the fire touched not the Church
which they account for a great miracle.
This yeere 1469. died Don Pedro Fernandes of Velasco Earle of Haro who was reputed
to bee a Knight that led the most Christian life of any other of his time,Religious deeds of Pedro Fernandes de Velasco, Earle of Haro. in testimony
whereof the Spaniards write that hee did build the Monastery of Pomar, where
hee made three of his daughters Nunnes, with an hospitall where twelue Gentlemen,
falne into pouerty, should be honorably entertained, and a Chappell for the buriall
of him and his: liuing afterward very retiredly in Medina de Pomar, eschewing the
daungers and troubles of this world: these religious workes are practized in Spaine, by
the great Lords that are rich, when they are become old and haue many children. Now
his sonne Don Pedro of Velasco, oftentimes named in this History, succeeded in the
Earledome.
But returning to the History of King Henry, who beeing come to Segobia, the absence 
of the Maister of Saint Iames, who was extreamely sicke of a quartan feuer, did
greatly trouble him, for without him hee could doe nothing: therefore it was thought
fit, that for their better conferring together, the King should come to Madrid, whether
the Maister beeing very weake was brought, the King and the whole Court
going forth to meet him, not without the wonder of diuerse, which thought it a
strange matter to see this Prince, so much to abase himselfe to Iohn de Pacheco, who
notwithstanding that hee was sicke, yet all matters passed thorough his hands, and
nothing was concluded on without him. About the same time died Don Lewis de la
Cerde, who had held Escalona all the time of the troubles, and appointed at his death,
that his people should yeeld it vp to the King: the Maister of Saint Iames, demaunded
this place and obtained it: and because the souldiars of the deceassed, did say that they
would not deliuer it to any other but to the King himselfe,Contempt of Iustice in these daies in Castile. hee came thether in person,
and receiued the towne, and gaue it forthwith to the maister of Saint Iames: so
as all that which had beene taken from Aluar de Luna, Maister of Saint Iames, fell to
this man.

In these daies the great Lords of Spaine grew so licentious, as he which was strongest,
would right himselfe, the King nor his lawes beeing in no sort feared nor reuerenced.
There was a quarrell betwixt the Earles of Benauent,Quarrels betwixt the Earles of Ben^uent and Lemos. Lemos, and the Vicont of Vacan,
about the towne of Matilla, possessed by the Earle of Lemos, the Earle of Luna laboured
to reconcile them, and to bring them to talke togither; but he of Benauent came
thither so well accompanied, as hee tooke the Vicount prisoner, and sent him away to
Benauent, then he tooke the towne of Matilla by force, and restored to Garcia of Toledo,
Bishop of Astorga, certaine places which had beene vsurped vpon him. The sort
of Canales was likewise taken from the Archbishop of Toledo by a captaine called
Peter Bermudes of the Kings party,Canales taken from the Archbishop of Toledo. who was nothing sorry therefore. In Biscay and
Guipuscoa, the factions of Gamboinnes and Ognazines grew outragious, the chiefe
heads whereof were Peter Abendagno and Iohn Alphonso of Murica, whereof followed
so many murthers,Factions in Biscay. rapes, and other cruell and wicked acts, as the King, at the request of
them of the country, sent D. Pedro of Velasco the new Earle of Haro thither, with power
and authority to finde out and punish the offenders, and to reduce those two Prouinces
into a quiet and peaceable Estate. The Earle vpon due information made, bannished for
euer out of Guipuscoa and Biscay, the two ring-leaders of these factions, who vpon
paine of death and confiscation of their goods, should neuer more set foote in those
countries, and besides he caused diuerse theeues and murtherers to bee executed. Wee
haue declared heretofore, how that the confederate Lords, desiring to draw the Earle
of Alua to their league, had giuen him in hostage, for the performance of the capitulations
made betwixt them, the townes of Montalban, and the Archbishops bridge,
which place the Marquis of Villena Maister of Saint Iames (who was now rid of his feuer,
and ruled the King more then before) desiring to draw from him, he vsed such means
with the Earle as he was contented to deliuer those townes vnto him, the Archbishop
of Siuill being a third man, and arbitrator betwixt them. They promised the Earle that
the King should giue him the title of Duke of Alua, and Earle of Barco: and besides, in
regard he was possessed of the city of Coria, pawned to him by his sonne in law, deceassed,
they would be a means to haue it confirmed to him with the title of Marquis thereof,
vpon this condition that he should deliuer vp Montalban and the Archbishops bridge
which the Earle agreeing to, the Maister of Saint Iames sent him the Kings letters-pattents
for the confirmation of his titles: and so they two remained friends. Wherefore
D. Garcia Aluares of Toledo was euer after called Duke of Alua, Earle of Barca, and Marquis
of Coria. The ordinary inuasions and spoiles made by the Moores vpon the frontiers
of Andaluzia in these confusions, by reason that there was small or no resistance at
all in that part of the Kingdome, mooued the Archbishop of Toledo, and the great
Lords of Spaine earnestly to sollicite the King to call an assembly of the chiefe men of
the Kingdome, where there should assist the Maister of Saint Iames, the Dukes of Areualo,
Alua and Albuquerque, the Admirall and the Marquis of Santillana, the Earles of
Benauent and Treuigno, the Popes Nuntio, the Archbishops of Toledo and Siuill, and
the Bishops of Siguenca, Burgos and Coria, who should aduise of some fit expedient to
remedy so many inconueniences, and make Iustice to florish againe in the realmes of
Castile. The same request was afterwards made by the Princes D. Fernand and Donna
Isabella, and by the Deputies of the cities and communalties, vniuersities, orders of religious
men, and the Colledges of Churchmen, to call the assembly in some city or town,
vnder the sufegard of foure great Lords, there for to make some good conclusion with a
common consent: and if the commissioners should not agree, that the decision of the
whole matter might bee put to the iudgement of foure wise religious persons, chosen
ont of the Orders of the Chartreux, Saint Francis, Saint Dominike and Saint Ierome,
vnto these demaunds, made with so great instance by the States of Castile, the King
made none other answere, but that hee would thinke vpon it and prouide for it accordingly
by the aduice of his councell.


Muley Albohacen, the nineteenth King
of Granado.
IN the meane space the Moores, of whom wee haue spoken, did wast and spoyle the 
countrey of Andalusia.Moores. They were commaunded at that time by Muley Albohacen king
of Granado, or as some others call him, Haly Muley Hacen, or Hali Aben Acan: for Muley
among the Moorish Princes, namely, of Marocco, Sus Fez, Vilez, Tremessen, Tunis
and Escuray, is a common title and surname, signifying, Prince, King, or Lord. This
man was surnamed the Great, and succeeded his father king Ismael, who died in Almeria,
the yeare 1465. after he had raigned twelue yeares: he was a valiant souldier, and yet neuerthelesse
for certaine yeares he was at peace with the Christian Princes: hee had two
wiues which were married to him, the one a Moore, by whome, among other children,
hee had a sonne called Mahumet Boabdelin, or Boabdile, who raigned after his father, and
was called king Chiquito, which is to say, little: his second wiues name was Zoroyra, who
hauing beene a Christian, did at her husbands instigation, returne to the Arabian Sect
of Mahumet: by her he had two sonnes, the one called Cad, and the other Nacre, who after
the taking of Granado, and the finall conquest of that Kingdome, were baptized and
tooke new names, to wit, the mother Izabella, and the children, Fernand and Iohn: of
whose royall race, there is yet at this day succession in Castile.
The Constable Michaell Lucas de Irancu, who kept a garrison at Iaen, had regard to the
dangers that might happen to the kingdome of Castile, on that side of Andalusia in Eccia,
Don Martin of Cordoua, with others in other places, who were assisted but with
weake forces, by Don Pedro of Cordoua, Earle of Cabra, and Martin Alphonso of Cordoua
his sonne-in-law^ but within the kingdome of Granado, the Moore King had to
enemie, a knight named Alquizot, Captaine and Gouernour of Malaga, who had intelligence
with King Henry of Castile then raigning, vnder whose protection hee had put
himselfe, as hath beene heretofore declared, and was held by him as one of his vassals: by
reason whereof Muley Albohacen, (who desired and sought by all meanes to driue this
Moore out of Malaga) beeing mooued against King Henry, and taking aduantage by
reason of the troubles and confusions in Castile, hee entred oftentimes with a great armie
into Andalusia, which he led further into the countrie, then any of his predecessors,
Kings of Granado had done, by reason of the weak resistance which he there found, from
whence followed death and captiuitie of people, with burning and desolation to the
Countrie.
The petitions and complaints which were daily made to king Henry, were full fraught 
with the contents of these miseries,Castile. but hee did not tast them as hee ought, but partly
thorough negligence, and hatred which hee did beare to businesses, and partly with ouer
much intending his owne passions, he did deferre the remedies, beeing at that time busied
with a desire to marrie his supposed daughter to the Duke of Guienne, and to the
same effect he treated with the French Ambassadours, which were arriued at Medina del
campo, to wit, the Bishop and Cardinall of Albi aboue-mentioned, and the Lord of
Torsi from the French King, and from the Duke of Guienne, the Earle of Bologne, and
the Lord of Malicorne, who hauing declared their Commission to the King, and vsed
some sharpe and bitter speeches against the Princesse Izabella, he seemed to like very well
of the marriage, and appoynted the Arch-bishop of Seuile, the Bishop of Siguenca, and
the Master of S. Iames, to agree about the matrimoniall conditions: who whilest they
were in this sort busied, there happened a great riot at Guadalupa, occasioned by Donna
Eluira, Ladie of Belalcacar, who hauing vnderstood that Don Alphonso Ponce of Leon,
Bastard-brother to Don Rodrigo Ponce of Leon, Earle of Arcos, did accompany and
bring backe two young Ladies, daughters to the Countesse of Medellin, who till then
had beene kept vnder the power of the Earle of Cifuentes, shee sent her brother Don

Francisco of Estuniga, accompanied with those of the family of Chaues of Trugillo with
a great company of souldiers, to make reprisall of these Ladies for certaine prisoners,
Kinsfolks, and friends of the Chaues, who were kept by the Countesse of Medellin: wherfore
Don Francisco hauing ouertaken them at Guadalupa, D. Alphonso Ponce, who conducted
them, thought to get the franchise of the Monasterie of Guadalupa, where hee
was beseeged, and the Ladies, with those that conducted them, and the Monkes of the
same place, did suffer many outrages, notwithstanding that the King thought to remedy
the matter, by sending thither the Licenciate Don Henriques, who could do no good:
in the end Don Francisco of Estuniga and his people hauing broken vp the gates of the
Couent, enforced Don Alphonso to yeeld himselfe, and to deliuer the Ladies into his
hands, whom they ledde away with them. Now the marriage beeing concluded betwixt
Donna Ioane and the Duke of Guienne, to the great discontent of diuers Spaniards, the
King and the Ambassadours went to Segobia,Conclusion of the marriage betwixt Charls Duke of Guien and D. Ioane. there to receiue Donna Ioane, who was at
Guadalajara, and also to apply to themselues the pardons of the Iubile, which the Pope
graunted this yeare, vnto such as would giue money for them: to wit, the richer sort,
foure royals of plate, those of the meaner sort, three, and the meanest of all, two, the
third part whereof was to bee applyed to the sea of Rome and chamber Apostolicke, and
the other two thirds towards the building of the Cloister of the great Church of the
same cittie, whereunto the King furnished aboundantly to that which was wanting, and
gaue vnto it certaine Coapes of cloath of gold.The townes of the Infan^asgo giuen to the Marquis of Santillana. Donna Ioane was in the keeping of the
Marquis of Santillana, who in recompence of his paynes, and cost, bestowed about her
entertainment, receiued in gift from the King, the three townes of the Infantasgo, namely,
Alcocer, Valdoliuas, and Salmeron, the which did belong to the Countesse of Saint
Steephen, wife to Don Diego Lopes de Pacheco, Marquis of Villena: but shee was recompenced
foure fold, for the King gaue her the towne of Requegna with the rights of the
port thereof: the Master of Saint Iames, father to the Marquis, beeing hee that did order
and dispose of all matters after his owne pleasure and pro^ite.
There arose about the same time a great tumult in Vailliodolit betwixt the old and
new Christians, the old beeing fauoured and vpheld by Iohn de Biuero, a rich Cittizen
of the same towne, and very affectionate to the seruice of the Princes Don Fernand, and
Donna Izabella, who vppon this occasion came from Duegnas, where they remayned,
to Vailliodolit, and were lodged in Iohn de Biuero's house: the which did so stirre vp the
mutinous people, as they came running in armes to force that house, the Princes were
in danger to haue beene taken, if the Bishop of Salamanca, who was President of the
Chancerie, had not suddainly put them out of the towne, and caused them to returne to
Duegnas.
The King hauing notice of this tumult, came to Vailliodolit, confiscated Iohn de Biuero's
house, and gaue it to the Earle of Benauent with the Captaine-ship of the towne,
and hauing pacified the people, he returned to Segobia, where his chiefest and most
pleasing aboad was, the fortresse of the which place, held for a certaine time by the Master
of Saint Iames, was a little while before yeelded vp vnto him, where hee made Andrew
de Cabrera Captaine.
Certaine dayes after, the King remooued from Segobia, and came to lye in the Monasterie
of Paular in the valley of Locoia, bringing with him his wife Queene Ioane, D.
Ioane her daughter, the French Ambassadours, and others, the Duke of Areualo and
Valence, the Master of Saint Iames, the Earles of Benauent, Miranda, S. Martha, the
Arch-bishop of Seuile, with many other Lords, Knights, and Prelates: but the Lords of
the house of Mendoza, did chiefly accompany the Queene and her daughter, namely, the
Marquis of Santillana, the Bishop of Siguenca, the Earles of Tendilla and Crugna, and
Don Iohn Hurtado, the which Lords and Ambassadours, beeing by the Kings commandement
assembled in an open field, vpon the banke of the riuer which runneth thorough
the same valley, where from all parts of the Countrie, great numbers of people of all
sorts were gathered together.
The Licentiate Antonio Nugnes of Cite Rodrigo was commaunded by the king to
reade a writing signed with his hand, and sealed with his seale, contayning in substance,

that whereas he in times past, at the intreatie and request of the great Lords of his kingdome,
and for to pacifie the troubles and ciuil warres of the same, had declared his sister
Donna Izabella his heire, and successor in the State and royall dignitie of Castile, and
procured the Lords, Prelates, and Communalties of the kingdome to sweare vnto her,
vppon condition, that she should be obedient vnto him: she notwithstanding reiecting
all respect and duty due vnto him, who was her king, father, and elder brother, had married
her selfe without his knowledge, and against his expresse commandement; to Don
Fernand king of Sicill and Prince of Arragon: in regard whereof, hee did at that present
manifest and declare her to be fallen from all the right which shee might pretend thereunto,
and did disinherit her, disanulling all promises, declarations, and institutions made
vnto her in that behalfe: commanding all his subiects, that from thence forward they
should not acknowledge her for Princesse, but obey (with a follemne oath) his daughter
Donna Ioane there present: This writing beeing read openly with a loud voice, the Cardinall
of Albi, the French Ambassadour, came to the Queene, requesting her to affirme
by oath, whether Donna Ioane were truly the daughter of the king her husband or not,
whereunto she answered,King Henry of Castile his false oath. that vndoubtedly she was: then he made the like request to the
king, namely, whether he did stedfastly beleeue, that Donna Ioane there present, were his
daughter, the which he affirmed, saying, that he had alwaies reputed and accounted her
for his owne naturall daughter euer since shee was borne: then presently, the Prelates,
Lords, and others which were present at that act, came and kissed the Infanta's hands, and
following the Kings commaundement,The Lords of Mendoza refuse to kisse the hands of D. Ioane. they tooke the oath of fidelity vnto her, after the
manner accustomed to the eldest sonnes of the kings of Castile, all of them calling her
Princesse and heire, the Marquis of Santillana, the Bishopp of Siguenca and his other
breethren excepted, who excused themselues, saying, that they had alreadie at another
time taken the same oth, which was not now needfull to be reiterated. After these things
the Earle of Bologne hauing exhibited the authoritie which hee had from the Duke of
Guienne, the Cardinall tooke Donna Ioane, and the Earle by the hands, and betrothed
them, with all the vsuall ceremonies and sollemnities: and then the drummes and trumpets
sounded, and all sorts of signes of ioy and gladnesse were made by the assistants.
This done, the Ambassadours returned to Segobia, where by the way they were so beaten
with a violent tempest of wind, raine and hayle, as they were in danger of their liues,
and diuers of their traine perished, which was an euident token, that the miseries of
Spayne were not yet at an end. From Segobia, the King caused the Bishop of Siguenca
to accompany them to Burgos,The Duke of Guienne his death, breakes this marriage. from whence they returned highly contented to France:
but the Duke of Guienne his death, who liued in continuall discord with his brother king
Lewis, hindred the accomplishment of this marriage.
The Arch-bishop of Toledo was then at home in his house,New troubles by the Arch-bishop of Toledos meanes. contriuing of new trobles,
and held the party contrarie to the Master of S. Iames, who did wholly possesse the
King, to the great indignation of the great Lords, who vppon that occasion left the
Court, and retired themselues home to their houses, the kingdome beeing opprest with
miseries, plagues, famines, murthers, and falshood in all things, especially in mony, to
the great hurt of the people, who wanted the administration of iustice. Basco de Contreras
one of the Kings captaines, had taken the fortresse of Perales from this Arch-bishop,
the which caused new troubles: for the Arch-bishop beeing desirous to recouer it, assembled
forces, and came and beseeged it: the King on the other side sent him commandement
to withdraw his souldiers, threatning, if he refused, to fall vppon him and his, and
was already come to Madrid, with troupes of horse and foote. The Arch-bishop perceyuing
himselfe inferiour in strength, obeyed the Kings commandement, and brought
backe his people to Alcala.
The Princes Don Fernand and D. Izabella, remayned at Duegas, beeing counselled
and fauoured in all things by the Arch-bishop of Toledo, and his faithful companion
Don Iohn of Arias Bishop of Segobia,Proceedings against the Archb of Toledo. by reason whereof the King complayned to
the Pope by his Ambassadour resident at Rome, of both these Prelates, accusing them
of committing many things to the preiudice and contempt of his royall Crowne. The
Pope vnderstanding so much, sent to the Bishop of Segobia, commanding him within

the terme of ninety dayes to make his personall appearance at Rome. And hee appoynted
that the Lords of the Kings Councell, should cause the Arch-bishop to be summoned
and exhorted by foure Channons, according to the forme of law, to returne to the
obedience due vnto the king, which if he should refuse to do, they should then thunder
out his processe, and send it to Rome, that the Pope might see it, to the end to proceede
against him, and chastise him as a rebellious Prelate. The Popes Briefe beeing declared
in the Chapter-house of Toledo, there came to the Court at Madrid, Fernand Peres of
Ayala, bastard-brother to Pero Lopes of Ayala, who had beene Earle of Fuencalida, Diego
del Gadillo, Marco Dias, and Don Francisco of Palencia, Prior of Arrochio, Chanons
of the same church, who hauing shewed to the King, how highly their Prelates disobedience
did displease not onely them, but the whole Chapter, they offered themselues to
performe whatsoeuer the Kings Councell should thinke fit to bee done for his seruice,
and for reducing the Arch-bishop to his duty to his royall Maiestie. Now, because the
King and his trayne were at that time in the Diocesse of Toledo, and fearing the Archbishops
censures and interdictions, they defended themselues with an appeale, putting
themselues vnder the protection of the Sea Apostolicke: and then a Knight and a Doctor
was sent to giue the Arch-bishop notice of the Briefe, and to commaund him to returne
to the Kings seruice, and to abandon the Princes, whom the King desired to chase
out of the Realme. The Arch-bishop excused himselfe, and answered, that heretofore by
the Kings commaundement he had sworne to the Princesse Donna Izabella, as to the eldest
heire of the Crowne, therefore he could not acknowledge any other but her: and he
besought the king to deale no farther in that businesse, because such was his determinate
will and purpose. The King vnderstanding this answer, commanded to proceed against
the Arch-bishop with all rigour: but the Master of Saint Iames, who managed the affaires
with more cunning, was of a contrarie opinion: he aduised the King to send the Licentiate
Diego Henriques vnto him, to offer him, if he would adhere to the Kings partie,
and forsake the Princesse, three thousand tennants, and two forts for his two sons Troilo
Carillo of Acugna, and Lope Vasques of Acugna.
The Arch-bishop reiected these temptations, and would by no meanes forsake the
Princesse seruice. This notwithstanding, the Master caused all proceedings against her
to cease, and the foure Channons were sent backe to Toledo discontented enough, three
of them were taken by the way, and brought to Torrejon de Velasco, by Pero Arias of
Auila, who by the Arch-bishops commandement lay in ambush to surprise them. Fernand
Peres of Ayala, onely saued himselfe in Canales. The King beeing very much displeased
herewith, sent diuers horse-men to field, who tooke diuers friends and seruants
of the Arch-bishops, and among others, Don Diego of Gueuara, a Channon of Toledo,
in exchange of whome the three Chanons were deliuered. And so the matter passed on
betwixt the King and the Arch-bishop for that time.
In the meane time, the Master of Saint Iames intending his owne profite, and beeing
assured of his credit and power, had taken the cittie of Alcaraz, which imported him very
much, beeing neere to his Marquisat of Villena, and was easily confirmed in the possession
and reuenue of the same by the King,Disorders in the gouernement of Castile which discontented diuers: for by his example,
the Earle of Benauent, seized vpon Villalua, and deposing Pero Nugno from his office of
Merin major of the cittie of Valliodolit, he gaue it to his brother Don Pedro Pimentell.
It was then an ordinarie tricke in Spayn, for those that were able to seize vpon any place
to do it, without caring for robberies, murthers, and other hainous crimes, which they
by such attempts affoorded matter and occasion too, beeing assured that if they had any
little fauour in Court, to possesse their booties without controule. It happened euen so
to the Earle of Arcos, Don Rodrigo Ponce of Leon, who hauing taken, during the furies
of the League, the cittie of Cales, he obtayned the same in full proprietie, with title of
Marquis therof, by the meanes and furtherance of the Master of Saint Iames his father-in-law.
If two Lords were at strife, without any respect of the Royall Maiestie, they would
strike vp the drumme, and raise forces to ruine one another, as if they had beene Soueraigne
Princes, which had held of none but of God and the sword (as they say.) Vppon

these tearmes stood Don Manuel Ponce of Leon, brother to the Earle of Arcos, and Don
Fernand of Velasco, brother to the Earle of Siruela, who were in the field, accompanied
with great number of horse-men readie to come to battaile betwixt Madrid and Alcala,
neere enough to the Court: wherefore the King to hinder them, sent thither his great
Master Andrew Cabrera with sufficient forces. Cabrera vsing great diligence, and gallowping
apace in a dustie high way, his horse raising a great cloud of dust, hee was not perceiued
by those which followed him, but was ouerthrowne, and so troden vnder the
horse feete, that beeing well-neere bruised to death, hee was brought backe speechlesse
to Madrid, where after he had beene well visited by the Chirurgions and Phisitions, hee
recouered at leysure.
There was a quarrell betwixt the Earles of Haro and Treuigno, about certaine words 
of contempt vttered by the Countesse of Haro,Quarrell betwixt the Earles of Haro and Treuigno. the Earle of Treuigno strengthened
himselfe with Pedro Abendagno, and Iohn Alphonso of Muxica, chiefe of the Mutins of Biscay
and Guipuscoa, who were banished not long before by the Earle of Haro, committed
by the King for the ordering and pacifying of those Prouinces. The Earle of Treuigno
then hauing giuen them entrance into the countrey, against the Kings leaue, and
contrarie to the sentence: and beeing confederated together, they ioyned to their league
Don Pedro Lopes of Padilla, Gouernour and Captaine of the frontiers of Castile, riding
vp and downe, and commaunding in the Countrie without any feare at all: wherefore
the Earle of Haro, by the Kings commaundement, came to Burgos, and there leauied
certaine forces in hast as well hee, as the Earle of Salines Don Lewis, and Don Sancho
of Velasco his breethren, and brought them into Biscay, beeing most of them horsemen.
The Earle of Treuigno and the Gouernour, did the like on their parts, vnto whome
were ioyned with great numbers of foot-men leuyed in Biscay and Guipuscoa, the heads
of the faction aboue named, to encourage whome the Earle of Treuigno vsed a policy.
My companions in armes (quoth he) is it possible that you can indure, that this Earle
Pedro of Velasco, with his credite and fauour gotten by flatterie, should hence-foorth
commaund ouer you as your Lord, and separate you from the Crowne of Castile, into
the which your Predecessours were incorporated with so great affection? Will you againe
subiect your selues to follow those priuate passions, which haue so often troubled
the generall state of the Kingdome, and exposed the subiects to extreame miseries,
whereof you haue so many recent examples before your eyes? I do not thinke that the
auncient valour of the Biscans is so farre degenerate, as euer to consent to submit themselues
to any subalterne iurisdiction, especially when at this instant, an occasion presents
it selfe to be reuenged vppon him, who is the oppressour of your liberties: For if
wee do not fight valiantly, and cut this Earle of Haro in peeces, assure you that hee will
become your Lord: For hee hath without all doubt obtayned of the King (who respects
not the worthinesse or vnworthinesse of those hee doth good vnto) the Lordshippe of
Biscay, and hath Letters pattents thereof, the which I haue seene and read: Wherefore
it remaynes then in your prowes and valour, to set free your selues from this inconuenience.
The Biscains animated by this speech, beeing come to blowes, neere the towne of
Mugnia, in streight places and aduantageous for foote-men, as they were, against horsmen,
did fight so furiously, as they put them to flight, with great slaughter, and taking of diuerse
persons of woorth, among whom were ledde away the Earle of Salines, and Don
Lewis of Velasco. The King hauing notice that these Lords were in armes, was come as
farre as Burgos to hinder their fight, but hee came not soone enough. Wherefore hee
went to Odugna, and from thence sent commaundement to the two Earles to lay downe
their armes, and to retire themselues to their owne houses, enioyning the Earle of Treuigno,
vpon paine of his indignation, to deliuer the prisoners: then hee caused them to
make truce, the better to reconcile them, and make them friends. In this incounter, the
valour of one Iohn de Lerua was noted on the Earle of Treuigno's partie. On the other
side Don Pedro Manrique sonne to the Earle of Paredes, beeing accompanied with certaine
base fellowes, surprized the Citty of Alcarras, and enforced Iohn de Haro, who was

Gouernour thereof for the Master of Saint Iames, to saue himselfe within the Castle,
where hee beseeged him: but the Gouernour valiantly defended himselfe, and aduertized
the Master of his distresse, who vppon this occasion beeing come to Ocagna, and
hauing speedily gathered together eight hundred horse, hee with his sonne Don Diego
Lopes de Pacheco came to Alcarras, and caused Don Pedro Manriques to dislodge, who
at the bare report of his comming did rayse his seege, beeing not strong enough to
attend him.
During these stirres, the Kingdome of Castile was like a Forrest, where freely, and
without controule, all sorts of mischiefes were committed, the head that had power to
redresse them, not regarding it: Wherefore the townes and communalties were enforced
to set downe some remedie for it, to the end they might liue in better safetie, for men
were more assured from the violence of theeues in their owne houses, then in the fields:
and they established in euery corner honest men,Hermandades of Castile. who went vp and downe well accompanied,
preuenting those outrages the best they could, punishing the offendours, as often
as they could lay hands on them, leauing the wayes in some sort assured by that
meanes: the King beeing contented there-with, and letting them alone, albeit the Factious
were greatly displeased there-with, and namely, the Master of Saint Iames, who
sayd it was not well done, to put base people in authoritie, and to keepe the Nobilitie
vnder.
Now the Court beeing returned to Segobia, in the Castle of the which Cittie, the
King had caused his Treasure, Iewels, and other rich stuffe to be transported from Madrid,
hee determined to leauie an armie, beeing resolued to chase the Prince Don Fernand,
and Donna Izabella out of the kingdome of Castile, for they were beames in his
eyes, which did hinder him (as hee sayd) from prouiding for the present calamities and
miseries of his kingdome. The Master of Saint Iames, who euer held the euent of battell
doubtfull and suspitious, was of opinion to vse meanes more cunning, and lesse dangerous.
The King beeing come to Coca with this purpose and determination, leauing at
Segobia the Earle of Vruegna, and Andrew de Cabrera, with the Queene, and Donna
Ioane, whome hee called Princesse, and the Master, who made vse of the Arch-bishop of
Seuile at his owne pleasure, caused him to counsell him not to proceede against the
Princesse by way of force, but to trie other meanes to draw them to his will. The King
perswaded thereunto,An. 1470. Genealogie of Castile. dissolued his armie. These things passed in the yeare 1470. at
which time the Princesse Donna Izabella was deliuered of hir first child, in the Cittie of
Duegnas, the first day of October, to wit, of a daughter called Elizabeth, or Izabella like
the mother.
Then the Moores of Granado,Moores. proude, because of their fore-passed prosperities,
forraged the Countrie belonging to the Master-shippe of Alcantara, against whome
was sent the new Marquis of Cales, Don Rodrigo Ponce of Leon, Earle of Arcos, who repressed
these runnagates, and tooke from them the Cittie of Cardela, the which soone
after was taken againe by the Moores: neuerthelesse hee carried away with him great
spoyles, and many Moores prisoners. In the meane space the Duke of Alua came to
the Court at Medina del Campo, who was kindly receyued and welcommed by the
King.
 Now the marriage of Donna Ioane beeing dashed, by reason of the Duke of Guiens
death,Castile. who departed this life at Bourdeaux, the King by the aduise of the Master of
Saint Iames, sent Ambassadours to King Don Alphonso of Portugall, to treate with him
about a marriage betwixt him and her. This King had no desire thereunto, because of
the common report, which was, that shee was borne in adulterie betwixt Don Bertrand
de la Cueu^, and the Queene of Castile: and therefore he had wholy reiected it, at such
time as she should haue beene married to the Prince Don Iohn his sonne,Genealogie of Portugal. whome hee
married about that time to Donna Leonora, daughter to the Infant Don Fernand Duke
of Viseo, and of Donna Beatrix, daughter to the Infant Don Iohn, who had beene in
former time Master of Saint Iames, and the second Constable of Portugall: of the
which Don Fernand, and Beatrix were borne, Don Domingo who was Duke of Viseo
after his father, and Don Manuell who raigned in Portugall, after this Don Iohn his

brother in law. Donna Beatrice had builded the Monastery of Nunnes, called the conception
of Veja, where shee with her husband Don Ferdinand lye buried. Now King
Alphonso at such time as this Ambassage was making ready, was busied with good successe
about the Affrican expedition: for hauing in person transported beyond the sea
a very mighty armie, being followed by the Prince Don Iohn his sonne, and by many
great Lords, and experimented Captaines of his kingdome, amongst whom the most
renowmed were Don Iohn Coutin Earle of Marialua, Don Aluaro de Castro Earle of
Montesanto,Arzilla and Tanger in Affrick taken by the King of Portugall. and his sonne Don Iohn de Castro, Don Henry de Meneses Earle of Valencia,
Ruy de Merlo Captaine of his guardes, who afterward was Earle of Oliuenca,
and Don Alphonso Vasconcello, who was Earle of Penela, hee tooke by force Arzilla,
and did so terrifie them of Tanger, as they forsooke the Cittie, and left it empty to
the enemy, so as King Don Alphonso hauing amply enlarged his Empire, beyond the
sea, the Kings of Portugall haue since intituled themselues, Kings on this side and
beyond the Sea. The Earles of Montesanto and Marialua dyed at the taking of
Arzilla.
The gouernment of Tanger was giuen to Ruy de Merlo with a good garrison:
and the King and the Armie beeing returned to Lisbone, Don Alphonso Basconcello,
was made Earle of Penela,Mariage of the Prince D Ioan of Portugall with Donna Leonora of V^sco. and then was the marriage of the Prince celebrated,
beeing seuenteene yeares of age, with Donna Leonora his cousin germaine, with
dispensation made since by Pope Sixtus the fourth, who succeeded Paul the second
in the Sea of Rome. The Ambassadors of Castile agreed vpon an enterview of the
the two Kings, betwixt the townes of Badajos and Yelues: but they departed one
from an other discontented, without any conclusion of the marriage, the principall
impediment was, the small trust which the King of Portugall reposed in the
Maister of Saint Iames, whose inconstancie hee merueilously suspected; together
with the disordered life of the Queene, who was detested of all men. This marriage
afterwards was thought vppon to bee renewed, as shall bee heere-after
declared.
The King of Castile wanted no troubles and discontents in this iourney, by meanes 
of the insolency,Castille. wherein the Lords, Prelates, and Knights his subiects were nourished,
the one taking euill example from the other. First of all the Bishop of Siguenca
refused to accompany the King, and notwithstanding any entreaty, he would
not stirre forth of Guadalajara, whether hee had with-drawne himselfe, beeing
highly displeased that hee had beene disappointed of a Cardinals Hatte, wherevnto
by the kings fauour hee had earnestly aspyred, the Maister of Saint Iames hauing
supplanted him, who procured and obteined it for Don Lewis d' A^ugna Bishop of
Burgos his nephew, the Bishop of Siguenca beeing neuer satisfied with speaking
euill of Donna Ioane and the Queene her mother. The king with his traine beeing
come to Badajos,Insolency of the Maister of Saint Iames. hee was constrained to lodge in the suburbes, and villages thereabouts:
for the Earle of Feria shutte the gates against him, saying, that hee was certaine
that hee would vpon his entry giue the same towne to the Maister of Saint
Iames, to whom hee durst deny nothing: for hee went about not long before to snatch
the towne of Sepulued by force as it were from the king, which was neere to the
Earledome of Saint Steuens, the which notwithstanding the request, admonishment,
and resistance of the inhabitants, who could not endure to bee alienated from the
Crowne, the king was constrained to grant vnto him by reason of his importunity:
but the townesmen not resolued to obey the Maister, gaue themselues ouer to the Princesse,
who with Prince Ferdinand her husband came thither, and remained for a certaine
time in those quarters, and in the territories of the Archbishop of Toledo, who
was alwayes their faithfull seruant. At Siuill the Duke of Medina Sidonia, and the
Marquis of Cales were at great strife, and ioyned battaile ^he one against the other,
by meanes whereof the Marquis was driuen forth of the citty, and withdrew himselfe
to Xeres, where being fauoured by the knights of Saint Iames, and those of Calatraua,
and the Duke by those of the Citty, they made cruell warres one vpon another,
the Maister of Saint Iames vpholding the Marquis his sonne in law.

In an incounter made betwixt Seuile and Alcala of Guadiaira, two bastard sonnes of
the Duke of Medina were slayne, and other disorders followed thereuppon: for the redressing
whereof, the King sent Don Inigo Lopes of Mendoza, Earle of Tendilla, to Seuile,
who by his diligence and good counsell, caused them to lay downe their armes, and
made those two Lords friends, and the Duke had his towne of Medina Sidonia, and the
fortresse of the same restored vnto him.
At Toledo Pero Lopes of Ayala newly made Earle of Fuensalida, was sollicited by the
brother of his deceased wife Donna Maria de Silua, to wit, the Bishop of Badajos, who
was desirous to bring againe the Earle of Cifuentes, and his Vncle Don Iohn de Ribera
into Toledo, to giue his eldest daughter Donna Leonora in marriage to the Earle of Cifuentes,
seeking by that meanes to reconcile and make them friends, which the Master
of Saint Iames did likewise procure, building some desseignes vppon the same citty: but
the king being aduertized thereof, sent foorth-with the Licenciate Diego Henriques to aduertise
the Earle of Fuensalida by no meanes to make that marriage, and not to suffer the
Earle of Cifuentes nor Don Iohn de Ribera to enter into Toledo, because he was assured,
that as soone as they should set foot within the cittie, they would driue him thence.
The Earle giuing more credit to the Bishoppe, then to the King, was very willing to
agree vppon the marriage, by reason whereof the Earle of Cifuentes, and Don Iohn de
Ribera,People of Toledo mutinous. were no sooner entred into the cittie, but contrarie to their oath and promise,
which was not to attempt any innouation, nor stirre vp any troubles, they put themselues
in armes, and bandied themselues in such sort, as there was nothing to bee seene
but daily and continuall skirmishes, fights, murthers, robberies, and other miseries, vsual
in diuided Citties, the common people of this towne beeing more mutinous and apt to
enter into factions and leagues, then any other Cittie of Spaine: Wherefore the King,
the better to redresse these inconueniences, beeing at Madrid, sent the Bishoppe of Burgos,
together with the Licentiate Diego Henriques, who for a time caused those insolencies
to cease.
The King comming afterwards thither, tooke away, against all reason, the gouernement
of the cittie from the Earle of Fuensalida, and put it against his will, into the hands
of Doctor Garcy Lopes of Madrid, with charge of an assistant, and with great authoritie,
onely to please and content the Master of Saint Iames. The dispossessed Earle went home
to his owne house, and the Earle of Cifuentes afterward had no desire to accomplish
the marriage with Donna Leonora, alleadging certaine lets and hinderances, by reason
of their neere consanguinitie, and so soone after married else-where. The Earle of Cifuentes,
and Don Iohn de Ribera, tooke Doctor Garcy Lopes, committed him to prison,
and made themselues masters of the Cittie gates, and other strong places, and beseeged
the Castle, the which they had taken, with the absolute commaund ouer the whole Citie,
had not certaine Channons resisted them, who fortifying themselues in the great
Church, held out till such time as the Marshals Fernand de Riuadeneyra, and Pera^fan de
Ribera were come to their ayde, who caused the Earle and his people to with-draw themselues.
The Master of Saint Iames, who was at that time in the territorie of Leon, making
his progresse vp and downe about the ordering of the affaires of that Prouince, beeing
aduertized of that which had befallen Garcy Lopes, came in great hast to Toledo, from
whence hauing driuen the Earle of Cifuentes, Don Iohn de Ribera, Lope of Estuniga,
with Arias de Silua, and other of their complices, hee left the Cittie in quiet. The King
not long after came to the Monasterie of Sisla, halfe a league distant from the Cittie, but
hee did in no sort touch any of the seditious, because all the mischiefe had beene procured
by the Master. As hee thought to returne to Segobia, hee found the Cittie in a
mutinie, and reuolted from the Corrigidor or Gouernour of the same, by the meanes of
certaine Gentlemen, who were taken, and sent with yrons vppon their legges to the Castle
of Madrid, where they remayned a long time after.
Now if temporall matters were so ill gouerned, it is to bee supposed, that spirituall
affaires were farre worse: for what good could happen to the people* whose Pastors, neglecting
their ecclesiasticall functions, had no other care but to heape vp worldly riches

and honours, making themselues heads of Factions, and by their couetousnesse and ambition,
did themselues most of all trouble and disquiet all Kingdomes and Commonwealths.
Whilest these miseries troubled the Realme of Castille, King Iohn of Arragon did stil 
endeauour to reduce the Rebels of Catralonia to his obedience,Arragon. and after that hee had
ended the question betwixt himselfe and his sonne-in-law Gaston of Foix about the kingdome
of Nauarre, hee did send his sonne Don Alphonso of Arragon, with the Earle of
Prades, who was returned to his seruice, into the confines of Barcelona, who encamped
themselues alongst the riuer of Beson, and made courses euen to the Cittie gates, burning
and spoyling, houses, gardens, and other places of pleasure of that countrie. Then
they went to batter a strong castle seated vppon the riuer, which the Barcelonois beeing
desirous to succour, Iames Galliot Gouernour of the cittie, came into the field with a
great number of horse-men, and foure thousand foot, bringing with him Don Denis of
Portugall, and Gratian of Aguirre, who presenting themselues before the enemie, with
intent to fight,The Barcelonois defeated. were so rudely receyued, as within awhile they were defeated, with many
of their people slayne, hurt, and taken prisoners, in the number of whom were Iames
Galliot, and Denis of Portugall: part of those which fled, came backe to the cittie, and the
rest retired themselues into the woods and mountaines. This losse did so daunt the courage
of those of Barcelona, as despayring of their affaires, they all began to hearken vnto
peace, whereunto they were the rather incited by the Kings comming, who ioyned
himselfe soone after with the forces of his sonne Alphonso, taking the towne of Valdonzellas,
hee made shew as if he would beseege the Cittie both by sea and land,The citty of Barcelona yeeldeth to the mercie of the King. the which
beeing filled with great feare, and yet neuerthelesse trusting to the Kings clemencie, they
sent Commissioners vnto him, to craue his pardon, and to offer him the keyes of the
Cittie, submitting themselues to his mercie.
These men beeing come into the kings presence, did by the mouth of Lewis Setenti a
Florentine, confesse the Cittizens fault, and did implore his mercie, presenting him with
the keyes, the which the King holding in his hands, re-deliuered forth-with to the Commissioners,
contrarie to the expectation of all his followers,King Iohns clemency. who thought, that in regard
hee had beene so many yeares troubled and disquieted with the obstinate and cruell
warres of the Barcelonois, hee would haue executed seuere vengeance vppon them:
but hee on the contrarie, with a singular mildnesse, did not onely pardon them, and their
Confederates, for whatsoeuer they had committed against him, but confirmed them in
their goods, liberties, priuiledges, exemptions, and auncient rights. The next day following,
the Cittizens had prepared a triumphant chariot for him, that he might make
his entrie with great pompe and magnificence, the which he would not accept, but was
contented to enter into the Cittie riding vppon a white Courser, by Saint Anthonies
gate of the same cittie, which hee sound vnprouided of all manner of victuals, wherewith
he caused them presently to bee furnished; so as without the aboue-named defeate,
necessity would haue enforced them to haue yeelded.
By this peace which happened so opportunely, the miseries of Cattalonia were ended,
which had troubled the whole State of Arragon for the space of tenne yeares. He which
shewed most prowesse, and performed the notablest exploites in this warre, was Don
Alphonso of Arragon, Duke of Villa hermosa, a Prince worthie of great prayse, and
high commendation, who dyed afterwards in the seruice of his brother King Fernand
raigning in Castile,D. Alphonso of Arragon his posteritie. at a place called Linares, leauing his sonne Don Alphonso of
Arragon, heire to his Dutchie of Villa hermosa, who was Knight of the Order of Saint
Iames, and a Daughter called Donna Maria of Arragon, who was maaried to the
Prince of Salerne. Hee had out of wedlocke Don Iohn of Arragon, Earle of Luna,
Captaine of the Castle of Amposta, Don Alphonso of Arragon, who was Bishop of
Tortosa, and afterward Arch-bishoppe of Tarragone, Don Fernand of Arragon,
Prior of Saint Iohns of Cattalonia, together with Donna Leonora of Arragon, wife to
the Earle of Albayda.
This peace was no sooner concluded, but the King had newes of a new rumult, raised 
in Nauarre,Nauarre. whereinto the Princesse his daughter voluntarily had runne herselfe with

great danger, and many of her seruants lost their liues. It happened after this manner:
Iohn d' Athondo the Kings Auditour of his accounts, and Cittizen of Pampelona, with
Michaell Ollacarizqueta, and others of the same cittie, seruants to the King and the
Princesse, and of the Faction of Grammont, did vndertake, in hatred and disgrace of the
contrarie partie of Beaumont, who possessed the Cittie of Pampelona, to bring the
Princesse Donna Leonora into the same,Practises of D. Leonora Couatesse of Foix. with troupes of souldiers, and to make her
peaceable and absolute Ladie thereof: they hauing then communicated together about
their plot, it was thought fit, that the Princesse should come in a morning before day to
the Iewes gate, otherwise called the Tower of the royall gate, and the Marshall Don Pedro
of Nauarre, should make himselfe Master of the two next towers. The appoynted
time beeing come, the Princesse with her attendants, found the gate opened by those of
Grammont,Rashnesse of D. Leonora. through the which beeing brought in, the Marshall possessed the two Towers
with three-score and tenne Gentlemen, and on a suddaine, they beganne to crie,
God saue the Princesse, God sane the Princesse: at this rumour those of Beaumont, (albeit
they were amazed at so vnlooked-for an accident happening in the night) ranne to
armes, and behaued themselues in such sort, as they not onely hindred their enemies
from further entring into the cittie, but enforced the Princesse and her people to get
them thence in great hast: for the most part of the souldiers which should haue followed
her, were not yet arriued. Hauing recouered the gate, they beseeged the Marshall Don
Pedro and his souldiers which were in the two towers, who at the first would not yeeld,
but in the end, when they sawe the Cannon was readie to play vppon them, they were
content to parley.
The Princesse fearing least some euill might happen to the Marshall, and those that
were beseeged with him, sent word to the Cittizens, that what was done, was by her speciall
commaundement, and therefore intreated them to do them no hurt. At the last they
yeelded, vppon promise made, that they should all depart with their Armes, without any
harme either in word or deed, which notwithstanding, they were all taken, and shut vp
in the Kings prisons of the cittie,The Marshall with his followers slayne. where soone after they were cruelly and perfidiously
stabd to death with daggers: and it is reported, that the Marshall was slaine by the hands
of Philip of Beaumont, brother to the Earle of Lerin. This act did very much displease
the Princesse, who commaunded that the same gate should euer after be called the gate
of treason, or the traytors gate: and in some sort to reuenge that wrong, they proceeded
against the Earle of Lerin, and against Don Iohn of Beaumont, Prior of Saint Iohns,
and Chancellor of the Kingdome, and against Don Philip, and their breethren, and Don
Iohn Earle of Luza, Charles of Artieda and his children, Arnold d' Otza, the Prouosts and
Iurates of Pampelona, with others their allyes and complices, who by the iudgement
and authoritie of the King and his Councell, were condemned to death, depriuation of
honours, defamation of their houses, and confiscation of their goods, as guiltie of high
treason.
The Records of those times taxe the Earle of Lerin, saying, that hee, to the end hee
might the better enioy the cittie, had driuen thence the Kings and Princesses seruants,
and had established therein Officers and souldiers, such as were at his deuotion, contrary
to their authoritie, whose iurisdiction hee did vsurpe, vexing and tyrannizing the Kingdome:
That by the fauour and ayde of the Earle, the Guipuscoans had ouerthrowne the
forts of Larraun, Lecunberry, Leyca, and Gorriti: and that hee beeing sundrie times
sent for by the Princesse, to come to the Parliament and Assembly of the Estates of the
Kingdome, would neuer obey her commaundement: That the Earle of Foix, hauing
sent his children, Iohn and Peter of Foix, both in his owne name and the Princesse, to perswade
him to returne to his due obedience, hee did reiect their admonishments, and derided
Pope Pauls commandement in that behalfe: the which things, full of contumacie
and contempt, had induced the Princesse to make that attempt. Others thinke, that her
owne extreame ambition and desire to beare rule, did more mooue her, than any of the
Earles misdemeanours which were not lightly to bee esteemed.
On the other side, the Earle of Lerin, and his Faction, did arraigne and condemne others
of their aduerse partie, and as for the Marshals death, hee excused himselfe;

saying, that he came to seeke him, and had done his best to surprise the Cittie, and to
cut the throates of those of Beaumont who were in the same: yet for all that, this could
not excuse his breach of promise.
The King afterward recompenced Iohn d' Athondo, with a perpetuall rent to him and
his heires of sixe-score golden Florens by the yere of the coyne of Arragon, and besides
that, did permit him to beare in a quarter of his coate, the royall of Armes of Nauarre.
To Michael Ollacarizqueta was likewise giuen other rewards. This sedition happened in
Pampelona about the end of the yeare, one thousand, foure hundred, seuenty one.
Concerning the affaires of Castile:Castile. about the time that Toledo, and other Citties
of the Kingdome did reuolt, the which wee lately mentioned, Donna Maria of Portocarrero,
wife to Don Iohn de Pacheco, Marquis of Villena, and Master of Saint Iames, died
of a canker at Segobia, and it is reported, that shee beeing a wise and vertuous Lady, did
greatly reprooue her husbands extreame ambition, and that at her death, she made him
sundrie remonstrances which tended greatly to his honour and commoditie, and the
preseruation of his house, shee did greatly aduise him to maintaine the King in his honour
and reputation, towards whome hee had insolently behaued himselfe, and most
commonly without respect, to the great griefe of all the great Lords of Spaine: whereuppon
the Master made her many faire promises of amendment, which after her death
were soone forgotten: therefore considering with himselfe, that hee was now a widdower,
and badly beloued, he thought it expedient for him, and greatly profitable for his affaires
in hand,Master of S. Iames allyes himselfe with the house of Velasco. to marrie againe, and to strengthen himselfe with some good allyance:
wherefore he bended his thoughts vppon the houses of Mendoza and Velasco, rich and
mightie families, the chiefe of which, hee hauing sounded and practised, there was a
meeting betwixt Segobia and Pedraza, by the Bishoppes of Siguenca, Palenca, and Burgos,
the Earles of Haro, Medina Celi, and the Master, who agreed vpon a marriage betwixt
the sayd Master, and the Earle of Haros daughter: wherewith the king was well
pleased.
The marriage was afterward sollemnized at Pegnafiell, a place belonging to the
Earle of Vregna, who was Nephew to the Master. By this allyance the Bishop of Siguenca
was pacifyed, came to Court, and had promise of the Kings fauour for his obtayning
of a Cardinals hat, whereon he dreamed day and night, from Pope Sixtus the fourth,
newly elected, who was borne in Sauona of the family of Rouero, a Friar, and Cardinal
of the title of Saint Peter ad vincula, whose Legate Roderigo Borgia, Bishop of Albi, and 
Cardinall of the title of S. Nicholas in carcere Tulliano,Rodrigo Borgia Cardinal^. Vice-chancellour of the sea of
Rome, who afterward was Pope, came this yeare 1471. into Spayne, where hee was receiued
at Madrid by King Henry, with all the honour and submission, that a seruant or an
obedient sonne could vse towards his superiour and father, as also in all places as hee
came by the way: as soone as he was entred into Castile, especially when hee arriued in
the territories belonging to the Mastershippe of Saint Iames, hee went vnder a rich canopie,
the King beeing on his left hand, yet a little behind him.
Hauing then declared his legation, and shewed his faculties, which were to visit the
Kingdome of Castile, and the Isles neere adiacent, to ordayne what was necessarie for
the Church of Rome, the King shewing himselfe very obedient and willing, hee deputed
the Licenciate Diego Henriques his Chronicler, Chaplaine, and Councellour, to accompanie,
and conferre with him about these matters. At the intreatie of the King and the
Master of Saint Iames, the Legate dispatched a message to Rome, for the Bishoppe of
Siguenca's hatte:An. 1472. this was in the yeare, one thousand, foure hundred, seuenty two. When
the Court and the Legate came to Segobia, there was made a generall assembly of the
Commissioners of euery Cathedrall Church of Spaine, where a certaine Subsidie was
graunted to the Pope, which was the principall cause of his Legation, in recompence
whereof, the Legate bestowed pardons and indulgences vppon euery place with measure
and proportion, according to euery mans qualitie, and besides did ordaine to euery
Church two Channonries, the one for a Diuine, the other for a Chanonist, the which
should be giuen by the Bishops and Chapters.
Some neuerthelesse, namely, of those which did cleaue and adhere to the partie of

the Princes Don Ferdinand and Donna Isabella, did not appeare at this assembly, in the
number of whom was Don Inigo Manrique Bishop of Coria, who requested the legate
to come to Valiodolit, saying, that they were to conferre with him about matters touching
the succession of the kingdomes; but the King perswaded him to the contrary,
accusing the Princes and their followers of many matters. The Legate neuerthelesse
went to Alcala to visit the Princes, who remained there with the Archbishop of Toledo,
by whom he was sumptuously receiued and with great pompe, as also in Guadalajara,
the Marquis of Santillanas house, where hee remained a certaine space, with the
Marquis and the Earles his bretheren.
 The impieties, superstitions, thefts, rapines, and other insolencies vsed at that time
among the Christians in Spaine,Enormous sins cause those newly conuerted to returne to Iudaisme. namely the Prelates and Church-men, were so scandalous
to all men, as diuerse newe Christians, who were conuerted from Iudaisme to the
profession of Christianity, being constrained more by the rigor of the lawes, then perswaded
by wholesome doctrine, and good examples, began to returne to Iudaisme, not
being able to beleeue by humaine reason, that the religion professed by such detestable
people, could bee the true. The remedy applied to this mischiefe was the same which
arrogant men and such as hate correction,Massacre of the new Christians. and are desirous to liue in their errors and
corruptions, doe commonly vse, namely the sword, massacres, and all manner of excesse.
For in the Citty of Cordoua, insteed of bringing back these straies by meeknesse,
holinesse of life, and such like examples, which is the duty of the ministers
of the Church, they did let loose the bridle to the rash mutinous people, who made
a cruell slaughter of them, and spoiled their goods.
Those of Iaen followed this example, against whom the Constable Michaell Lucas d'
Irancu opposing himself,The Constable Don Michael Lucas de Iransu, murthered by the people. was most inhumainly murthered in the Cathedral Church by
the enraged multitude. The like cruelties and robberies were committed in Andujar
and other places of Andaluzia, wherewith King Henry was extreamly discontented,
but being faint-harted and of no courage in these matters, hee did no more punish the
murtherers, then the Pastors were diligent in seeking out fit Christian meanes to bring
back these Apostata's into the right way. The office of Constable was giuen to Don
Pedro Velasco Earle of Haro the Kings great Chamberlaine,D. Pedro de Velasco made Constable of Castill. at the intercession of the
Maister of Saint Iames his Sonne in law, the which dignity hath euer since, euen till
our time, continued in that family: The King like-wise gaue the seales of his Chancery,
to the Bishogge of Siguenca.
The King finding that Donna Ioane his supposed daughter, had very ill successe in her
treaties of marriage, resolued to bestow her vpon Don Henry, Sonne to the Infant Don
Henry who was Maister of S. Iames, and brother to Don Ferdinand Infant of Castile, which
was King of Arragon, who at the same time, remayned in the Citty of Barcelona, from
whence hee caused him to come secretly into Castile. This Prince, who by the commandement
of King Iohn his vnckle, was called in his dominions, the Infant of Arragon,
and by some others the fortunate Infant,Pride hinders the Infant Don Henry from his preferment in Castil. was very proud, the which hee shewed in
Castile before his time, which did greatly hinder his aduancement, in that Kingdome.
Hee with his mother Donna Beatrice Pimentell, Aunt to the Earle of Benauent, arriued
at Requegna, from whence afterward, (the King hauing furnished them with all things
necessary for their calling, and place which they held) the Maister of Saint Iames
caused them to come to the Castle of Garcy Nugnos, sending two of his Gentlemen
to accompany them thither. During the time that this Don Henry remayned there,
sundry Lords and Knights came to visit him, diuers of whome because they would bee
reputed ciuill and curteous, offered to kisse his hand, thinking that hee would not haue
suffered it, but hee keeping a great grauity presented his hand freely vnto them: but
one amongst the rest taking him by the hand, sayd to him in derision, my Lord you haue
a very faire hand, and so without kissing it let goe his hold, whereat D. Henry was much
offended.
The Maister of Saint Iames remayned at that time in Madrill, being discontented
with an accident hapned at Segobia: Hee had sundry times solicited the king to commit
the Castle and gates of the citty to his keeping, alleadging that in that place Queene

Ioane and her daughter, might lodge more safely then any where else, and that he should
by no meanes giue the charge thereof to Andrew de Cabrera, because he was assured that
Beatrice of Bouadilla his wife, was drawne to the Princesse party, and besides, that he being
a Cattelan, was an affectionate seruant to Prince Fernand, all which was very true.
The King yeelded to the Maisters request;Enterprise of the Maister of Saint Iames against Andrew de Cabrera captaine of the castle of Segobia. But Andrew de Cabrera refused to dispossesse
himselfe of the castle: whereat the Maister beeing highly offended, practised his ruine,
and thought to effect it by this practise: He casued Diego Tapia and certaine other Gentlemen
to come into the city, giuing them charge to stirre vp the people, whom he knew
to be desirous to fall vpon the new conuerted Christians, and to spoile them of their
goods, as they of Cordoua and other places of Andaluzia had lately done; and they appointed
that during the tumult, some band of souldiars should force the Kings house
and take both him and Andrew de Cabrera, his Steward, to make him deliuer vp the castle:
Diego de Tapia needed not to vse much labour to stirre vp the people who were ouermuch
addicted to mischiefe: wherefore it was concluded that at the ringing of a larum
bell in the Church of Saint Peter de los Picos, they should assaile the city in fiue sundry
places, on a sunday after dinner, namely in the quarter of Saint Olalla, in that of Saint
Colomba, Saint Martin, Saint Iohn, and that of Saint Michael, appointing a squadron
to goe vp and downe, and to discouer in euery place of the city. But it was the will of
God, that this complot came to the knowledge of the Legat, who lay then at Guadalajara,
who forth-with reuealed it to the King, the King sent word thereof to Andrew de Cabrera,
captaine of the sort, to the end he should stand vpon his gard, and preuent this danger
in the city; Cabrera hauing secretly armed many souldiars, and all the Conuerts
which were fit to beare arms, did so preuent his enemies, as he slew and defeated most of
them, and Diego Tapia was shot through the body with an arrow. The Maister hauing
failed in his enterprise,The Maister of Saint Iames failes of his purpose. and fearing least some euill might betide him, departed the same
night from Segobia, and came to the Monastery of Parrall, to goe from thence to Madrid:
the King tooke the paines to come and visit him in the Monastery, and vsed all the
entreaties that he could to bring him backe: but the Maister said vnto him, that he had
no confidence in Andrew de Cabrera nor his wife, and that hee would neuer set foote in
Segobia vntill such time as hee were possest of the castle: wherefore the King returned
to Segobia to pacifie and appease the tumult. It is most certaine that the enterprises
of the Maister, beeing preiudiciall to an other, were very dangerous to himselfe: for
his sonne-in-law the Earle of Benauent, still bearing in minde how hee had preuented
him of the Maistership of Saint Iames, did keepe armed men in his house, who were appointed
to haue slaine him in that tumult, wherefore hee did wisely to goe to Madrid,
whether neuerthelesse, all matters being appeased, the King and the whole Court came,
and namely the Earle of Benauent: and thither were also brought the Queene, and D.
Ioane her daughter. At Madrid there arriued a messenger from the Pope, who aduertized
the King that D. Pero Goncal de Mendoza,D. Pero Gonsal de Mendosa Cardinal of Spaine. Bishop of Siguenca, was created Cardinall
of the title of holy Crosse, the which did greatly please the King, who commanded
him to be called the Cardinall of Spaine, the which title hee vsed during his life, and receiued
many honors of King Henry.
In these times beganne the Order of the Religious of Saint Francis of Paul, who was
a Calabrian borne at a place called Paul, who was drawne into France by King Lewis
the eleuenth, and died at Tours; his Order called the Minims of Saint Francis, was approued
by Pope Sixtus this yeere 1473. and afterwards at the request of King Francis
the first,An. 1473. Order of Saint Francis of Paul. of Queene Claude his wife, and of Donna Louise of Sauoy his mother, the Author
was canonized by Pope Leo the tenth, in the yeere 1529. of this Religious Order
there are many Monasteries in Spaine, diuided into two Prouinces.
King Henry beeing desirous to consumate the marriage, betwixt Donna Ioane and
his cousin the Infant Don Henry, tooke councell therevpon of the Bishop of Siguenca
chosen Cardinall, and of others of his councell, and caused the Infant with his mother
to come to Xetafa, betwixt which place and Madrid, he did see them, and would willingly
haue brought them to Madrid, but the Maister of Saint Iames, who did not allow of
this marriage, delt in such sort as they came not thither: afterward, the king hauing

sounded the maister concerning this match,Mariage of D. Ioane supposed daughter of Henry of Arragon, broken by the Maister of S. Iames. hee did openly diswade him from it, saying,
that he ought not to marry his daughter to any other then to a King or a mighty Prince:
and that if he were determined to giue her to Don Henry, it behooued him then to leuie
men of warre, and to appoint for their pay, more then twenty millions of Marauedis;
the King (who had treasures in the Castle of Segobia) said, that hee would not want
money; and therefore, hee sent the Maister, and the new elected Cardinall to Segobia,
to take out of the Castle such summes as hee appointed: but the Captaine Andrew
de Cabrera, delayed them many dayes, saying, that hee would cause the money to bee
told out, but yet they did it not; for indeed hee was seruant to the Princes, and wholy
contrary to the Kings will, as concerning Donna Ioanes marriage; and besides that hee
would haue nothing to doe with the Maister, whom hee deadly hated, fearing that all
that hee went about tended to no other end but to dispossesse him of his Gouernment.
In the meane time the Earle of Benauent (who was coosin Germaine to
to Don Henry,) perceiuing that chiefly by the practises of the Maister, the mariage
was delayed, and incensed with an old hatred against him, about the Maistership of
Saint Iames, had bitter words with him, telling him that hee should better haue
considered of matters, and not to haue procured the Infant Don Henry to haue
come into Spaine, in a manner to deride him, and vnder colour of lyes to abuse
the King, the Realme, and the great Lords, with many other bitter words, which the
Maister endured with patience.
 The death of Don Alphonso of Fonseca, Archbishoppe of Siuill, did promote
Pero Goncales of Mendoca Bishop of Siguenca to that dignity, vnto whom almost
at the same time that his Bulls were dispatcht from Rome, was the Cardinals Hatte
presented. And the King beeing solicited to prouide for the troubles and miseries of
his kingdome, hee did the same yeare one thousand, foure hundered, seuenty and three,
call the Estates to Saint Mary de Nieua, whether came the Deputies of the Communalties
and citties of Castile, and Regions annexed to the same. There were sundry
exactions abolished, which had beene leuied vppon the poore people by the Kings
officers,Taxes leuied by vsurpation vpon the poore people abolished. and by subalterne Lords following his example, as paiments for the Portes,
bridges, taxes, watching and warding, and other such like impositions, leuied without
any lawfull cause, vpon wayfaring men, passengers, and the inhabitants of places.
There was also granted to the King a certaine Subsidie of money: At this parlament
the Infant Don Henry, and his mother Donna Beatrice Pimentell were present.
And then the Maister of Saint Iames bethinking himselfe of another pollicy, by
meanes whereof hee might get the citty of Segobia into his hands, hee counselled
the King to remooue the assembly of the estates to Segobia, where more commodiously
the affaires of the kingdome might bee managed,The Maister of S. Iames his couetousnesse cut short. and Donna Ioanes marriage
concluded vpon: the which assembly should bee there in safety, vnder the faith
and safeguard of the Marquis of Santillana, whom hee perswaded to demand, for
the same purpose, the Keyes of the gates of Saint Iohn and Saint Martin, of the same
citty, of Andrew de Cabrera: but Cabrera perceiuing very well wherevnto it tended,
and beeing resolued couragiouslie to oppose himselfe against the Maister of Saint
Iames, found many probable excuses, and delayed the matter, till some other determination
was taken, wherein hee was supported and fauoured by the new Archbishop
of Siuill, and Cardinall of Spaine, who had secretly vnited himselfe to the
Princes, and was wholy against Donna Ioane. In this manner the Maister was disappointed
of his purposes to his great greefe, who in like manner sought to surprise
the castle of Toledo, and raised such a tumult there, as the King was faine to goe thither
in person to appease it:Impunity, the nurse of all disorders. but hee caused no enquirie to bee made for the ringleaders
to that mischiefe, to punish them according to their deserts: by reason wherof
euery man almost committed what mischiefe hee pleased, without any feare of
the lawes.
Whilest the king remained at Toledo, the Marquis of Villena, sonne to the Maister
of Saint Iames, came to doe him reuerence, whom hee receiued with extraordinary
kindnesse, the Maister beeing then at Pignafiell with his wife the Dutchesse

of Escalona. And when the King returned to Segobia, the Marquis of Villena followed
him, but he lodged without the city at the Monastery of Parrall, because of the quarrels
betwixt his father and Andrew de Cabrera: the King went often to heare masse at
this Monastery, and to visit the Marquis.
As these matters passed, the Princesse D. Isabella hauing intelligence with the Inhabitants
of Aranda de Duero, tooke that place which belonged to the Queene, whereat the
King merueilously storming, Andrew de Cabrera put him in minde of the great tirannies
of the Maister of Saint Iames, and of his insatiable couetousnesse in getting of townes
and cities, and how hee had continually, without any respect, hurried and tired his royall
person, as hee himselfe very well knew: and therefore hee perswaded him to be pleased,
that the Princesse his sister might safely come to the castle of Segobia, where they might
see one an other, and conferre together, which could not choose but bee exceeding profitable
for the Kingdome and for all good men. The King, who was tender hearted,
and easie to bee carried away, was pleased therewith, and after that hee had heard the opinion
of the Cardinall of Spaine, and of the Earle of Benauent, hee was more desirous
of it; and Donna Beatrice of Bouadilla, wife to Andrew of Cabrera, disguised in the habit
of a country-man, and riding vpon an asse, went her selfe to Aranda to cause the Princesse
to come to the castle of Segobia, who beeing accompanied with the Archbishop
of Toledo,Enterview of King Henry and the Princesse Isabella his sister. and others, came thither, and entred the castle in a morning before day, where
she was courteously entertained. Her comming was on the sodaine, the King beeing
absent at that time from Segobia, hunting in the forrest of Balsain, who was hastned
by Cabrera, who did greatly suspect the stay of the Marquis of Villena at the Monastery
of Parrall, fearing that hee remained there to make some practise vpon him. Now
as soone as the Marquis of Villena knew that the Princesse was come to the castle of
Segobia, he dislodged in all hast, and neuer left galloping till he was arriued at Aillon,
fearing to be taken.
The Earle of Benauent, and Cabrera, rode forthwith to the forrest to giue the King
notice that his sister was come, who returned to Segobia, and after that hee had dined,
he came to the castle to see the Princesse, to whom he vsed all signes of loue and friendship:
and sitting downe, one neere to an other, they talked a long while togither, and at
last the King tooke his leaue of her with many curteous ceremonies, seeming to bee
highly pleased. The Maister of Saint Iames hauing intelligence of all these matters,
thought to prouide for his owne safety whatsoeuer should happen, and therefore hee
went to Cuellar to talke with D. Bertrand de la Cueua Duke of Albuquerque, whether,
at his intreaty, came the new Constable Don Pedro de Velasco Earle of Haro his father
in law, and there they made a league and confederacy together: afterward they began
to sollicite the King, to put the Princesse his sister forth of Segobia; wherevnto (being
bewitched by the Maister) hee consented, but his councell therein was diuided. The
Princesse, the better to order her affaires, was of opinion to cause the Prince her husband
to come to the castle of Segobia, thinking by his presence the King would be sooner
brought to reason,Prince Fernand comes to Segobia. and all matters concluded with more facility. The Prince beeing
come, the King saw him, and receiued him with a cheerefull countenance, and they
rode togither on horse-backe thorough the city, to the great contentment of the people,
and likewise of the Courtiers, though not of all. The great Maister Andrew de Cabrera
made them a Royall banquet in the Bishops house,Priuiledge of the Earles of Ribadeo. at which the Earle of Ribadeo, by
priuiledge from his ancestors, did eate at the King and the Princes table. The feast being
ended, with store of musike and other delights, the King grew sicke and complained
of his side, and was carried into his lodging, where after a while, hee recouered, but not
without hauing certaine relicks of rheume, fluxes of bloud by vrine, with vomitings, and
other such like mortall accidents: The Princes did hourely visit him, and caused others to
solicite him to declare the Princesse his sister heire to the Kingdomes, wherevpon there
passed diuerse strang and bitter words betwixt those which mannaged this businesse on
either side: but nothing being concluded, the Princesse resolued not to leaue Segobia.
The Maister of Saint Iames was aduertized of all that passed, by the King himselfe, who
went about on a night to put certaine companies of souldiars into the city, who should

seize vpon certaine Towres, Churches and Houses, to the end to giue entrance to him
and other greater troupes, with which forces he would take the Princes, and Andrew de
Cabrera prisoners. The Maister had as bad successe in this plot as in the former: for God
who had predestinated the Princes Fernand and Isabella to reigne in Spaine, suffered this
practize to be discouered, by meanes whereof the daunger was preuented, the Princesse
stood vpon her gard, and the Prince retired himself in time, and went into Arragon, whether
he was called by warres and troubles which there happened.
 King Iohn of Arragon, his father, was in his old age oppressed with crosses, as well in
Nauarre,Nauarre, and Arragon. by the seditions of his subiects, as on the frontiers of France and County of
Rossillon. In Nauarre, soone after that the Princesse Donna Leonora failed in her enterprise
of taking Pampelona,Death of Gaston de Foix. her husband the Earle Gaston of Foix, returning out of
France into Nauarre, fell sicke and died at a place called Roncevaux, in the yeere 1472.
leauing heire of his Lands and Lordships of Bearn and Foix his sonnes sonne, Francis
Phaebus a child of the age of fiue yeeres, who remayning vnder the gouernment of his
mother Donna Magdalen of France, and of the Princesse Donna Leonora his grand-mother,
was likewise, after her death, heire to the Kingdome of Nauarre. Donna Leonoraes
titles were then,Titles of D. Leonor of Nauar. Princesse, heire of Nauarre, Infanta of Arragon and Sicill,
and Lieutenant Generall for the King her Lord and father in the said Kingdome of
Nauarre.
After the decease of Gaston Earle of Foix, this Princesse making her aboade in the
city of Tafalla, called there a Parliament, to the which the great Lords came, and especially
the chiefe of the faction of Grammont and Beaumont, who inflamed with enuy
were still desirous to ruine one an other. It happened (as it is easie amongst those that
are of troblesome and enuious dispositions) that diuerse bitter speeches passed betwixt
the Earle of Lerin and the Constable of Nauarre Pedro de Peralta, which caused great
contention: into the which quarrell Nicholas de Echauarri, Bishop of Pampelona, did
so farre enter, as the Constable thinking himselfe greatly iniured by him, threatned him
that it should cost him his life.
This Bishop was suspected to bee more familliar with the Princesse Donna Leonora
then honesty required,Suspition of loue betwixt the Princesse D. Leonora, and the Bishop of Pampel^na. which caused him to be hated of diuerse men, who were iealous
of their Princesse honour, taking it more heinously at his hands, who was a prelat
and ought to giue good example, then if it had beene any other. The Bishop, after
this threatning, beeing fearefull, would by no meanes come forth of his house.
The Princesse, either desirous to pacifie this quarrell, or else not able to endure him
long out of her sight, sent diuerse messengers to him, to bring him vnto her to the
Monastery of Saint Sebastian of the Order of Saint Francis at Tafalla, where shee
accomplished a nine daies vowes which shee had made, for shee vsed great deuotion
to those fathers, and bestowed many benifits vpon them: but the Bishop still fearing
to bee met with by the way, prayed her for to excuse him. At the last shee sent
vnto him one of her familliar friends called Fernand de Baquedan with an other
Knight named Sir Hughe,The Bishop of Pampelon^ slaine by the Constable. who promised to conduct him safely thether, wherevpon
hee mounted on his Mule, and rode in their company towards Tafalla, whereof
the Constable beeing aduertized, hee was so farre transported with rage, as leaping
on horse-backe, hee met with the Bishop on the way, and slew him hard by the
gates of Tafalla, not respecting or regarding the Princesses word, nor yet his Episcopall
dignity, for the which inhumane fact he remained diuerse monthes together excommunicate.
This mans death did greatly offend diuerse both in Nauarre and in King Iohn of Arragons
Court, but especially the Princesse. Don Alphonso Carillo a Spaniard, was promoted
to that dignity in his sted, being in number the fortith Bishop of that Sea.
On the other side, King Iohn beeing then threescore and tenne yeeres of age, was ingaged
in a tedious quarrell with the French, vpon this occasion: The Earledome
of Rossillan was ingaged vnto King Lewis the eleuenth for the summe of three hundred
thousand crownes, who kept therein Gouernors and Officers which did oppresse
the people, and committed diuerse insupportable outrages, where the inhabitants daily

complained,The Earledome of Rossillou, origina^l of all the wars betwixt France and Spaine in our daies. requesting their King to protect them, wherewith the Frenchmen were displeased:
in regard whereof King Lewis sent Ambassadors to King Iohn, who sommoned
him to make paiment of the three hundred thousand crownes, and to receiue his Earledome,
or else to appropriat it vnto him for the same summe, or if hee were not pleased
with these two motions: that then hee should giue him suerties in France, for the payment
of the money at a certaine time. This did greatly trouble King Iohn, neuerthelesse,
with great modesty hee made answere, that hee would request King Lewis not to
vrge him at so vnseasonable a time, after his long and chargeable warres made against
his subiects, to repay the said summe, which as then was impossible for him to doe, muchlesse
to sell the Earledome vnto him, and wholy to alienate that which did belong to the
crowne of Arragon: And as for the suerties which he demaunded; hee did not thinke
it a reasonable request, nor yet beseeming him, who had (God be thanked) wherewith to
pay his debts in time: with this answere the Ambassadors were not satisfied, as also by
reason that those of Perpignan, impatient of the French yoake, beganne manifestly to
rebell against them: wherefore King Lewis sent forces into the county of Rossillon, to
chastice those of Perpignan, who had constrained the Frenchmen dwelling amongst
them, to retire themselues into the castle, from whence they shot into the towne with the
Canon, doing great harme therevnto. King Iohn came thither in hast to appease this
stire, and endeauored by all meanes to perswade the people to obey the French, promising
them shortly to deliuer them from that trouble: but they answered him boldly, that
they had rather suffer death then returne to the subiection of such Lords.
During these disputations King Iohn was on a sodaine beseeged in the towne
by the French army, which the Spanish Authors number to bee forty thousand,
who hauing enuironed it on euery side, beganne to batter it without, and within to assaile
it from the castle, so as it behooued the beseeged to be couragious, and valiantly to
defend themselues, the Kings presence seruing them greatly to that purpose. The seege
continued foure monthes: in the end, at the report of Prince Fernands comming, who
vpon the newes of the French mens arriuall, had leauied souldiars both in Castile, Arragon
and Cattalonia, they raised their seege and retired themselues into France. King
Iohn and the towne beeing deliuered from this danger, all men went out to meete the
Prince, and the father and the sonne embraced one an other with great ioy, who came
togither into Perpignan. The King did againe entreat the Inhabitants to obey the
French for a short time, till he could otherwise dispose of his affaires, assuring them that
he would pay the French King his money, and take them againe to himselfe. They being
obstinate refused it, and requested him, to giue King Lewis other pledges, or else to
suffer them to depart thence, for they would willingly giue ouer their houses, goods, yea
and their owne liues, rather then to submit themselues to the vilde vsage of the French.
King Iohn seeing them so resolued, left D. Lewis de Requesens for the Gouernor, and with
the Prince his sonne returned to Barcelona.
Before the Princes departure out of Castile, there arose a great quarrel betwixt the 
Marquis of Santillana,Castile. Quarrel betwixt the houses of Mendosa, and Pimentel. and the Earle of Benauent, because that the Earle (possessing the
towne of Carrion, by the Kings permission, the which hee had held during the former
troubles, had vildely and iniuriously intreated certaine Gentlemen which dwelt in the
same towne, who were neere in bloud and parentage to the Marquis, who hauing notice
thereof sent vnto him, and desired him in regard that those Gentlemen did belong
vnto him, that hee would for reuerence due to the boanes of his ancestors spare and respect
them: the Earle made him a proude answere and said, that hee would cause his ancesters
bones to be taken vp, and send them vnto him in baskets, to the end he might bestow
them safer with himselfe at Guadalajara amongst the rest of his progenitors. The
Marquis being iustly mooued hereat, conspired with the Earle of Treuigno, and others
his friends and kinsfolkes, to take that place from the Earle, who had builded a new fort
there; the Earle of Treuigno hauing intelligence with the wronged Gentlemen (his
lands lying neere to Carrion) he entred the towne with souldiars,The Marquis of Santillana su^^riseth the towne of Cari^^. and beseeged the fort
and soone after the Marquis arriued with troupes of horse and foote, as well of his owne
tenants as those of the Constable Pedro de Velasco, the duke of Albuquerque and others,

who supported him in this quarrell. The Earle of Benauent hauing notice of what the
Marquis had done, and ment to doe, came in speedily to Valiodolit, and gathered his
friends togither, so as with the helpe of the Maister of Saint Iames his father in law, who
in this tooke his part, hee found himselfe able to offer battaile to his aduersary: but the
King beeing accompanied with the Cardinall of Spaine brother to the Marquis, and
with the Maister, father in law to the Earle, did put himselfe betwixt them, and handled
the matter in such sort by the Cardinalls meanes, as he hindred them from ioyning
battaile: and it was agreed, that the towne of Carion should returne to the crowne,
and the Earle should haue the towne of Magaua in recompence, which belonged to the
Cardinall, who to make them friends was content to dispossesse himselfe thereof, and receiued
other recompences for the same. Prince Fernand when this quarrell beganne,
was ready to depart into Arragon, and had leauied certaine companies of souldiars,
the which wich his owne person hee offered to the Marquis who gaue him humble
thankes, saying that he was strong enough to incounter a greater Lord then the Earle
of Benauent: and therefore hee besought him to preserue his person in safety, that hee
might in time to come reigne in Spaine, and not to hazard it now when there was
no need.
The Marquis afterwards returned to Guadalajara, and went to Saint Christofers to
visit the Princesse Donna Isabella, who went forth to meete him: hee offred her his seruice,
and all aide and assistance for the obteining of her right, after the King her brothers
death. The Earle of Benauent returned into his owne possessions, the King with the
Cardinall to Segobia, and the Maister to Cuellar: but soone after, the King with the
whole Court, and the Maister likewise, came to Madrid, where by the Maister his Councell
it was thought fit that the Cardinall should returne to Segobia to treat with
the Princesse, and the Maister brought the King to Trugillo, to cause the fort of
the same city to be deliuered vnto him, which hee had so importunately a long time
begged: but the Gouernor of that place whose name was Gratian de Sese would not
consent therevnto, nor obey the Kings commandment; yet neuerthelesse hee hauing
beene sollicited by the Maister with promise of great recompences hee beganne to negociate
about the deliuery thereof: but the matter being delaied, the King, who since his
last sicknesse decaied in his health, was constrained to returne to Madrid, there to take his
rest: In the same place remained Donna Ioane in the keeping of the Marquis of Villena:
as for the Queene, she was else where, and lead a pleasant life without any shame at all.
In the meane time the Maister of Saint Iames, who remained at Santa Cruz de la Sierra,
delt in such sort as captaine Gratian of Sese deliuered him the fort of Trugillo, being
recompenced with the Lordship of Saint Helice de los Gallegos, where shortly after he
was cruelly murthered and stoned to death by his owne tenants. About the same time
the Maister of Saint Iames D. Iohn de Pacheco fell sicke of an Impostume in his throate,
which caused him to voide great quantity of putrified bloud at his mouth, which in the
end strangled him,Death of D. Iohn de (...) Maister of Sain^ Iames. he died in the threescore and fourth yeere of his age, hauing more
credit and authority in Spaine, then any Lord in his time: his death was kept secret by
his seruants, vntill the fort of Trugillo was yeelded vp, which was forthwith done, and
then it was openly declared to all men: his body was carried to Parrall neere Segobia, a
Monastery of Saint Ierosme, founded by King Henry then reigning for his place of buriall,
and the Maister was buried in the chiefe chappell with great pompe and sollemnity.
Great was the Kings sorrow for the Maisters death, to whose sonne and heire Don Diego
Lopes de Pacheco Marquis of Villena, he did not only confirme the guifts of the townes,
cities and castles, granted to his father, but bestowed likewise vpon him the Maistership
of Saint Iames, and sent a messenger to the Pope to obtaine the confirmation thereof,
not respecting the Knights of the same Order, who began to murmur and strongly to
oppose themselues against it, and they did not onely bandy themselues against the Marquis
of Villena, who was not chosen according to the rules of the Order, but they likewise
fell at variance amongst themselues: for D. Roderigo Manrique Earle of Paredes
Commander of Segura, said, that the election of the new Maister ought to be made in
the Couent of Vcles, according to the ancient custome: On the other side, D. Alphonso

de Cardegna great Commander of Leon, affirmed, that it stood with great reason that
the election should be made in Saint Marks of Leon, in regard the deceased Maister died
in the confines of Leon: wherefore each of them standing firme in their allegations,
and hauing their factions and (...), those two were chosen and saluted for Maisters;
in such sort as the Order of Saint Iames, had at that time three heads, like vnto C^rber^s
the three headed ^ogge (...) The Marquis of Villena, besides the Kings fauour, did
hope that the Earle of (...) Commander of Castile would take his part; and
because he had the keeping of Donna (...) the Kings supposed daughter, it made the
King more bound vnto him, and in (...) deed by reason thereof the King did groatly aduance
him: the which gained diuers seruants to the Princesse Donna Isabella, who
were iealous to see his sonne who had done them so much mischiefe in so great credit
and authority.
The Cardinall of Spaine hauing beene a certaine time at Segobia with the Princesse,
came backe to Madrid to the King, with the Constable Don Pedro (...) Velafco, who
ioyntly spake to the King with the great boldnesse ^ouching the succession of the Kingdome,
beseeching him to take in good part, that which they should say vnto him vpon
their consciences,King Henry takes no care for the succ^ssion of his Kingdome. which was, that he ought to maintaine the Princesse Isabels right, because
he knew better then any that this Donna Ioane was not his daughter: and they
requested him, in the name of God, not to be the cause of so great miseries which would
oppresse his Kingdome after his decease, if hee should dissemble in that behalfe, but to
speake the truth, for his peoples sake, in declaring his sister the Princesse his true and
lawfull heire: wherevnto the King without any trouble made answere, that Order
should be taken for them both; neuerthelesse hee delaied all hee could from medling in
that businesse. In the meane space the Marquis of Villena, who promised to him selfe
the Maister-ship of Saint Iames, thinking to practize with the Knights of Castile, and
chiefly with the Earle of Osorno, the great Commander, came to Villarejo, in which
place the enterview of him and the Earle was agreed vpon:The Ma^qui^ of Villen^ taken prisoner by his competitor. but the Earle feigning himselfe
sicke, sent thither his wife, well accompanied with men at armes, by whom the Marquis,
at his lighting from his horse was seized vpon, and carried away prisoner into the
castle of Fuente Duegna.
The King being aduertized hereof, did presently take horse, notwithstanding he was
very sicke, and came to the Earle of Osorno, who shewed himselfe sterne and obstinate,
without respect or reuerence, wherefore the King returned highly displeased to Madrid.
By the way he met with the Archbishop of Toledo at Villa Verde, who offered him his
seruice, and therevpon, to please him hee beseeged out of hand the castle of Fuente
Duegna, whether the King likewise came in person. The seege lasting long, Lopes Vasques
de Acugna, brother to the Archbishop, making shew of ending this strife as a
friend, found meanes to bring the Countesse of Osorno to a parley, who comming abroade
with a sonne of hers, was deceiued in the same manner as she had beguiled the
Marquis, and the mother and the sonne were brought prisoners into the castle of
Hueta.
This pollicy did highly please the King and the Archbishop,The Countesse of Osorno, and her sonne taken, the Marquis of V^llena set at (...). and was the cause that the
Marquis was deliuered: the Cardinall and the Constable made an end of the matter,
and the prisoners were set at liberty on either side: the Archbishop of Toledo returned
to Alcala, and the King, beeing much afflicted and weake, to Madrid, where Catarres,
vomitings, and other mortall accidents brought him to his last houre. The physitions
hauing told the Cardinall of Spaine, the Constable, the Marquis of Villena, the Earle
of Benauent and other Lords of his Councel there present, that his sicknesse was mortall,
they caused Frier Peter Macuelo, prior of Saint Ierosme of Madrid, his confessor, to
put him in minde of matters belonging to his soules health, and the peace of his
Kingdome. Hee had long discourse with the prior in confession; then hee made
his will, appointing the Cardinall, the Duke de Areualo, the Marquis of Villena,
and the Earle of Benauent for his executors; and hee commaunded that his seruants
should bee paide and well recompenced with his treasure and iewells, and declared
Donna Ioane to bee his lawfull daughter, and true heire to his Kingdomes; the

which will was written by Iohn de Ouiedo, one of his secretaries: neuerthelesse, diuers
authors affirme, that he made no will, and say, that as he was in the agony of death, those
that were present, asked him whom he would declare to be his heire, to whom hee made
none other answere, but that Iohn Goncall his Chaplaine knew his minde therein, vnto
whom he referred them, naming the foure aboue mentioned for the executors of his
last will and testament, and ordained his body to bee buried at Guadalupa. Vpon this
doubt, whether the King made a will or not, were afterward great troubles raised, but
that which is most likely to be true, is the testimony of the Lieutenant Diego Henriques
his Cronicler and Counsellor, who saith, that he did make a will, and in deed his testament
was found the yeere 1504. thirty yeeres after his death.
In this manner King Henry the fourth, ended his vnfortunate daies, and his reigne full
of troubles and disgrace,An. 1474. the one and fortith yeere of his age, and twentith
of his reigne, being in his latter daies so leane, drie and meager, as hee represented
rather an Anatomy of bones, then a man, by reason whereof, his Physitions had no need
to enbalme him: his body was kept for a time in the Monastery of Pas in Madrid: and
afterward transported to Guadalupa and buried in the chiefe Chappell there, where
three and fifty lampes of siluer doe continually burne for him day and night, two and fifty
whereof haue rent assigned them for the expence of the oyle.
The end of the one and twentith Booke.




SEMPER EADEMTHE TVVO AND TVVENtith
Booke of the Generall History of Spaine.

The Contents.
1 DOn Fernand the fifth of that name, and Donna Isabella King and Queene of Castile by
her, twentith in the Order of the kings of Castile, and forty one of Leon: their dispositions
and qualities. Estate of the affaires of Castile, at their comming to the Crowne.
2 Warre betwixt the French and the Arragonois in the county of Rossi^lon.
3 Contention betwixt King Fernand and Queene Isabel, about the gouernment of the Kingdome,
and order taken for the same.
4 Duisions in Castile: practizes of certaine Lords in Portugall to the preiudice of king Fernand
and Queene Isabel.
5 Alphonso the fifth King of Portugall entreth Castile with an army: treaty of a marriage
betwixt him and Donna Ioane, supposed daughter to the late King Henry the fourth, and
progresse of the warre in the confines of Zamora, Toro, Burgos, and else-where.
6 Alliances betwixt France and Castile broken; the French army enters into Guipuscoa, vnder
the conduct of Monsieur de Albret.
7 Continuance of the warre betwixt Castile and Portugall: Battaile of Toro lost by the Portugoise.
8 The Estates at Madrigall, where Donna Isabella, daughter to King Fernand and Queen^
Isabell, was sworne vnto, as Princesse and heire of the kingdomes etc.
9 Practices to ioyne the Kingdome of Nauarre to that of Castile.
10 Bishops forbidden to enter into Biscay, by an antient priuiledge.
11 Continuance of the warre betwixt France, Portugall, and Castile. Dilligence vsed for the
renuing of the alliance of the two Realmes of France and Castile: warre of Voles against
the Marquis of Villena.
12 Vaine practices of the king of Portugall, in France, in pursute of the warre of Castile.
13 The Spaniards first voiage into Guyney.
14 Toro surprised by the Spaniards, and the league of the confederate Lords dissolued.
15 Election of the Maisters of Saint Iames, in king Fernands power.
16 King Fernand and Queene Isabella at Toledo: the building of the Monastery of Saint
Iohn of the kings Warre on the coast of Badajos.
17 Donna Isabella reformeth the Estate of the Citties and Country of Andal^zia.

18 Enterview of the Kings D. Iohn of Arragon, and D. Fernand of Castile father and sonne,
at Victoria. Cutting off certaine cities of the Realme of Nauarre in fauour of Castile.
19 Nauigations and conquests of the Spaniards in the Ocean sea.
20 Institution of the ordinary inquisition of Spaine against the Iewes and Moores.
21 Troubles raised by the Archbishop of Toledo.
22 Seditious prelats, and other petty tyrants punished.
23 Exploits of warre on the frontiers of Extremadura, and at sea betwixt the Portugals and
Spaniards.
24 Treaty of peace betwixt Spaine and Portugall propounded by D. Beatrice, Dutchesse of
Viseo.
25 Vnion of Castile and Arragon in D. Fernand the second, the nineteenth King of Arragon.
26 D. Leono^^ of Nauarre the foure and thi^tith, in the order of the Kings of Nauarre, succeedeth
King Iohn her father: but shee dieth almost as soone as he; her children and posterity.
27 D. Francis Phaebus, first of that name, the foure and thirtith King of Nauarre: seditions
at his commings to the crowne by the factions of Beaumont and Grammont.
28 Estates of Castile assembled at Toledo: their decrees and ordonances.
29 Affaires of Nauarre. Estates assembled at Tudela. Feigned reconciliation of the two families
of Beaumont and Grammont. Impieties, treasons, murthers.
30 Execution of the decrees of the Estates of Toledo.
31 Spanish army in Sicill.
32 Rigours of the Spanish inquisition: iurisdictions and tribunalls thereof.
33 A great quarrel betwixt D. Ramir Nugnes de Guzman, and D. Frederike Henriques, in
the Court of Castile.
34 D. Iohn second of that name, and thirteenth King of Portugall.
35 Contentions betwixt the Pope, and the Kings of Castile, for the election to benifices: agreements
betwixt the Pope, King Fernand and Queene Isabella.
36 King Francis Phaebus enters into Nauarre: prouisions and orders for the quiet of that
Kingdome.

Order and continuance of the Kings reigning
in Spaine, written in this two and twentith
Booke.

CASTILE. LEON. ARRAGON. PORTVGAL. NAVARRE.
20. D Fernand th^ 5. and Queene Isabella 41. 19. the same Ferdi 2. 13. D. Leonora the 1.
34. D. Francis Phoebus 1.
D. Fernand the 5. King 20. of Castile and 41. of Leon, and Donna Isabella the 4. a woman
which inherited the Kingdome of Castile, and the 5. which inherited in Leon.


AT such time as the Princes D. Fernand, and Donna Isabella came to
the crowne of Castile, and Leon, by the decease of King Henry the
fourth, then did iustice and peace beginne to smile vpon Spaine. And
it seemed that for the quiet, honour and exaltation of the Spanish
nation, God had chosen and defended them, in the middest of so many
straits and difficulties, wherein they were oftentimes plunged, as
well during the reigne of the Lord King Henry, as afterward: adorning
each of them for that purpose with royall quallities, and heroike vertues, both of
body and minde. For, as well Don Fernand as Queene Isabella, were of meane
stature and proportion,Qualities of the Princes Fernand and Isabel. yet well composed, faire and pleasant aspect, gratious in their
speeches and of such Maiesty in the gesture and motion of their bodies, as was requisit
for such grent Princes: they were sober and moderate in their diet, and all other their
actions, deuout and religious, as they had beene instructed, but yet for all that a little to
much couetous of glory and honour which made them oftentimes stumble, and transported
them out of the right way of equity, especially D. Fernand. To loue, and desire
honour and glory, is in deed an affection beseeming great persons, and without the
which they can hardly giue themselues to any laudable exercize: but the excesse thereof,
which men call ambition, is alwaies accompanied with the greatest vices: They were
also maintainers of iustice in Spaine, the which they executed in such sort, as their seuerity
did not depriue them of the praise which they deserued by their mildnesse and elemency.
The plaies and pastimes which King Fernand vsed in his youth, were Cardes
and Chesse; but afterward he became inclined to hunting and hawking, to the exercize
of armes, and he did prooue excellent in all kindes of horsemanship: he loued learned
men: but his euil hap was, not to be instructed therein in his youth, which was thorough
his fathers negligence, who was also himself in a maner wholy vnlearned: King Fernand
did greatly delight to heare learned men talke, and to vnderstand of the laudable actions
of great men, but especially of his ancestors.
Queene Isabella, for her part, tooke great pleasure in learning the Latin tongue, and
proffi^ed so well therein, as in lesse then a yeere, she was able to vnderstand what her selfe
did reade, or what was spoken vnto her in the same language: her continency and chastity
was rare, and it did appeere in all her actions, speeches, attire and countenance.
Shee kept ordinarily in her house young men and women of noble parentage, whom
shee brought vp, and also Ladies of great place, who were honoured for their vertue and
honesty: She would willingly haue had the King her husband like her selfe, of whom she
was extreamely iealous, and if at any time shee perceiued him familliar with any of her
Ladies or Gentlewomen, she presenty sought meanes to quench those vnlawfull fires
yet without scandall, either by marrying them, sending them away, or admonishing
them, or by some other honest and discreet meanes, desyring that the Ladies of her traine
should be rather vertuous then faire.
It is noted of her, that in her trauaile of child, what paine soeuer she indured, shee did
neuer fetch one sigh or groane, and at that time she would cause her face to be couered.
Charmes and inchantements she abhorred as became a Christian: she did greatly loue
learned men, who were of good conuersation; especially prelats of an holy and religious
life, doing more good vnto such, and sooner preferring them to liuings and dignities,
then others of greater houses, who made more shew of the fame and glory of their
ancestors then of their owne vertues.
These Princes being thus qualified, obtained the crowne of Castile and afterwards,
that of Arragon, not without paine, trauaile and great oppositions (as hereafter shall appeare)
which being by them surmounted and passed ouer, they established iustice, gaue
peace to the Spaniards, quenching all forepassed ciuill warres, and did zealously labour
about the ordering of religion, wherein they wanted good-helpe: this at the leastwise
redounded to their honour, that they did roote the Moores out of Spaine, and
made conquests in Affrica, they did quicken vp the Spaniards spirits, and incited
them to al excellent artes and sciences, ordayning great stipends to learned men, namely

benefices and Ecclesiasticall reuenewes: they made diuerse good and profitable lawes,
and by their authoritie and meanes, the inhabitants of a new world came to the knowledge
of those Regions, the which hath for all that in diuerse sorts redounded to the
hurt of man-kinde: not by these Princes occasion, but by the couetousnesse and cruelty
of those which came after them.
The Princesse Isabell (as hath beene already said) was at Segobia, at the time hir
brother King Henry died, whither the Princes and Lords, which tooke his part, did come,
after the Kings obsequies were finished, which lasted nine dayes, and there they saluted
her as Queene of Castile and Leon, taking the oath of fealty, and dooing her homage
after the accustomed manner. There were present when this was done Don Alphonso
Cari^^o d' Acugna Archbishop of Toledo,Lords holding the party of the Princes Ferdinand and Isabel. D. Pero Goncall of Mendoca Archbishop of
Siuill, called Cardinall of Spaine, and the Bishop of Siguenca, Don Pedro de Velasco,
Constable of Castile, Don Alphonso Henriques Admirall of Castile, by the death of his
father Don Frederick, newly deceased, and Vnckle by the mothers side to the new King,
Don Garcy Aluares of Toledo, Duke of Alua, Don Bertrand de la Cueua Duke of Albuquerque,
Don Diego Hurtado de Mendocca Marquis of Santillana, Don Roderigo Alphonso
Pimentel Earle of Benauent, Don Pedro Manrique Earle of Treuigno, and others, some
of whom were already with the Princesse before the Kings death.
Prince Ferdinand was at the same time in Cattalonia with his father King Iohn, who
beeing aduertised of that which hapned, came speedily to Segobia, where hee in like
manner was receiued and acknowledged as King, to the great ioy and contentment, not
onely of the Citty but of the whole kingdome, who sent their Deputies vnto him, to
doe him homage and seruice, as to their lawfull Lord and King, in the right of his
wife: it beeing a matter out of all question, that Donna Ioane was a bastard, borne in
adultery, and not capable of any right to the Crowne. Other Lords, which were absent,
did in like manner send their deputies to make their submissions, and to take the
oathes due to the new King. But the Marquis of Villena, who had Donna Ioane in keeping,Lords, contrary to the Princes, taking Donna Ioanes part.
and Don Aluaro d' Estuniga Duke of Areualo, Don Roderigo Tellas Gyron, Maister
of Calatraua, and Don Iohn Gyron Earle of Vregna, cousins to the Marquis of Villen^,
with others their confederates and adherents, were of another opinion, and did not
onely fauour Donna Ioane, who called her selfe Queene of Castile, but craued many
things for their owne particular profit. The Marquis would haue the Maistership of
Saint Iames, and the places belonging therevnto, which Don Iohn de Pacheco his father
had enioyed: The Duke of Areualo would haue his Dutchy confirmed to him, and the
Maistership of Alcantara for Don Iohn d' Estuniga his sonne; other men demanded
other matters. Now the first thing that was thought vpon by the King and Queenes
Councell,Iustice, and treasures the principall members of a state. was, about the ordering of their treasures, and administration of iustice, the
managing and execution whereof, was to be committed to fit persons, and capable of
such affaires: wherefore Don Guttiere de Cardegna, the Queenes Chamberlaine, and
Goncalo Chacon, were created chiefe Treasurers, and with them Roderigo de Vllao was
ioyned: then they sent Ambassadors to Lewis the eleuenth the French King, to aduertise
him of King Henries death, of their promotion, and to request him to continue,
and confirme the ancient alliance with the house of Spaine. The Ambassadors had
likewise commission and instructions, for the restitution of the Earldome of Rossillon
to the King of Arragon. King Lewis made a shew of sorrow for King Henries death, and
seemed to reioyce that they had succeeded him: but touching the restoring of the
County of Rossillon, hee would by no meanes hearken therevnto, but sent a learned
Lawyer to King Ferdinand and Queene Isabell to shew his reasons for the contrary,
who came to Valiodolit with the Ambassadors, his comming beeing to no
purpose.
 The citty of Perpignan beeing succoured (as heretofore hath beene said) by Prince
Ferdinand,Arragon. was after his returne into Castile againe besieged by the French. King Lewis
willing and commanding his Captaines, who had shamefully raised their siege, and were
retired into the countrie and territory of Narbona, on paine of being punished as traitors
to their king and country, to returne and assaile the towne, and not to stirre from

thence till they had taken it, although it should cost all their liues: whervpon, they came
backe, and by the helpe of the Castle, did for eight moneths space, so presse the beseeged,
as they brought them to the extreamest poynt of necessitie: for besides the continuall
toyle, watchings, fights, and daily reparations of the breaches, whereunto they were
constrained, the want of victuals was so great in the towne, as they were not onely enforced
to eate dogges,Famine in Perpignan. cattes, and all other sorts of vncleane meates, but also the very
bodies of men, friends or enemies, which were slayne in the assault, yea mothers did deuoure
their owne children: such was the obstinacie of those people, who would not yeeld
to an enemie, whome they had despised and offended and from whome they did expect
no mercie: but in the end, extreame necessitie, and inexorable famine brought them to
that poynt which they sought most to auoyde,Perpignan yeelded to the French. and they found more mercie then they
hoped for: for they were taken by composition, their offences pardoned, and the Garrison
permitted to depart with their armour and weapons: so as King Lewis, by the taking
thereof; pretended now more interest to it then before. This was the last quarrel which
King Iohn of Arragon had with the French, or any other: for the goute, his yeares, and
other discommodities of old age, perswaded him to spend the remainder of his dayes in
rest and quiet in the citty of Barcelona, leauing the gouernement of the Kingdome of
Nauarre to his daughter, who was heire thereunto, and his other dominions to the rest
of his children and Lieutenants.
This yeare 1457. there grew a contention betwixt King Fernand and Queene Izabella
about the gouernement of Castile, disputing which of them two had most tight to the
succession thereof:Castile. she, as daughter to King Iohn of Castile the second: and hee, as sonne
to King Iohn of Arragon, who descended in direct masculine line from King Iohn the
first, in the third degree. Some, who tooke the Kings part, did say, that it was a thing against
nature and all good order, that the regiment of so great a State should be in a womans
power, and that so many great Lords and braue Knights should be vnder the commaund
of that sexe, weake both in body and mind, without experience, wisedome or
knowledge of what was profitable or hurtfull to a kingdome, vnlesse it were by hearesay,
beeing oftenest deceyued by ignorance, and which did follow their owne passions,
and those of them that they fauoured, who for the most part were chosen amongst the
worst sort of people.
That all kingdomes, Iurisdictions, and well-gouerned Common-wealths, as well
auncient as moderne, had wholy reiected a womans empire, and if at any time they had
submitted themselues thereunto,Contentions betwixt king Fernand and Q. Izabella. their ruine and desolation had soone after ensued: alledging
for example the Sallicke law of France, which is a good old custome, alwaies profitable
when it was obserued, either in the totall gouernement, or parts thereof. On the
contrarie part, others who held with Queene Izabella, did say, that euery one ought to
be maintayned in their right, and that there was nothing more consonant to nature, then
that children should succeed their fathers and neerest kinsfolke: that diuers women had
beene profitable to Kingdomes and Common-wealths, as well in old times, as of fresh
memorie, namely, that there were sundrie recent examples thereof in the Monarchie of
Castile. And as for Queene Izabella, her constancie, iudgement, and wisedome was sufficiently
knowne, and that all men were assured of her good gouernement, and that shee
was not the first woman which had inherited that kingdome.
This last opinion was followed and allowed of, whereat king Fernand seemed to be
highly displeased: but the Queene, who did dearely loue him, and would not willingly
haue him discontented, told him, that her intent was not in matters concerning the affaires
of Castile and Leon to bee more obeyed than himselfe, and requested him to consider,
that whatsoeuer was decreed in that poynt, was for the good and benefite of their
onely daughter Donna Izabella: if so bee that they should happen to haue no issue male,
who otherwise should bee wholly depriued of that honour and royall dignitie, if what
hee had poursued and alleadged, should take place, by these probable reasons the king
was satisfied with that which the great Lords had decreed.
Yet neuerthelesse it was concluded and determined, that all letters missiue, writings,
and other expeditions, should bee made in both their names, and vnder the seale

of the two kingdomes of Castile and Arragon, and that all coyne shold be likewise stamped
with both their armes quartered therein.
 The Marquis of Villena mooued the King and Queene, that by their fauour he might
be confirmed in the Master-shippe of Saint Iames,The Marquis of Villena his demaunds. and that a husband might be prouided
for Donna Ioane, with a dowrie befitting her estate: which beeing performed, hee
promised to become their faithfull and obedient seruant: hee was one of the brauest
Knights, and best men at armes in all Spaine: tthe King and Queene sent him word, that
concerning the Master-shippe, hee should haue all their fauours and assistance, as well
to the Pope, as to the Knights of the same Order, notwithstanding that Don Alphonso of
Cardegna, and Don Roderigo Manrique had diuided it betwixt themselues, and were in
possession thereof, and that as for Donna Ioane, they would intreate her kindly and honourably,
and prouide her a husband, but in any case it behooued him to deliuer her into
their hands.
The Marquis who had bad counsell, and was still accompanied with seditious persons,
refused to deliuer the Ladie, and that which was worse, at the perswasion of Doctor
Anthonie Nugnes of Cite Rodrigo,A seditious Prelate. hee beganne to broach new practises with Don
Alphonso king of Portugall, for to procure him to marrie Donna Ioane, promising to
make him King of Castile. On the other side the Arch-bishop of Toledo, a man of a turbulent
spirit, and a louer of Innouations, complayned, that the King and Queene, did
not accomplish that which he had hoped for and deserued, nor yet what they had promised
him before their comming to the Crowne, seeking all meanes and occasions to
free himselfe from their seruice. But enuie was it that vexed him, to see the Cardinall of
Spaine (whome he hated) to be in so great credit and authoritie by their meanes: for
these respects hee left the Court, beeing accompanied by Hernando Alarcon his familiar
Councellour, the great and renowned Alcumist of those dayes.
The king and Queene beeing come to Vailliodolit,Hernando Alarcon. by the way of Medina del Campo,
the mote or fort whereof they left in the keeping of the Duke of Alua, they were
visited by diuers Deputies of Townes and Citties, who came to do them homage, and
to offer them all dutie and obedience. In the meane time, the Marquis of Villena importuned
the king of Portugall to marrie Donna Ioane, with the kingdome for her dowrie,
or else to defend her as an Vnkle, assuring him that hee should find readie to do him
seruice, himselfe, the Master of Calatraua, the Earle of Vregna, the Marquis of Cales
his brother-in-law, Don Alphonso of Aguilar, the Earle of Benauent, and also the
Dukes of Areualo and Albuquerque, and the Arch-bishoppe of Toledo, together with
fourteene of the chiefe Citties of Castile, who wanted but a head, who at his first arriuall
would furnish him with fiue thousand Lances, with other forces and meanes. And
among these bargaines, hee demaunded of King Don Alphonso diuers great gifts and
aduancements both for himselfe and for others.
The king of Portugall hauing consulted with his Councell about this businesse,Practises of the Marquis of Villenain Portugal. notwithstanding
that their opinions were diuers and contrarious, yet hee sent Commissioners
to treate of this marriage with Donna Ioane his Neece, and by Ruy de Soca his
Ambassadour, hee willed king Don Fernand and Queene Izabella, to giue ouer freely
vnto him the kingdomes of Castile and Leon, the which they did vniustly possesse and
inherit, in regard they did belong and appertaine to D. Ioane, whome the Ambassadour
called Queene, saying, that if they had any right or interest in those Realmes, they should
submit themselues to the tryall of lawe, and that hee would lay downe his armes, so as
they would dispossesse themselues, and leaue the kingdomes in the hands of a third person:
and if they should refuse so to do, hee then tooke God for witnesse and iudge, that
he was not the author of those miseries which should ensue.
Vntill that time, king Don Alphonso had liued and raigned in great credit, magnificence,
and reputation, and with good and happie successe in his affaires concerning his
State: but the couetous and greedie desire hee had to raigne in Spayne, by the meanes
of Donna Ioane, whome hee had oftentimes reiected and refused, as beeing assured,
and confidently resolued, that shee was not lawfull daughter to the late king Henry, did
cast him head-long into a gulph of miseries, by the vnluckie and intestine warres,

which hee tooke in hand by her meanes against the Kings Fernand and Izabella: who by
the aduice of their Councell, did wisely answer his demaunds, shewing him, that there
was no reason in that which hee went about, and that he ought to call to mind the cause
why hee had refused Donna Ioane in King Henryes life-time, whose daughter hee very
well knew shee was not, and that therefore they did greatly meruaile at that which hee
now beganne to attempt: and they did likewise protest not to bee guiltie of any miseries
which follow warre, beeing determined by all meanes to defend and protect their kingdomes.
The King and Queene finding hereby,Castile. that warre would follow, they did seeke by all
meanes to giue contentment to the Marquis, the Arch-bishoppe of Toledo and others,
on whome those affaires depended, but their labour was in vaine. The Arch-bishoppe
shewed himselfe most obstinate, who among other furious speeches, sayd, that he would
teach the King and Queene what it was to offend the Arch-bishoppe of Toledo:Audarious speech of the Archb. and no
perswasions nor intreatie of Don Pedro of Acugna, Earle of Buendia his brother, nor
of other graue and religious persons, could alter his determination, but hee did still with
great obstinacie persist in that which Hernando Alarcon had suggested: Therefore on either
side great preparitions of warre were made, and the Kingdome was in such sort diuided,
as diuers, who seemed to be desirous of quiet, gaue occasion to haue their loyaltie
called in question: souldiers were leauied euery where, and diligent watch was kept in all
the Citties, Townes, and Castles, some taking the Kings and Queenes part, others adhering
to the King of Portugall, who aduertised his Partisans, that hee would shortly
come into the Countrey with a great army.
The King Don Fernand, and Queene Izabella diuided betwixt them the charge of the
defence of the Kingdomes, so as King Fernand should haue a care of that part which was
toward the North, that is to say, old Castile, Leon, and the countries next adjacent, and
Queene Izabella should looke to those Regions and Prouinces which are beyond the
mountaines, namely, Toledo, Andalusia, and Murcia: shee was accompanied by Don
Pedro de Velasco the Constable,Dutch is of Infantasgo. Don Diego Hurtado of Mendoza, who was created Duke
of Infantasgo, and by Don Garcy Aluares of Toledo Duke of Alua: by the way shee caused
the Arch-bishoppe to be founded once againe, who lay at Alcala, sending the Constable
vnto him, who was a wise and discreet Knight, who did so well handle the matter, as
the Arch-bishop had condiscended to the Queenes demaunds, had not Hernando Alarcon
and his associates perswaded him to the contrarie.
King Ferdinand beeing desirous to haue the Citties of Salamanca and Zamora to take
a new oath of allegeance, went thither, and would willingly haue exacted the like from
them of Toro, but hee would not hazard his person in going thither, albeit that Roderigo
de Vlloa his chiefe Treasurer, had the Castle in his power: for not long before, his elder
brother Iohn de Vlloa, had made himselfe Master of the Cittie, whither he had drawne diuers
leude persons; who fearing punishment, for their many heinous crimes, did shadow
themselues vnder his protection: who for his owne part did greatly tyrannize in the citty
and had newly caused the Licenciate Roderigo of Valdiuiesso to bee hanged foorth at
the windowes of his owne house, and had moreouer receyued money of the king of Portugall,
at whose seruice and deuotion he kept the same place.
The Cardinall of Spaine did at the same time write to King Don Alphonso, alledging
many reasons to diuert him from a warre so dangerous and vncertaine, but the King in
his answer wanted no contrarie reasons. Queen Izabella in the meane time furnished Toledo
with Garrisons, and placed Don Roderigo Manriques, Earle of Paredes for an assistant
there, who tearmed himselfe Master of Saint Iames, and hauing by her presence
well ordered that Cittie, and by letters and commaundements other places of Andalusia
and Murcia, shee returned to Vailliodolit. At the same time the Inhabitants of Alcarras
rebelled against the Marquis of Villena, and craued ayde of Don Roderigo Manriques
against the Marquis, who intended to beseege them, the which they obtayned, moreouer
the King and Queene sent vnto them the Bishop of Auila, and the Lord of Coca and
Alaexos, who were both of them called Alphonso de Fonseca.
The Marquis fearing least other places might reuolt, by the example of Alcarras,

solicited the Kings of Portugall to make hast, and hauing taken Donna Ioane whome he
termed Queene, out of Escalona, hee brought her by Trugillo vnto Plaisance, whereas
King Alfonso of Portugall arriued with an army of fiue thousand horse,The army of Portugall entreth into Castill. of all sorts, and
fifteene thousand foote. Hee was attended on by the Archbishoppe of Lisbone, the
Bishoppe of Ebora and Coimbra, and many other Prelats, and Church-men, who are
alwaie desirous to bee where stirres and tumults are, albeit the true followers of Christ
Iesus, haue peace in greatest recommendation: more-ouer, there were with him, the
Constable, and Marshall of Portugall, the Duke of Braganca, and his brother the
Earle of Faro, the Earles of Villa-real, Penela, Marialua, and Pegnamacor, with a great
number of other Nobility, desirous to serue their King to winne honour, and to encrease
their estates by the enlargement of so great a conquest as they hoped to make
vpon the Kingdomes of Castile and Leon, with the teritories annexed there-vnto, the
most part of whome, hauing vpon this vncertaine ground, sold or morgaged their lands
and liuings.
The King of Portugall and Donna Ioane were betrothed each to other in the
Citty of Playsance,The king of Portugall and Donna Ioane betrothed each to other. protesting to craue a dispensation from the Pope: there were
present, Don Diego de Estuniga Duke of Areualo, and his brother the Earle of Miranda,
and King Alfonso, and Donna Ioane, were at that act and ceremony called and intitled,
King and Queene of Castile and Leon. King Alfonso at his departure out of Portugal,
least his Sonne the Prince Don Iohn Regent and gouernor there,Geneologie of Portugal. who was newly made
father to a Sonne by his wife Donna Leonor, who was named Alfonso being borne at
Lisbone in the yeare 1475.An. 1475. King Fernand and Queene Isabell did like-wise intitle themselues
Kings of Portugall and of the Algarues, and either-fide did beare the armes of
both the Kingdomes indifferently. The gouernors of the frontiers were commanded
to inuade one another, which they readily executed with great cruelty, and to the
great spoyle of the realme of Portugall, the people of Castile putting all to fire and
sword that were neere to their borders, especially on the coast of Badajos, where the
Castle of Nodar was taken from the Portugalls, and Martin de Sepulueda, one of the
foure and twenty of Siuill, was made gouernor thereof, who from thence made sharpe
warre vpon the Portugois, and yet in the end hee proued scarce faithfull to his Kings.
Don Alfonso of Montroy, Treasorer of the order of Alcantara, who seemed him-selfe
Maister thereof, did on the other-side winne Algretta.
In like manner Don Alfonso de Cardegna, great commander of Leon, who called
him-selfe maister of Saint Iames, did with sundry troupes of horse forrage and spoile
the fronters of Portugall, and brought great booties from thence. Don Pero Aluares de
Soto mayor, shewed him-selfe on the King of Portugalls side, and tooke Tuy, calling
him-selfe Vicount thereof, and tooke also Bayon of Minio: sundry other exploits of
warre, with burning of houses and robberies, were committed on the frontiers by this
enraged multitude.
Now the king of Portugall did perceaue that the warre was likely to last longer and
bee more difficult than hee had expected, and almost despairing of ending it with honour,
vnles hee had the aide and supply of some greater power, hee sought by all meanes
to incite the French King, Lewis the leauenth, to breake his alliance with the Kings of
Castile,Toro deliue^ed to the King of Portugall. and to assaille them on that side of Guipuscoa, the which hee obtayned, as hereafter
shalbe mentioned. In the meane time, hauing receiued the Citty of Toro, by
the treason of Iohn Vlloa, hee assayled the Castle, and tooke it by force, and by the
like treason made him-selfe Maister of Zamora, the which was deliuered vnto him, by
Iohn de Porras one of the chiefe cittizens thereof, whose Sonne in law named Alfonso
de Valencia beeing Mashall, was Captayne of the Castle, who had rather trust to the
vncertaine promises of the King of Portugall,Zam^ra in the power of the King Portugal. than respecting his owne honour, relie
vpon the offers of King Fernand and Queene Isabell: from Zamora King Alfonso came
backe to Toro, where his new betrothed wife and her mother Queene Ioane lay, who
was sister to this King, who dyed about that time, and was very honorably buried at
Madrid in the monastery of S. Francis.

The Kings, Fernand and Izabella, greatly apprehending the wrongs and losses which
they daily sustained, they hasted on their subiects and souldiers to suppresse the Portugois,
or else to fight with them. Great numbers of Lords, Knights, and men at armes
came to Vailliodolit, where the whole bodie of the armie, from all places of Spayne, was
assembled, Andalusia excepted, in which Prouince the quarrell did still continue betwixt
the Duke of Medina Sidonia, and the Marquis of Cales, and betwixt the Earle of Cabrera,
and Don Alphonso of Aguilar: and there was some likeli-hood, that the Marquis,
and Don Alphonso would take the Marquis of Villena's part their brother-in-law. The
men of note that were come to Vailliodolit, were these, Don Pedro G^ncal of Mendoza,
Cardinall of Spayne, and his breethren Don Diego Hurtado of Mendoza, Duke of Infantasgo,
Don Inigo Lopes of Mendoza, Earle of Tendilla, Don Lorenzo Suares, Earle of
Crugna, Don Pedro de Velasco, Constable of Castile, Don Alphonso Henriques high Admirall,
Don Garcy Aluares of Toledo, Duke of Alua, Don Roderigo Alphonso Pimentel,
Earle of Benauent, Don Henry Henriques, Earle of Alua de Lista, Don Pedro Manrique
Earle of Treuigno, Don Iohn Manrique, Earle of Castagneda, and his brother Don Gabriel
Manrique, Earle of Osorno, Don Pedro Aluares of Osorio, Marquis of Astorga, D.
Diego Lopes Sarmiento, Earle of Salinas, Don Pedro of Mendoza, Earle of Montagu, D.
Alphonso d'Areillan, Earle of Aguilar, Don Pedro of Acugna, Earle of Buendia, with other
Lords ecclesiasticall and temporall.
Don Bertrand de la Cueua, Duke of Albuquerque remayned neuter, knowing not
how to resolue: he would willingly haue adhered to the King of Portugall, who was to
bee husband to her, who was reputed to be his daughter, but he durst not: yet for all that
at the last, he tooke the partie of king Fernand and Queene Izabella, by meanes whereof
diuers did take their parts, who before that time were doubtfull what to do: Garcy Lopes
of Padilla Treasurer of Alcantara, who was the last Master of that Order, and Don Diego
of Castile, with diuers Knights and Commanders came to the Kings and Queenes seruice.
The armie beeing mustred, there were of the Prouinces of Guipuscoa, Biscay, Alaua,
Gallicia, and the Asturia's, thirty thousand foote, foure thousand men at armes,
and eight hundred Genets or light horse. King Fernand with this mighty armie marched
along the riuer of Duero against the cittie of Toro, where the King of Portugall, with his
betrothed bride, did remayne: by the way the Biscans and Guipuscoans did take by force
a place called las Hazegnas de los Hierros, and some of the Inhabitants thereof in regard
of the rebellion, were hanged.
The King of Portugall who was inferiour in forces, would not come to field, but kept
himselfe within Toro,Toro beseeged by King Fernand. before which cittie king Fernand stood with his armie embatteled
aboue fiue howers, and at the last he sent Don Gomez Manrique, to tell king Alphonso,
that he should do well to giue ouer the title of king of Castile, and to returne into his
owne kingdome, and that if his future wife did lay any claime to the Realme of Castile,
that the same might be referred to the iudgement of the Sea of Rome, or if he had rather
to trie the matter by armes, that then he should come foorth to fight, or else to accept
the single combate betwixt them two, to saue that effusion of innocent bloud: King Alphonso
made answer to euery poynt with great modesty, but to that of Duell or single
fight, hee required, that Izabella, and Donna Ioane, (who pretended each of them to be
Queene of Castile) should be kept as hostages, to the end that hee which should prooue
conqueror, might enioy his prize, to wit, the kingdomes of Castile and Leon: thereuppon
were diuers messages and answers sent too and fro, but to no purpose; so as King
Don Fernand hauing tarried certaine dayes about Toro, his army beginning to want
victuals, and other necessaries, hee was aduised to retire from thence, notwithstanding
that hee was assured, that the Portugals were in the selfe same estate. Howsoeuer, the armie
was brought backe, to the great discontent of the souldiers, who were extreamely
sorrowfull, that so great a force had beene so vnprofitably and idly employed: and they
did much murmure against the great Lords, whome the king had much ado to qualifie
and appease.
Beeing returned to Medina del Campo, Queene Izabella came thither from Tordesillas:
then the king had great need of money, by reason that his treasures were drawne

drie, hauing spent all that which King Henry had left in the Castle of Segobia, whereof
Andrew de Cabrera was keeper, who was newly made Marquis of Moya, in recompence
of his good seruice:Iewels and plate taken from the churches by the Kings of Castil. the meanes to get money, and least hurtfull to the people, who were
ouer-much spoiled and consumed, was to take the Iewels and plate of the Church,
whereunto the Arch-bishoppes and Bishoppes did consent, in regard of the Kings necessitie,
seeing it had beene aduised by good councell. Whilest these things were doing the
Earle of Par^des, and other the Kings seruants did assayle Ciudad Real, which the Master
of Calatraua, with other places, had vsurped: Moreouer, the Earle beeing come to Vcles,
made such sharpe warre vppon the Marquis of Villena, as hee hindred hoth of them from
going to the ayde of the King of Portugall, taking diuers commodious places belonging
to the Marquisate of Villena, thereby to frustrate the Marquis of the reuenues
thereof, which he receyued of the tenants with a better will then they payed it to the
Marquis, in regard they did extreamely hate the Portugals. Hauing rebelled, they did
fauour the Earle in the taking of the Castle of Villena, who was likewise ayded therein
by the Arragonois,Marquisate of Villena re-united to the Crowne. and by that meanes the Marquisate was re-united to the Crowne,
with promise, neuer more to alienate it. The Captaine of Requegna deliuered vppe
the fort to King Fernand, which held for the Marquis, beeing aduertized that the people
were in armes readie to assaile it.
In these aduersities the Marquis alwaies shewed an incredible constancie, and sayd,
that hee did not respect the losse of a little, seeing that hee hoped to haue the command
of Toledo, Burgos, Cordoua, and Seuile; and hee did place good Garrisons in those
townes and fortresses which were left. The Master of Calatraua, the Earle of Vregna,
and the Duke of Areualo were almost in the like distresse, for they were earnestly sollicited
by the King of Portugall, to accomplish what they had promised him, the which they
could not performe, and they excused themselues, in regard they were of necessitie to
defend the townes and forts which had taken his part, acquainting him with the toyle and
trauaile which they did endure and vndergo, in going about to make him the king of
Castile.
The King of Portugall beeing in want and greatly troubled in his mind, was at the
same time sounded by letters from the Cardinall of Spayne, vppon what conditions he
would end that warre, who made answer, that if they would giue ouer to him Toro, Zamora,
with the Kingdome of Gallicia,Queene Izabellas magnanimity. and readie money to pay his armie, hee would
then with draw his forces, and pretend no more title: But Queene Izabella hauing notice
thereof, sayd, that shee would neuer suffer the Kingdome which was left by her predecessors
to bee dismembred of one poore Towne or Village: yet notwithstanding if
peace might bee bought with money, shee would consent, that the King of Portugal
should receiue such a summe as should be agreed vppon, and thought fit, by any reasonable
and indifferent Iudges.
The Castle of Burgos was at the same time in the keeping of Don Iohn of Estuniga,
who held it for his Vncle the Duke of Areualo, one of the King of Portugals faction,
who did great hurt to the townes-men and inhabitants, assayling them on the sudden,
spoyling, killing, and taking all those prisoners whome hee could lay hands on: D. Lewis
of Acugna, Bishoppe of the same Cittie, committed the like disorders in the Countrey
round about: Wherefore the King and Queene sent thither to the avde of the oppressed,
Don Alphonso of Areillan Earle of Aguilar, Don Pedro Manrique, Don Sancho de Rojas,
and Don Stephano of Villacreces, who were followed soone after by the King, with great
troupes of Biscains, Guipuscoans, Alauois, Asturians, and others. There came vnto
him also his bastard-brother Don Alphonso of Arragon, Duke of Villa-hermosa: by these
forces the castle was much distressed, and a Church neere to the same was taken, which
was called Saint Mary the white, within the which the beseeged kept their munition,
wherein the king placed a companie of souldiers, whose Captain was Don Iohn of Gamboa,
borne at Motrico in the Prouince of Guipuscoa, the assaults continuing, the beseeged
sent to demaund ayde of the Duke of Areualo, who wrote to the King of Portugall
by Iohn de Sarmiento, who was one of those who had beene driuen out of the Church of
Saint Mary the White, aduertizing him, that if that Castle, which was the fort of the

Cittie of the Kingdome were lost, he should neuer hope to raigne in Castile, therefore
it behooued him to come and succour it: when the king of Portugal vnderstood thus
much, he gathered together as great forces as he could conueniently, and marched towards
Areualo, where the Arch-bishoppe of Tolledo, and the Marquis of Villena did
meete him with troupes of chosen souldiers, who againe did sweare vnto him, not to
acknowledge any other King in Castile but himselfe. Queene Izabella was at the same
time newly come to Vailliodolit out of Leon, where shee had displaced the Captaine of
the towers of the same cittie, whome she knew to haue intelligence with the Portugois,
and placed an other in his roome; and hearing of King Alphonso's comming to Areualo,
and that the aboue-named Lords were ioyned with him, shee speedily sent Don Iohn de
Silua, Earle of Cifuentes to Olmedo, and Don Guttiere of Cardegna to Medina del
Campo, to the end to hinder the enemies from enterprising vpon those places, and to
wearie them.
The Earle of Cifuentes, who was young, hotte, and desirous to winne honour, would
(contrarie to the aduice of the elder, and more experienced Captaines) needes runne to
Areualo, and there to lay an ambush for the enemie, but hee was discouered, and the enemie
came foorth vppon him with greater forces, so as hee was constrayned with great
dishonour to returne backe to Olmedo, beeing defeated and ashamed.The Earle of Cifuentes defeat^d by the Portugo^s. After this victory
the King of Portugall, the Arch-bishoppe of Toledo, the Marquis of Villena and other
Lords marched towards Pegnafiel, a towne belonging to the Earle of Vregna, where
they remayned, expecting some other companies which were to be ioyned to their army.
Vppon this occasion Queene Izabella came to Palenca, with the Cardinall of Spaine,
the Admirall, the Earle of Benauent, and others, from whence shee sent the Earle of Benauent
with certaine men at armes, who lodged in Baltanas, a towne neere to Pegnafiel,
and from thence made continuall roades, cutting off those which carried victuals to the
Portugals campe, who were greatly distressed thereby, wherefore the King of Portugall
sent to assayle the same place, where the Portugals sought so furiously, as notwithstanding
the great resistance which the Earle and his souldiers made,The Earle of (...) taken prisoner. they entred and tooke
it, and brought away the Earle of Benauent prisoner, beeing wounded, to the campelying
at Pegnafiel, with diuers other braue Knights.
These two ouerthrowes of the Earles of Cifuentes and Benauent, did greatly trouble
the Queen, who was aduised for the best to go to Burgos to the king her husband, where
the castle still held out, and made wonderfull resistance. The king of Portugall in the
meane time made no hast to succour it: for he was inferiour in forces to the armie of the
Kings his aduersaries, and withall hee greatly feared, that the cittie of Zamora stood not
firme for his seruice, therefore hee chose the safest way, which was to returne to Areualo,
with purpose to put greater garrisons into Zamora and Toro. Donna Leonora Pimentell
Dutchesse of Areualo, who was sister to the Earle of Benauent, and a Ladie of great
woorth, obtayned her brothers libertie of King Alphonso, agreeing vppon his ransome,
and promised that he should no more serue the King and Queene in those warres: for
assurance whereof, he gaue the townes of Portillo, Villalua and Majorga in pawne: and
albeit the king promised great honours and rewards to the Earle of Benauent, to the end
to draw him to his seruice, yet he would neuer consent thereto, but in regard of this mishap,
he remayned as neuter.
The yeare one thousand,An. 1476. foure hundred, seuenty sixe, those of Ocagna beeing kept
short by the Garrisons of the Marquis of Villena, and tyred with their oppressions, returned
to the seruice of the King and Queene, beeing ayded and fauoured by the Earle
of Cifuentes, and by Don Iohn de Ribera, who came thither with great troupes of souldiers:
Queene Izabella gaue the gouernement of that place to the Earle of Paredes, enemie
and competitor to the Marquis, who beeing by little and little dispossest of what hee
held, did greatly complaine thereof to the king of Portugall, saying, that he had sustained
those losses by beeing in his seruice, and he did request him to passe on with his forces to
Madrid, assuring him that by the assistance of the Archb. of Toledo, the Master of Calatraua,
and with the forces of the same kingdome of Toledo, which took his part, not onely

in a short time to recouer what was taken from him, but that his affaires would prosper
the better.
The King of Portugall hauing had therevpon the aduise of the Lords, and Captaines,
of his army, was aduised not to leaue the hilly country on that side of Burgos: for whosoeuer
was possessed thereof, might boldly terme himselfe Maister of Castill and Leon:
and withall, if he should seeme to march towards Toledo, the enemy would say, that he
did run away from them: wherefore he entertayned the Marquis, with promise to aide
him in all he could, and more-ouer to recompence him with great guifts, and honours,
prouided that hee would take some good order for his affaires, and in some sort prouide
for the present danger.
From that time, the Marquis, who felt his losses, and saw no hope of rising
againe,The Marquis of Villena beginneth to incline to King Ferdinand and Queene Isabels side. began to thinke vpon fit meanes to returne to the King and Queenes
seruice: At the same time, the Citty of Zamora did seeke some fit occasion to rebell
against the King of Portugal, whereof hee stood in some doubt, and vsed such dilligence,
for the discouery of their practizes, as hee had notice of a plot, which they had layd, for
the which he caused foure of the chiefest Cittizens to be put to death. Yet notwithstanding,
Francis de valdez, Captaine of the bridge of Zamora, beeing solicited by Queene
Izabell, did promise to deliuer that forte into her hand, and withall to giue her entry into
the Citty, but that it behooued King Ferdinand to bee present in person at soe great an
enterprise.
The King was not slacke at such an occasion, but leauing his brother Don Alphonso
of Arragon, and the Constable at the siege of the Castle of Burgos, hee came
thither in a disguised habit, beeing accompanied with three horsse-men, by the way of
Valiodolit, causing it to be giuen out, that he was sicke, and kept his chamber. Although
this enterprise seemed to be kept close, yet the King of Portugall had notice thereof, and
did meane to put a new supply, of such as he durst trust, into the bridge, vnder collour of
sending certaine soldiers forth in the night a boot haling: but the Captaine would not
suffer them to passe, bidding them come in the day time, saying that the night is euer
dangerous to strong places, and passages of importance, as this was. The day following
the King attempted the like, and finding the like resistance, would by force haue taken
the passage, but those of the guarde of the bridge did valiantly defend it, and did kill and
hurt diuers Portugois:The King of Portugall forsaketh the citty of Zamora. wherefore, King Alphonso, by the Arch^Bishoppe of Toledoes
councell, withdrew his forces from the fight, and hee with Donna Ioane, his bethrothed
wife, left the Citty about midnight, suspecting some treason, in regard that the bridge
alone made such resistance, he being there in person.
The inhabitants at the same instant brought in Don Aluaro de Mendoza by an other
gate, who tooke and spoyled the Portugois, which were left, excepting a few, who saued
them-selues in the Cathedrall Church, who on the morrow after by breake of day yeelded
them-selues, King Fernand, the Admirall, the Duke of Alua, and other Lords
beeing there arriued. These soldiers were sent away without paying any ransome,
and carried their baggage away with them to Toro, where their King remayned, who
to encourage his people, sayd, that the victory of a warre did not consist in the gayne,
or losse of a few townes, or Citties, but in the issue of a battaill, the which alone
would decide the quarrell, about the succession of Castile and Leon: for the which
purpose hee did write to Prince Iohn his Sonne, to make as great a leuy of soldiers in
his Kingdome as possibly he could, and with all speed to bring them to his aide. King
Fredinand beeing maister of Zamora, beganne to better the Castle, and caused the
traytors to bee arraigned, and condemned, confiscating the goods of Iohn de Porras,
and others.
Whilest these matters were handled at Zamora, Don Alphonso of Arragon, Duke
of Villahermosa, and the other Captaynes who beseeged the Castle of Burgos,
did continually batter it, and gaue it many daungerous and rude assaults, but they
that were within it wanted no courage to defend them-selues. And as the sentinells
and those of the garde, were reuiling one another, an Alcayde, or Sheriffe of Burgos,

called Alphouso de las Cueuas, beganne to talke to those of the Castle, and vsed such perswasiue
reasons and arguments, as they were resolued to hearken to some composition,
especially when they did see a great quarter of their wall beaten downe, by meanes
whereof they lay open to their enemies assaults: therefore beeing sollicited, they did capitulate
about they yeelding of the castle, vppon condition, that all faults past should be
forgiuen,The Castle of Burges yeelded. the which was granted by the Queene, who for that regard came from Vailliodolit
to Burgos, and did receiue the Castle her owne selfe, whereof shee made Diego
de Ribera Gouernour, who had beene tutor and bringer vppe of her brother the Prince
Don Alphonso: and hauing appoynted that which was requisite for the peace and quiet
of the Cittie, shee returned to Vailliodolit, and from thence went to Tordesillas, to the
end to be neerer to the enemie, the better to haue an eye to his enterprises and proceedings.
Thither Don Pedro of Estuniga, eldest sonne to the Duke of Areualo, did come to the
Queene, whose part hee had still taken, and had shewed himselfe faithfull vnto her, in
regard whereof he was vnkindly vsed by his father, and by Donna Leonora Pimentel his
mother-in-law. He besought the Queene to receiue the Duke his father into grace and
fauour, promising to put all that hee did possesse into her hands, making an apologie,
and excusing the faults which hee had committed by reason of his decrepit age, beeing
wholly possessed and ruled by his second wife. It did greatly displease the Queene to pardon
him, who had shewed himselfe so mortall and hatefull an enemie to the King her
husband, neuerthelesse, for the sonnes sake shee did pardon the father, and the whole family.
The title of the Dutchie was transposed from Areualo to the Cittie of Plaisance,
and euer afterward the Lords of the house of Estuniga became affectionate seruants to
the King and Queene.
The warres continuing after this sort in Castile, the French King inclining to the demaunds
and perswations of the King of Portugall, and bearing no great good will to the 
house of Arragon euer since the warre of Perpignan,Alliance betwixt France and Castile. sent a great armie into the Prouince
of Guipuscoa, vnder the conduct and commaund of Aman Lord of Abrit or Albret,
whose posteritie hath raigned in Nauarre, as shall hereafter be declared. Diuers
Gentlemen and braue souldiers of the countrie of Guipuscoa, vppon the report of the
comming of this armie, did shutte themselues vp in Fontaraby, others went to Irun, by
which place the French-men were of necessitie to passe, who did burne Irun, and slue certaine
men: there they went vp and downe for the space of sixe weekes spoyling the countrie,
not once attempting or offering to beseege Fontarabie, which was their chiefe
desseigne.
In the meane time Iohn Lopes de Lascano, and Sancho del campo, entred the towne, being
sent from the Court with about fiftie horse, at whose comming, the souldiers which
were within the towne, made a salley, and came foorth vnto the very limittes of Irun,
where they found about a thousand French-foote of the fore-ward of their armie with
their Captaine Purguet of Bayonne, who beeing assayled and set vppon on the sodaine,
through want of good and prouident watch,Purquet a French Captaine defeated. and hauing no faithfull discouerers, were
easily ouerthrowne, and put to a disordered flight: some of them, in this confusion, thinking
to saue themselues in a Tower of a mannor-house belonging to those of Vrdaniuia,
they were there beseeged, and burnt with Purguet their Captaine, the Master of the
same house being the first man that set fire thereunto. The poore distressed souldiers, to
auoyde and escape the implacable torments of the mercilesse fire, leaped out of the tower
windowes in most desperate manner, and were with scoffes and mockes receiued
vppon the enemies pikes. The Spanish Authours say, that three hundred were there
slayne and pittifully massacred, besides diuers others that were captiuated and taken prisoners.
Soone after Don Diego Lopes de Sarmiento, Earle of Salinas, Captaine generall for
the King and Queene, came into the Prouince with certaine troupes of horse, bringing
letters to the worthie persons and chiefe Magistrates of Queene Izabella's country,
who, with perswasiue admonitions exhorted the Guipuscoans, to stand and continue

faithfull to their Princes, for which they were renowned aboue all other Prouinces of
Spaine.
Now vppon the eighth day of Aprill this yeare one thousand,An. 1476. foure hundred, seuenty
sixe, beeing Saint Denis day, the towne of Fontarabie was beseeged by the French, where
no matter of woorth was performed, sauing some few light skirmishes with losse of men
on either side, for the space of fiue dayes onely, whilest the seege continued: for they
easily found, that in regard of the strength of the place, it was to no purpose for them to
tarrie there: yet the Lord of Albret did not intend to depart out of the countrie, without
leauing some worthie markes behind him, and perceyuing his owne armie to be mighty,
and that the King and Queene of Castile, by reason of their warres with the King of Portugall,The French do wast Guipuscoa.
and their owne subiects, could not readily send an armie against him, hee therefore
determined to forrage and spoyle the countrey with fire and sword: then hee entred
into the valley of Ojarcun, two leagues from Fontarabie, where hee burned the parish
Church, with fiftie men, who had with-drawne themselues into the steeple: they likewise
burned and destroyed diuers houses in the same valley, and notwithstanding that the
Earle of Salinas endeauoured to defend the towne of Renterie, yet the French-men
tooke and burned it, and slue fifteene men there, taking the Lord of Lescan his son, and
Martin Peres of Alcega prisoners.
The Earle of Salinas beeing not strong enough to hinder those ruines and spoyles,
and hauing regard to his owne safetie, and beeing to looke to many other places, retired
himselfe in safetie to Saint Sebastians.Fontaraby beseeged. The French-men returned the second time
to the seege of Fontarabie, where they beganne a sharpe batterie. In the same cittie remayned
at that time Don Iohn of Gamboa with a thousand souldiers, who was a valiant
man, and borne in the Cittie of Motrico in the same Prouince, vppon whome King
Iohn of Arragon had bestowed many fauours in recompence of his many yeares faithfull
seruice, and had also ennobled him in Arragon, and made him of his priuie Councell,
permitting him to beare in a quarter of his owne shield of Armes, those of the kingdomes
of Arragon and Sicill, for a noate or marke of his valour and prowesse, and besides
that, had married him to Donna Leonora of Castro, giuing him meanes to maintaine
his estate honorably, whereunto, his sonne King Fernand, and Queene Izabella
haue added more honours, making him of their priuie Councell, and great Master of
their horse.
The beseegers as well as they that were beseeged, did not spare the Cannon, which
wrought no other effect, but the death of some sixtie persons in the towne, and a Captaine
named Fortunato Sarauz,The seege of Fontaraby raysed. and the number of the assaylants which were slayne with
the Artillerie, was vncertaine: and this second seege lasted little longer then the former,
for the succours by sea which came to the towne from Saint Sebastians, beeing discouered,
the French-men raysed their seege, and hauing no hope at all to take it, they
had begunne to make a great trench round about the Cittie, which came to none
effect.
In Castile King Fernand beseeged the Castle of Zamora (as hath beene before-mentioned)
and not beeing able, either by prayers, promises, or threatnings to bring the
beseeged to yeeld, he commannded certaine peeces of batterie to bee brought to enforce
them thereunto: Whereof the King of Portugall hauing notice, and knowing
that King Fernand had not forces sufficient to maintaine the seege of Zamora, and to
defend and guard his Artillerie, if it were assayled, hee foorth-with made an enterprise
vppon it, hoping by that meanes, either to take his peeces of batterie by force of armes,
or else, if the king his aduersarie should come to defend them, that then the beseeged
should haue some time to ease and refresh themselues. Beeing come foorth to Toro
with all his forces for the same intent, hee had intelligence that the Artillerie was
safely arriued at the Campe: Beeing disappoynted of his purpose, he shewed himselfe
in order of battaile readie to fight, and hee sent to defie king Fernand; who,
if hee should refuse the fight, was aduised by him to returne into Arragon with
his wife.

The Castillian knights, and men at Armes, which were in the king Don Fernands
armie, were exeeding glad of this challenge, desiring nothing more than to come to
blowes: the King likewise was of the same opinion, but the Earle of Alua de Lista was of
another mind, and perswaded the contrarie, with diuers forcible reasons: Whereuppon
answer was made to the King of Portugall, that if hee had a desire to fight, hee might
come and rayse the seege before the castle of Zamora, which the King meant not to giue
ouer, till hee had taken it, and chastised the Rebelles. With this answer the King of Portugall
returned to Toro, where hee expected the succour which his sonne Prince Iohn
was bringing to him.
In the meane time,The Portugals defeated. Don Aluaro of Mendoza hauing met with the Earle of Pennamacot
both of them leading certaine bands of souldiers, did charge one another, in such
sort, as the Portugals were defeated and put to flight, with great effusion of their bloud,
the Earle beeing taken prisoner. Not long after, the Cardinall of Spaine came to king
Fernands campe, bringing with him great supplies from the Queene his wife, to the end
he might be able to giue the King of Portugall battaile, without discontinuing his seege
at the Castle of Zamora, as also to animate and encourage the Kings souldiers who had
heard the challenge. There came likewise from Gallicia, the troupes of horse and foote,
which the Earle of Lemos, and Don Pero Aluares Osorio, Lord of Cabtera did send to
the King and Queene, with those of the Earle of Montroy, all of them beeing brauely
armed, and choice souldiers.
King Fernands armie beeing strengthened by this supply, hee left sufficient forces
before the Castle of Zamora, and marched towards Toro, where staying within halfe
a mile of the Cittie, in order readie to fight, hee sent to the King of Portugall, who lay in
the Towne, to present him battaile, offering him the like brauado, which not long before
he had receyued from him at Zamora: but his expected forces out of Portugall being
not yet arriued, hee refused it, and there was nothing performed, but a few light
skirmishes, so as King Fernand brought backe his armie to Zamora. Not long after, the
Prince Don Iohn arriued at Toro, bringing with him twenty thousand fighting men, to
the exceeding great ioy of the king his father, who did hide from him the Duke of Areualo's
reuolt, and did write to the Duke, and aduertised him of the mighty ayde, which
the Prince his sonne had brought him, exhorting him to come in person to the campe,
and to bring his forces with him,The King of Portugal forsaken. or else to send them thither with all speede. The Duke
made him a free and plaine answer what hee meant to doe, and complayned of sundrie
of the kings negligences, by meanes whereof hee had lost the castle of Burgos, and let
slippe diuers fitt occasions. King Alphonso did in like manner sollicite the Marquis of Villena
and others, who excused themselues, in regard they were to resist their owne and
his enemies: so as there remayned no more Lords of Spayne in his army, but the Archbishop
of Toledo onely.
These Portugall forces beeing ioyned together, made vp the masse of a great armie:
the king left the duke of Guimaranes within Toro, and marched towards Zamora, on the
other side opposite to the Castle, the riuer beeing betwixt them, and hauing planted his
campe round about the bridge, hee did thereby hinder all men from comming foorth
of the cittie on that side. The placing of the campe seemed strange to king Fernand, for
the Portugals could no way from thence helpe those of the Castle, nor yet hinder his armie,
much lesse could they come to battaile:The King of Portugals vanity. and it seemed, that he did rather seeke vainly
to be accounted bold and valiant by lodging so neere his enemie, than to perform any
worthie act, as it appeared by that which hee did write to the French king, the Pope, and
to diuers other Princes, as also by that which hee published throughout all Spaine.
Queene Izabella sent the Duke of Villa-hermosa her brother-in-law, and the Constable
with two thousand horse to Fuente del Sabuco, and to Alaheyos, to keepe and cutte off
the enemies campe from victualles, and to distresse it. In the meane time there wanted
no mediatours for peace betwixt both the kings, but it was in vaine, and to no
purpose.
The Portugall armie hauing for the space of fifteene dayes beene abroade in the fields
in the dead time of cold winter, the king Alphonso determined to returne to Toro. And to

to the end he might do it safely, he sent Don Aluaro of Portugall, sonne to the Duke of
Braganca, and the Licentiate Anthonie Nugnes of Cite Roderigo to the King of Castile,
to treate of a peace vppon certaine conditions, which beeing refused them, they had in
charge to demaund a truce for a few dayes, thereby to bring matters to a finall agreement.
This was but a pollicie to auoyd battaile, and to be able to bring his armie in safetie
backe to Toro: There were sundrie opinions thereuppon, and at the last, they were answered,
that the truce which should be graunted, should bee but short, and if there were
nothing concluded betwixt the two Kings,King Alphonso of Portugal disl^dgeth fro^ before Zamora hee of Portugall might bee well assured not
to bee suffered to depart thence with so great ease, as hee imagined. King Alphonso hauing
vnderstood this answer, beganne to dislodge secretly the same night: the next day,
the scoutes seeing the place emptie, aduertized the King, that the enemie was dislodged,
who foorth-with commaunded the Captaines to leade the armie foorth into the field,
and to follow them: the presse was so great at the passage of the bridge, and at the going
ouer the riuer of Duero, by boate and other-waies, as the soldiers could conueniently,
as a good part of the day was spent before the armie could passe the riuer, and much
time was afterward lost in ranging the battaile into wings and squadrons, which was
ordered after this manner:
They made a squadron of the kings Guard,Battel betwixt the Spania^ds and Portugois. and of the troupes of horse of Lemos
and Salamanca, of the Townes of Olmedo, Valiodolit, Medina del Campo, with others,
which was commaunded by the great Master Don Henry Henriques. On the right hand
of this squadron were sixe battaillions, the first was conducted by Don Aluaro of Mendoza,
who a little before that time was created Earle of Castro Xeris, and Don Guttiere
of Cardegnas, and Rodrigo of Vlloa: the second, by the two Alphonso's of Fonseca, the
one Bishoppe of Auila, and the other Lord of Coca and Alaexos: the third, by Pedro
de Guzman, the fourth, by Bernard Franc, the fifth, by Don Pedro de Velasco, and the sixt
by Vasco de Bi^ar, brother to the Bishoppe of Salamanca. On the left hand, the Cardinal
of Spaine ledde the first battalion, the second, the Duke of Alua, the third, the Earle of
Alua de Lista, the fourth, Don Garcia Osorio, who brought thither the troupes of the
Marquis of Astorga his Nephew: betwixt these two, the foote-men were placed, and
in this manner the army marched on vnto the hilles which are betwixt Zamora and Toro,
and there it stayed. It was thought that the Portugals making such hast, would bee
at Toro before the Spanish armie should passe these hilles: and a Councell beeing called
to determine what was best to be done, the most part were of opinion to turne backe
againe, and to content themselues to haue gained the honour, that the enemies had
fled from them: but the Cardinall of Spayne beeing a wise man, and of an exceeding
great spirit, thinking that they did iudge amisse of the King of Portugals desseignes, intreated
the king to suffer him to goe to the toppe of those hilles with certaine troupes of
horse, for discouerie, who hauing obtayned leaue, and beeing gotten vp to a very
high place, hee espyed the armie of Portugall in order of battaile, without any trouble
or confusion at all. Returning then to the king, he told him, that the enemies meant
nothing lesse then to flie, and that hee had seene them standing in good and martiall
order, wayting if any would follow to fight with them: Whereuppon, euery man
beeing placed and ranked in his order and squadron, the armie, with great courage and
resolution, marched on.
The king of Portugall descrying the Spaniards marching towards them, caused his
people foorth-with to make a stand, and with great magnanimitie to turne their faces
towards them, resoluing rather to dye fighting, then to retirie with shame. Hee was at
the same time stronger in horse-men than king Ferdinand: wherefore after hee had diuided
his squadrons, betwixt himselfe, his sonne the Prince, the Bishoppe of Ebora, the
Earles of Ph^ro, Villa-reall, and other Captaines, and encouraged the Knights, and
souldiers with a large and well-composed speech, putting them in mind of the victorie
which King Iohn the first wonne from the Spaniards at Aljubarotta, he caused them to
march forward to the fight.
The chiefe strength and flower of the Portugall Cauallerie lay in the squadron of

Prince Iohn, against whom King Fernand caused the sixth battaillion on his right hand
to aduance themselues altogether, albeit that D. Alphonso de Fonseca first of all, and Don
Aluaro de Mendoca Earle of Castro after him, had requested the honour to bee the first
that might charge them.
The Portugals which were in that squadron ioyned with those whom the Bishop of Ebora
conducted, made so braue a resistance, as the Spaniards turned their backes: so as at
this first incounter, the victory seemed to be on the King of Portugals side, the Spaniards
being sore hurt by the Artillery, and by the Crosse-bowes of the Portugall-footemen.
These being retired, the other squadrons gaue in vpon the residew of the Portugall
army with better successe. Notwithstanding that the valor of either side made the fight
doubtfull for three houres space. In the end, the Portugalls not being able to hold out,
beganne to giue backe, and were disordred and put to flight, taking the high-way towards
Toro as fast as they could gallop, but being pursued, there was a great slaughter of them,
and there died more of them drowned in the riuer, who thought to haue escaped by
swimming, then were slaine by the enemies hands. King Alphonso being not succoured
by his sonne, and perceiuing that resistance, without order, was to no purpose, did retire
himselfe to Castro Nugno, where hee was receiued by the Gouernor of the same place
whose name was Abendagno de Villa-reall in Alaua, hauing once lost his royall standard
(which neuerthelesse was recouered againe) thorough the carelesnesse of Don Pedro de
Velasco, and Pedro Vaca, who for want of a good guard suffred the Portugals to take it
from them: he which did beare it was taken, and beeing stripped out of his armor, the
King and Queene caused it to be hanged vp in the Cathedrall Church of Toledo, in the
Chappell of the last Kings. On King Fernands side likewise died a great number of souldiars,
though vncertaine; and the Earle of Alua de Lista pursuing his enemies ouer eagerly,
and beeing not well followed and seconded by his people, was taken at the bridge
of Toro.
The Prince of Portugall made his retreate towards night vpon a little hill, and as well
as hee could did gather together his disbanded troupes, and then retired towardes
Toro: and if the Spanish captaines had gathered and kept all their forces togither
they might as easily haue defeated all as some: but diuerse of them were busied in stripping
the dead bodies, and others in pursuing the runne-awaies, who beeing come to
the gates of Toro, the Earle of Guimaranes, who was left there for the guard of the
City, fearing that the Spaniards who pursued them, would haue entred pel mel with
them, would not open the gates for no intreaty of the Archbishop of Toledo, who
was the only Spanish Lord that was in that battaile, nor yet for the cries and lamentations
which the poore hurt souldiars did make, vntill such time as the Prince Don Iohn arriued
with his troupes, and then they were all let into the City: but they were merueilously
troubled, when they perceiued that the King was missing, but the Earle of Guimaranes
beganne to make a most pittifull lamention, shedding aboundance of teares,
and tare the haire from his head and beard; and beleeuing for a certaine that hee was
either slaine or taken, hee did greatly reproach and raile vpon the Portugalls, saying,
that they were traitors to their King, and that they had basely and treacherously forsaken
him.
But the Kings comming soone after, and newes from him by letters to the Prince
his sonne in the meane time, did greatly comfort this Earle and all the rest of the
army. It is reported that after the losse of the battaile, the King beeing at Castro Nugno,The King of Portugall doth little apprehend the losse of the battaile.
fell a sleepe as hee sate at meate, where at the Gouernor did greatly wonder,
who in regarde thereof reputed him a carelesse man, and said, that honourable Knights
and souldiars did greatly wronge themselues in aduenturing their liues for such a
King, and yet this gouernour did still shew himselfe faithfull and constant in his
seruice.
Queene Isabell in the meane time did remayne at Tordfillas, who beeing aduertised
by the King her husband of his victory, shee caused generall processions to bee made,
giuing thankes to God, after the accustomed manner, and shee he selfe went bare foote
to the Abby of Saint Paule, without the towne, and as well there as in other Citties belonging

to the Queene, great signes of ioy were made, The seege of the Castle of Zamora
did still continew after that without any empediment, till Alphonso de Valence the
Captaine thereof, who was sonne in law to Iohn de Porras, obtained his pardon by the
intercession of the Cardinall of Spaine his kinsman,The Castle of zamora yeelded. King Ferdinands liberality. and did yeeld it vp. There was
found in the Castle great store of siluer, treasure, iewells, and other pretious mouables,
belonging to the King of Portugall, which by King Ferdinands commandement were
al restored vnto him, who made Sancho d' Castile Captaine of the Castle, and after that he
had ordayned, and prouided all things requisite for the safety of Zamora, hee came to
Medina del Campo, where the Queene met him; This happy successe did daunt the
courrages of all the Kings, and Queenes enemies, in so much as the greatest part of
them, employed all their meanes, credit, and friends, to obtayne their grace and fauour.
The Constable obtayned pardon for the Maister of Calatraua, and for the Earle of
Vregna his brother, vnto whom the Constable gaue one of his daughters in marriage.
The Arch-Bishoppe of Toledo, beeing daily dispossessed of the townes, and places
belonging to his Arch-Bishopricke, tooke leaue of the King of Portugall, and withdrew
him-selfe to Alcala de Henares, beeing accompanied with a gard and conuoy of
horsemen, which did greatly hinder the Earle of Treuignoes enterprise, who was sent by
the King for to take him.
There remayned in Atienca a Captaine of the King of Portugalls side, which did
great hurt to the country round about, who with his wife, family, and all his goods, was
taken in a night by a Knight named Garey Brauo, who had entry giuen him by one of the
Captaines seruants. This prey, amounting to better then tenne thousand duca^ts, was
giuen by the King, and Queene, to this Knight, who did in like manner take Camarena,
for their seruice, from which place Iohn de Touar, did commit infinite spoyles. The
King of Portugall finding that all matters fell out contrary to his desire, resolued to returne
into Portugall, with an intent to craue aide of the French King: Hee carried
Donna Ioane his betroathed wife with him, and left good Garrisons in those townes of
Spaine which hee did possesse, especially in Toro, where Don Fancisco Cotino Earle of
Marialua was left for Gouernour, in Iohn de Vlloa his steed, who dyed not long before
by a suddayne accident. Rodrigo of Caftagneda, brother to the Earle of Cifuentes, did
hold Madrid for the Marquis of Villena, beeing assisted by Iohn Sapata a Cittizen of the
towne, and a violent and bitter enemy to all those which tooke the King, and Queenes
part, whome by all meanes he chased from thence. He was cheefe of that faction. In the
number of those that were banished, was Pero Nugnes of Toledo cheefe, like-wise of
those on the King, and Queenes side, who had retyred himselfe to the Duke of Infantasgo:
this man with others, who were banished from Madrid, hauing conferred with the
Queenes people, did thinke to surprise the towne by intelligence, with some within the
same. Iohn Sapata, at the first newes thereof, left the Citty, his owne conscience accusing
him, and threatning him with death, for his many misdemeanors: neuerthelesse the
commander Pedro of Ayala, a knight of the order of Saint Iames, being in the Citty, did
defend it for a tyme, and then did deliuer it to the Duke. The Castle held two months
for the Marquis,Donna Isabell, sworne heire to the kingdomes of Castile. in which space it was beseeged by the Duke, sent thither with certaine
companies by the Queene. This same yeare, King Ferdinand and Queene Isabell, (their
affaires prospering) did celebrate and keepe the assembly of the estates at Madrigall,
where Donna Isabell, there onely daughter, at that time, was sworne vnto, and acknowledged,
after the antient accustomed manner of Spaine, Princesse of the Astiuria's, and
eldest lawfull heire to the Kingdomes of Castile, and Leon, and the dependances thereof,
in case no male child were borne vnto them. And in regard of the great zeale and affection
they did beare to iustice, which had greate neede of their aide and assistance,
the whole state of Spaine being so disordered, and full of confusion, as they which were
strongest,In what cases the prouosts of Castle may giue iudgement. would without any feare of punishment exercise infinite kinds of cruelties
vpon the weaker sort, it was decreed, for the preuenting thereof, to renew and authorise
the brother-hoods, and companies of the communalties. To the prouosts and iudiciall
seates whereof, authority should be giuen to giue iudgement in fiue cases, that is
to say, for murther, inforced theft, or those which should be hurt in the country or places

farre from any dwelling: Secondly, they might iudge the selfe same crimes committed
in the townes, and villages, in case the offender should flie away: Thirdly, the breaking
open of doores and walles, scaling and burning of houses: Fourthly, the rape and violence
offered to women or maides; of what age or condition soeuer: And fiftly for rebelling
against the Ministers of iustice executing their charge: which brother-hoods
should haue their prouosts and iudges in the townes, and their Ministers in all places
of their iurisdiction, and whereas any controuersie should arise betwixt the ordinary
Iudges and those prouosts vpon the enquiry and knowledge of offences, such differences
should be iudged by the Kings Councell.
Don Lope de Ribas Bishop of Carthagena was chosen chiefe president of all those
brotherhoods, and it was decreed that an imposition should bee laide vpon the people,
for the entertainement of the souldiars and officers of these Iudges, euery twentith house
to finde one horseman: so as by that meanes a power of two thousand horse was leauied,
to assist the Iudges, and to purge and clense the country from theeues and robbers.
Of whom, Don Alphonso of Arragon, Duke of Villahermosa, the Kings brother,
was captaine generall. These things beeing thus ordered, did neuerthelesse displease
sundry of the great Lords of Spaine; but the Constable was well pleased therewith, who
was the first that commanded his owne tennants, to contribute towards the payment of
these companies, whose example diuers other great Lords did follow afterward.
Now the King of Portugall had furnished Toro, Cantalapiedra, and Castro Nugno
with good and strong garrisons, which did greatly molest all the country there abouts,
especially that of Cantalapiedra where Alphonso Peres de Biuero was gouernour, who
made continuall courses, vpon the territory of Medina, Salamanca, and other places:
which to remedy, King Fernand resolued to beseege it, and sent thither the Duke
of Villahermosa his brother, and Don Pedro Manrique Earle of Treuigno, with Artillery
to batter it.
The seege being planted, and the Canon playing on either side, the beseeged, who
found themselues shut in, demaunded aide of King Alphonso, who did forrage and ouer*
runne the territory of Salamanca, thinking by that meanes both to diuert the army
from before Cantalapiedra, and to succour the beseeged, but it fell not out according
to his desseigne; for the Earle of Treuigno marched against the forragers, and did beate
them backe, and yet the beseeged in Cantalapiedra were still as much distressed as before.
It was treated concerning the exchange of prisoners: wherefore the Earle of
Benauent was freed from his oth, which hee made, not to beare armes for King Fernand
in that warre, and so the Earle of Pegnamacor was deliuered forth of prison, the seege
raised from before Cantalapiedra and the Licentiate Antonio Nugnes of Ciudad Rodrigo
was restored to his goods, and the garrisons of that place were not to beare armes
for a yeere afterward. The King and Queene gaue to the Earle of Benauent, foure millions
of Marauedis, towards the charges hee had beene at, and confirmed his former
guift of the city of Corunna, or the Groine, but the Inhabitants taking armes, did resist
him, intending to maintaine themselues vnder the demaines of the crowne, without
acknowledging any subalterne Lord, and draue those forth of the castle which held it for
the Earl. The same time, king Fernand was sent for into Arragon by King Iohn his father,
whither he did make a short iourney, and because his wars in Castile, but especially in Guipuscoa,
concerned him very nerely, he made a quick returne to victoria: for the Frenchmen
remained still in that Prouince burning the country, to driue whom away, the King
and Queene raised an army of fity thousand men, the most part of them being footmen,
out of the Prouinces of Guipuscoa, Alaua, Biscay, Asturia, and from other places on the
confines of Burgos. Vpon the report of this great preparation the French men retired to
Bayonne, with intent and threatning to returne againe the spring following.
At the same time,Nauarre. the faction of Beaumont and Grammont in the Kingdome of Nauarre,
were at as deadly warre as euer,Lewis of Beaumont coue^s the Realme of Nauarre. and the quarrell betwixt Don Lewis of
Beaumont Earle of Lerin, and Pedro of Peralta the Constable, was pursued with
all rigour and extremity: the Earle of Lerin beganne to treat with King Fernand
to make him King of Nauarre, and to deliuer into his hands the city of Pampelona

with other fortresses of the fame country: sending certaine Knights of Nauarre vnto
him to victoria, to offer him his seruice with all that hee did possesse: the King did curteously
entertaine those Knightes, and thanked both the Earle and them for their offers, and
good will: but concerning the rest, hee said that hee would not lay claime to anothers
right, for the Realme of Nauare did in right belong to his sister the Princesse Leonora,
and after her decease, to her Sonnes Sonne, Francis Phoebus Earle of Foix and Lord of
Bearne, and withall because King Iohn his father did enioy the toyall authority thereof,
during his life: therefore, to enterprise any thing against the right of those persons, vnto
whome hee did owe so much honour and respect, it would not onely be a sinne, but
impiety and sacriledge, so as by no meanes hee would harken therevnto: saying moreouer
that hee was much greeued, to see the inueterate hatred betwixt the Earle and the
Constable, and that hee would willingly take the paines to make them friends, thinking
it an office worthy of him,King Ferdinand meditates a peace betwixt the factions of Beaument and Gramont. to procure the peace and quiet of that Kingdome, which
was ruined by the confusions of the ciuill warres, wherefore hee did inuite both of
them to come to victoria, and to refere their controuersies to his arbitrement: with
these holy speeches hee gaue content, and admiration to the Knights of Nauarre, at
whose returne the Earle of Lerin, and the Constable came to Victoria, where if King
Fernand could not wholy reconcile them, yet he procured a truce betwixt them, putting
each of them in mind with great meekenesse mixed with grauity of their errors with the
amendement thereof, to the good of the Kingdome, their own particular proffit and for
the seruice of King Iohn their maister.
The King of Arragon afterwards, perceiuing him-selfe at the graues brinke, and desiring
to leaue quietnesse in that miserable kingdome, where the factions had bred such
confusions, as neither the feare of God, nor the respect of iustice, nor the loue of honesty
was able to containe men from executing all kinds of mischeefes, murthers, sacrileges,
robberies, burnings, and horrible desolations ouer the whole country, which were followed
with the terrible, and fearefull iudgements of God, as plagues, famines, and other
scourges of his wrath, all which were not onely encreased, but procured by the Kings
second marriage:King Iohns second marriage (...) to the realme of Nauarre. King Iohn I say beeing mooued with these things, sent the Earle of
Lerin such assurances, as hee caused him to to come to Saragossa, being well accompanied,
where the King did gently receaue him, graunted him peace, and gaue a generall
pardon to all offences past, proceeding from both factions, and for a greater confirmation
of the whole, he gaue the Earle a bastard daughter of his in marriage, called Donna
Leonora of Arragon; by these meanes the Princesse Leonora, widdow to the Earle of
Foix,The Earle of Lerin marrieth a bastard daughter of Arragon and becomes obedient to King Iohn. and future Queene of Nauarre, recouered without force her townes and fortresses,
and was euery where obeyed, except in the Citty of Caseda, which was battered, at
the taking whereof dyed that Valiant Captaine Sancho of Eruiti, surnamed the obstinate
in the seruice of the Princesse Leonora; about which time Alphonso Carillo Bishop
of Pampelona called a Sinode at Estella, wherein they treated of ceremonies and other
matters. After all these things, King Iohn beeing at rest and quiet^, in the Citty of Barcelona,
notwithstanding hee was very aged, and full of sicknesse, fell in loue with a
yong Gentlewoman called Francina Rosa, with whose beauty and comlinesse hee did
comfort by imbraces, and frutelesse kisses, the waywardnesse of his old age, leauing
her concerning other matters free, and vntouched to him who after-ward married
her.
King Fernand hauing (as hath beene already saide) made the pacification of Nauarre
at Victoria,Iohn King of Arragon falls in loue in his extreme old age. and by the renowne of his power, deliuered the country of Guipuscoa
from the French army, would in like manner order the affaires, of Alua, Biscaie,
and other places neere adioyning, where were many factions, and other disorders:
hee therefore entred Bicay, beeing attended on by Don Alphonso Carisso Bishoppe
of Pampelona, Pedro Lopes de Padilla, great gouernor of the Frontiers of Castile,
Don Henry Henriques, the Kings Vncle, brother to the Admirall, Don Pedro de
Estuniga eldest Sonne to the Earle of Miranda, Doctor Iohn Dias de Alcocer one of
the Kings Councell, Roderigo Vlloa his great Tresorer and Councellour, Don Diego de

Acugna sonne to the Bishop of Burgos, Don Fernand de Ayala sonne to the Marshall
Don Garcia de Ayala, and by other Knights and Ecclesiasticall persons.
The Biscains had an ancient custome, which was, not to suffer any Bishop to come 
within their country,Bishops exclaued out of the Country of Bisay. by reason perhaps of the attempts and wrongs which they had
in time before susteined by the prelats and Churchmen, the which was vnknowne to
King Fernand, who riding on with the Bishop, hee was aduertized of their custome,
and was constrained to send him backe; the peasants and poore country people thinking
the ground to bee infected wherevpon this Prelat and his Mule did tread were busied
many daies after in scraping together the dust of the high-waies,Strange opinions of the Biscaines concerning Bishops. which they laide vp
in heapes, and threw it afterwards with curses and imprecations into the sea, the
which certainely was not done without some mistery, those people not beeing voide
of religion, but superstitiously deuout, as the rest of the Spaniards are. The King visited
Bilboa, and afterward hee came to Guernica, where hee was receiued and reuerenced
with all ceremonious duty. Hee called the Nobility of the country thither, and
confirmed all their priuiledges by his letters patents, written by Gaspar Arin his secretary,
dated the thirtith day of Iuly, the yeere 1476. in the presence of diuers Noble
personages of name.
The King beeing busied about these matters, a famous French Pirate named Colora,
came with foure vessels to a place called the figge-tree of Fontarabie, to whom after
that, fiue more ioyned: these nine shippes did ride there at an ankor for the space
of eleuen daies, in the view of the towne of Fontarabie, and sundry times they landed
their souldiars, who ranne vp and downe the country burning and spoyling all they
met with; against whom the Garrison went forth, and flew more then a hundred of
them; wherevpon they set saile towards Galicia, where they burned the suburbes of the
City of Ribadeo, then sayling along the coast of Portugall, they met with certaine
Carrakes of Genoa,Combate at sea be wi^t the frenchmen and Genoueses. with whom they grapled, and the fight betwixt them was so furious,
as seuen vessells were there burned, to weet two Genoueses and fiue of the Pirates,
who with the other foure, which remained were repared at Lisbone. The report
of this Pirate, caused thirty ships of warre to bee set forth, as well from Saint Sebastians
as from other places on the coast of Biscay, who met altogether at Laredo,
and this sea-army parted from Conserua, and sailed towards Galicia, where they tooke,
partly by force, and partly by composition, certaine places vpon the sea coast next to
Portugall, which were reuolted from the Kings of Castile. Herevpon truce was granted
and agreed vpon betwixt the French men and Guipuscoans, by land onely, for the
space of three monthes, leauing the sea free for euery man to doe the best hee could:
the army aboue mentioned hauing done that exploite on the marches of Galicia, returned
laden with spoiles.
Amongst other things, those of Saint Sebastian brought away two yron peeces of
ordonance, whereof one did carry a stone-bullet of a hundred and threescore pound
waight, taken from Bayon de Minio. The charges of this warre of Guipuscoa, was
heauy to the whole Prouince with great discommodity and losse of their bloud: which
warre, after the retreat of the French, did continue still at sea, where the French lost more
then they did winne. King Fernand hauing discharged, honored, and praised the souldiars,
and punished certaine euill liuers in that country, and ouerthrowne certaine strong houses,
he returned to Victoria.
The Cardinall of Spaine,The Cardinall of Spaine, se^ks to renew the peace betwixt France and Spaine. in the meane time, who was a very wise and pollitike man,
did trie by all meanes to draw away the French King from the alliance with Portugall,
and to make him friend to his King: hee had in former time written sundry letters vnto
him to that purpose, and now hee continued it, sending Alphonso Ianes, treasurer of
the Church of Siguenca vnto him, to put him in minde of the inuiolable Friendship
which had beene in times past betwixt the houses of France and Castile, whose forces
had beene so well vnited togither to the preiudice of the English, ancient enemies and
competitors of the crowne of France: whereas the Portugalls on the contrary had alwaies
fauoured, and followed them to the great hinderance and contempt of the
French Nation, and then hee besought him to consider what occasion hee had to

bandy against the King of Castile for Portugall, requesting him henceforward to giue
place to that which reason, humanity and profit, did require, which was to cause the
warre to cease, and re-establish the holy friendship and league betwixt France and
Castile. This Treasorer made diuerse voyages into France for this purpose, and
handled the matter so well, as hee obtained truce for a yeere, and there was a place
appointed betwixt Bayon and Fontaraby for the two Kings Commissioners for to
meet at.
About this time the Earle of Paredes, who called himselfe Maister of Saint Iames,
did beseege Vcles, where hee found sharpe resistance, and doing his vttermost to take
it, the captaine, who held it for the Marquis of Villena, certified his Maister what need
hee had of helpe: the Marquis beeing then at Alcara de Henares with the Archbishop
of Toledo, brought him and as much power as they could raise betwixt them to Vcles,
which were about three thousand horse. Yet notwithstanding the Earle made no
shew that hee ment to dislodge,VVarre of Vcles against the Marquis of Villena. but against the opinion of all men hee maintained the
seege, and hee had moreouer the courage to goe and affront the troupes of the Marquis
and Archbishop, keeping them a whole day in alarumm, aking sundrie charges
with aduantage: at the last, with the losse of some of his owne people he inforced them
to returne, not being able to driue him from the Castle, where soone after arriued men
at armes to his succor, who were sent by the Duke of Infantasgo, and conducted by Don
Hurtado de Mendoza his brother, with the which forces, ioyned to some of his owne, hee
followed the Marquis and the Archbishop with great hope to haue defeated them if
they would haue accepted the fight, but they wanted courage, albeit they were within
a bow shot of them; but the Archbishop and the Marquis retired themselues about
mid-night to a castle called Arauia, despairing euer to succor Vcles: which the beseeged
perceiuing, yeelded themselues with safety of liues and goods.
 As these men did thus trouble themselues in Spaine, the King of Portugall beeing
vexed,Portugal* King Alphonso of Portugall doth in vaine solicite the French King to vndertake with him wars against Spaine. that his affaires succeeded so vnluckily, where as he was wont to triumph and bee
victorious in Affrica, would once againe sollicite King Lewis, and determined to goe
in person into France: Hee therefore imbarked himselfe, and hauing passed the
Streights, hee came to Marseilles, from whence hee went to the King who lay at Tours
of whom hee was kindly entertained: but concerning the affaires for which hee came,
hee gaue him no hope at all, but delaied him from day to day, excusing himselfe by
the great warres which hee had against the English and the Duke of Bourgondy, enterteyning
him without any conclusiue answere: at the last hee told him, that it behooued
him to haue a dispensation from Pope Sixtus the fourth then raigning, for to marry
with his Neece Donna Ioane his sisters daughter, before hee could pretend any lawfull
right to the Kingdome of Castile and Leon; wherevpon either King did write to
Rome to that effect, where the Ambassador of King Fernand and Queene Isabella,
did mainely oppose himselfe against it, alleadging the great troubles and miseries
which such a dispensation might cause in Spaine: Yet notwithstanding at the entreaty
of King Lewis, the dispensation was graunted, the which did conteine that it
was lawfull for Donna Ioane to marry any one within the fourth degree. It is reported
that King Don Alphonso beeing in talke with King Lewis, and labouring to induce
him to poursue this warre,The King of Portugalls abiect courage. vsed many base entreaties, and kneeled to him with other like
iestures ill beseeming a King, who ought still to shew himselfe couragious, and constantly
to resist all aduersities. And perceiuing that the controuersies betwixt the
King and the Duke of Burgondy were a great hinderance to his businesse, hee tooke
vpon him to reconcile and make them friends, to the end hee might the better procure
helpe from both of them: for Duke Charles of Burgondy was his cousin germaine,
borne of a sister to King Edward his father: but hauing made a iourney to him, and
beeing returned to Paris, the Dukes ouerthrow and death did fodainely follow, which
happened before Nancy, in the yeere 1477. which did the more alienate the French
King from giuing eare to the affaires of Spaine,An. 1477. beeing more attentiue to recouer
both the Burgondies, with the lands and townes of Picardy, Flanders and Artois,

which were dependances of his crowne, Duke Charles hauing left no other heire of his
great Dominions but his onely daughter Mary who was afterward married to Maximillian
of Austria, she was grand-mother to the Emperour Charles, heire to all Spaine after
the death of King Fernand and Queene Isabella, in the right of his mother Donna
Ioane their daughter, as shal be declared in his place. Vpon these pretences concerning
Bourgondy, King Lewis found sufficient occasion to delay him: promising that those
businesses being ended hee would doe whatsoeuer the King of Portugall would request
him,King Alphonso of Portugall in despaire. who being sorrowfull and discontented, departed out of France, and was brought
into such despaire, as hee determined to goe to Ierusalem, and there to become a
Monke, without euer seeing Portugall any more* from which determination his friends
and seruants disswaded him, putting him in minde of the great wrong hee should doe
to his honour and reputation thereby. In his absence, Prince Iohn, by his fathers
consent, tooke vpon him the title of King, but vnderstanding that King Alphonso was
arriued at Cascaes, hee like an obedient sonne gaue ouer the title and authority vnto
him.
Queene Isabella in this meane space thought to haue surprised Toro by the meanes
of the Admirall and the Earle of Benauent,Castile. who after a long and dangerous fight,
were repulsed by the Earle of Marialua who was Gouernor. It happened in like manner,
that the great Maister Andrew de Cabrera hauing taken the Lieutenancy, or Captaineship
of the castle of Segobia from Alphonso Maldonado to bestow it vpon Don
Pedro de Bouadilla his father in law, Maldonado beeing enraged thereat, went about
to surprize the same place, there to recouer his former authority, and had intelligence
with certaine dead paies of the castle,Yumult in Segobia. and feyning on a day to haue need of some certaine
stones that were within the same, vnder collour of fetching them out, hee put
foure souldiars into the fortresse beeing instructed what to doe, who at the first, flue
the porter, and being followed by their Captaine, they tooke Don Pedro de Bouadilla,
and constrained the rest which were within it to saue themselues in a tower. In the
same castle the Princesse Isabella, the King and Queenes onely daughter, was kept:
wherevpon there arose a great tumult in the City of Segobia, which beeing vnderstood
by Don Iohn de Arias, the Bishop thereof, who as then lay forth of the City, by
reason of the dissention betwixt him and Andrew de Cabrera, hee came thither and
easily made himselfe Maister of the gates which were held by those of Cabrera's faction,
beeing fauoured by diuers principall citizens. Queene Isabella beeing aduertized
of this inconueniencie came thither with the Cardinall of Spaine, and hauing
made Goncalo Chacon Captaine, shee enquired by way of Iustice of the Captaines behauiour,
who hauing yeelded good account of himselfe, his iustifications were allowed,
and he restored to his gouernment.
The Archbishop of Toledo, and the Marquis of Villena, beeing not able any longer
to resist the King and Queene, made all the meanes they could for to obtaine
their grace and fauour, and they practized with the old King Iohn of Arragon, that
hee would bee a meanes to his children the King and Queene of Castile to receiue
them as their faithfull seruants.The Archbishop of Toledo and the Marquis of Villena obtaine their pardon. The messengers that went about this businesse
were certaine religious persons, who preuailed so much with King Iohn, as by great
importunity they obteined their pardon, and caused whatsoeuer they had possessed
in time before, to bee restored to them (the castles of Madrid and Trugillo excepted)
which remained at the Kings dispose and pleasure. The citty of Hueta, which
King Henry had giuen to Don Lope Vasques of Acugna, with title of Duke, was at
the same time yeelded vp and willingly surrendred to the King and Queene. The
Archbishop was more in fault, and more worthy reprehension, then any one that had
resisted the Kings.
During these warres, the Castillan marriners made their first voyage into Guyeney 
where were mines of gold,The Spaniards first voyage to Guyeney. wherevpon, as hath beene before mentioned, there
grew a controuersie betwixt the Castillans and Portugalls, who had most right and title
vnto that nauigation.
 Whilest Queene Isabella remained at Segobia, the Spaniards tooke Toro by meanes
of a shep-heard, who certified Don Alphonso de Fonseca Bishop of Auila, that there
was a certaine part of the City which the Portugals did alwaies leaue without any
guard, because by nature the seite thereof was strong. The Bishop sent to discouer
it, and finding the shep-heards report to bee true, sent thither sixe hundred men, and
him for their guide, they giuing no great credit to the poore man, went on very lazily
to that enterprise, but beeing incouraged by Pedro de Velasco, and by an other young
man called Alphonso de Fonseca,Toro surprised. who was the first that entred it, they all followed, not
being discouered by any one, and hauing broken open a gate, they gaue entry to the
rest of their fellowes, the Bishop hauing sent a good troupe after them, and so they became
Maisters of the City, the Earle of Marialua and his people hauing scarce leisure
to recouer the castle, from whence afterward hee went to Castro Nugno, abandoning
the said castle, within the which Donna Maria Sarmiento, widow to Iohn Vlloa, did fortifie
her selfe with those of her faction, who desired by all meanes to returne to the
Queenes seruice. The Queene hauing vnderstood those good newes, came speedily
to Toro, restored the bannished to their goods, did honorably recompence the poore
shep-heard whom they called. Bartlemew, enfranchising him and all his posterity from
tributes beside the ready money and pentions which she gaue him: and receiued Donna
Maria Sarmiento into her fauour, who was sister to Don Diego Sarmiento Earle of Salinas,
for whose sake and desertes she restored her vnto all her goods and possessions: and
by this meanes the castle of Toro came into the Kings power.
 About this time Don Roderigo Manriques Earle of Paredes, the pretended Maister of
Saint Iames died in the City of Ocagna,Election of the Maisters of S^int Iames, in the kings power. whose competitor Don Alphonso de Cardegna,
great Commander of Leon did in all hast with great troupes of horse march towards Vcles,
to the end he might be chosen there by the thirteene Electors: but the Queene preuented
him, and delt in such sort as the thirteene, and the Commaunder himselfe were
contented to intreate the Pope to put the Maistership to the Kings disposing, the which
was graunted, and the same dignity was afterward bestowed vpon the same Commaunder.
 After that, King Fernand returning from Guipuscoa by Toro and Ocagna, met the
Queene at Toledo, in which city they builded that famous Monastery of Saint Iohn of
the Kings, which is a Couent of Franciscan friers, and from thence they went to Madrid,
where they were aduertised that the Portugals had entred Castile by the way of Badajos,
and Cite Rodrigo, with two armies, against whom were sent as Generals, Don
Lorenzo Suares de Figueroa Earle of Feria, and the great Commander of Leon: These
did not onely beat backe the enemies, but they entred into the country of Portugal putting
the poore miserable subiects to fire and sword, who could not remedy their Kings
ambition; to which place Queene Isabella, who was a woman of a manly courage, did
march, the better by her presence to incourage, and fauour the enterprises of her army.
From Madrid the King went to Medina del Campo, where he tooke order with his brother
the Duke of Villahermosa, and the Constable, about forces sufficient to assa^e
foure fortresses at one time: by meanes whereof, in a short time hee brought vnder his
obedience, Cantalapiedra Sept, Eglises, and Cubillas: but at Castro Nugno, which was
the fourth, hee found greater resistance, his seege lasting long, so as all the forces which
were dispersed abroade in sundry places, were faine to be drawne togither to that place,
and the King himselfe came thither in person, by meanes whereof the towne was
taken, but the castle made obstinate resistance, before which hauing left his army, hee
returned to Medina del Campo.
There he receiued letters from Garcia Osorio, Corrigidor of Salamanca, who aduertized
him of diuers outrages committed by a Knight named Roderigo Mildonado, who
was of the same citie, who held the castle of Monleon, and from thence did many
robberies and insolent attempts, as namely coyning of false and counterfeit money,
with diuers others mischiefes: in regard whereof the King would needs go thither,
and found meanes to catch this wicked man, who thought to haue saued himselfe

in the Sanctuary of the Couent of Saint Francis, the which neuerthelesse did saue his
life, at the earnest entreaty of the Friers; who deliuered him vpon that condition, as also
that he should deliuer vp the Castle of Monleon, otherwise the King would breake
open their gates. Maldonado beeing taken, gaue his wife and subiects notice of his
estate, and willed them to deliuer vp the Castle to the King, the which they refused to doe,
saying, that they would haue some recompence of the King, otherwise they would deliuer
it to the King of Portugall; and if hee were taken prisoner, he might thanke himselfe.
Then the King caused him to be carried to a place, in the fight of those which were in
Monleon, and commanded that in their view his head should be strucken off: but being
come to the place, hee made such pittifull lamentation, as they compassionating him,
yeelded the Castle and saued his life. From Salamanca, the King returned to the Campe
before Castro Nugnes.
As Queene Isabell went towards Badajos, shee sent from Guadalupa, to Pedro de Baecs
Captaine of the Castle of Trugillo,Reformation of the townes and state of And^luzia. who held it for the Marquis of Villena, commanding
him, following the agreement betwixt her and the Marquis, to deliuer vp the
fortresse to Goncall d' Auila, the which hee refused to doe, saying, that hee would neuer
yeeld it whilest hee had life in him: the Queene tryed by faire meanes and promises
to drawe him to deliuer it, but all was in vaine: wherefore shee raised a power,
and marched to Trugillo, whether the Maister of Calatraua came, and Don Alphonso
de Montroy, who called himselfe Maister of Alcantara, with diuerse other Lords and
Knights: whilest shee remained there, shee recouered diuerse Castles of the same
countrey, some of which shee razed. And knowing her selfe to bee strong and well
accompanied, shee gaue ouer all milde and gentle meanes, and began to vse greeuous
threatnings, so as Don Pedro de Baeca, became more tractable, and was willing to
deliuer it, so as the Marquis would come thither in person, and bid him doe it. The
Marquis was sent for, who to auoyde farther quarrels with the Queene, caused it to be
deliuered, and Goncal d' Auila was made Captaine thereof.
After that, shee did choose certaine Arbitrators at Caceres to compose the controuersies
betwixt her and the Marquis, shee reformed the state of the towne, and
made the officers thereof perpetuall: and from thence shee went to Siuill, the which
Citty shee found in a miserable estate,The Citty of Siuill euill entreated by the factions of Guzman, and Ponce. and diuided into factions; which caused infinite
disorders and villanies: for the inhabitants were of a long time bandied one against
an other about the quarrells betwixt the houses of Guzman and Ponce: and they
were so grounded therein, as they fought for the same with incredible cruelties and
impieties, the father against the sonne, the brother against brother, the wife against
the husband, with more furie and obstinacie then the Guelphs and Gibelines in Italy,
and the Gamboins and Ognazins in Biscay, the Citty of Cordoua beeing likewise
infected with the same pestilence: Don Alphonso d' Ag^^lar Lord of Montilla, beeing
chiefe of the faction for the Marquis of Cales, his brother in lawe, and Don
Diego de Cordoua for the family of the Guzmans.
The Queene was receiued into Siuill with great honour, where shee made some
stay, and tooke the paines to heare all these controuersies, with others, sitting her
selfe in councell, and giuing audience euery Friday, beeing accompanied with Prelats,
Doctors, and other noble personages: whose example is to bee followed of all
Christian Kings and Princes, who in regarde they will not take the paines themselues
to harken vnto their affaires, doe see and heare by other mens eyes and eares,
which causeth them to fall into greeuous errors, by not knowing truly what is
done in their Realmes and dominions, through the pernicious dissimulation, and
damnable flattery of their Ministers and officers.
The Queene determining to punish all those that were guilty of the maine miseries
which this stately Cittie had endured,A Queene carefull of doing iustice to ^hir subiects. the Bishoppe of Cales, Suffragan to
the Cardinall of Spaine, Archbishoppe of the same Church, did admonish her in
a wise and learned Oration, of the difficultie and danger* of that shee pretended to
doe, saying, that it was the end of all good Princes, and of Iustice, to amend,

and not to destroy;The end of all good gouernment is to am^nd and not destroy offenders. otherwise in steed of Kings, they would bee accounted barbarous
tyrants, greedy of humaine bloud, true Ministers, not of the diuine clemencie, but
of the destroying spirit, who had beene a murtherer from the beginning of the world,
applying to his speech many examples of old times, drawne out of the Holy scriptures:
adding, that the number of the offendors was so great, that if all of them should
bee punished according to their deserts, the City would want people to dwell in it: the
Queene therefore beeing mooued with these reasons,Gentle punishments whereby the seditions in Siuill are appeased. gaue a generall pardon for all
matters past (apostacy onely and mens priuate interests excepted.) The Duke of Medina
and the Marquis of Cales, who were the causes of all these euills, comming into
the Queenes presence with great submission, would haue laied the fault one vpon
other: in the end hauing deliuered vp into her hands the places and fortresses which
they had vsurped, as well the one from the other, as those which did belong to the City
of Siuill, shee made peace betwixt them, and gaue to euery one his owne. The castle
of Vtrera onely made resistance, the captaine thereof saying, that hee would not deliuer
it, because it belonged to the Marshall of Sahauedra vnto whose father Goncalo Arias
of Sahauedra the late King Henry had giuen it, for which contempt, the Queene caused
it to bee beseeged and furiously battered, in regard hee did defend it with such obstinacy:
in the end, the place beeing taken by assault, himselfe, with all those that
were within it, lost their liues, the most part of them in the heate of the fight: the residew
of them beeing brought to Siuill seruied for an example to others not to resist a
greater power, and were publikely hanged.
King Don Fernand staied not very long ere hee came vnto Siuill to the Queene,
who about that same time was brought in bedde and deliuered of a sonne, who was
named Don Iohn; for the which, great ioy feastings and gladnesse was made ouer all
Spaine.
There came vnto the Kings, being at Seuill, an Ambassage from Muley Albohacen
King of Granada, with whom they were at peace, notwithstanding hee had not paied
the tribute which his Predecessors did vsually doe vnto Castile, the which the warres
of Portugall had constrained the Kings to dissemble till a fitter time. These Ambassadours
craued confirmation of the truce betwixt the Realmes and Kings of Castile
and Granado; the which was refused them, vnlesse that Albohacen would send the
arrerages due for the tribute: but the Moores answered (hauing expresse commission
so to doe) that the Kings of Granado, who had beene tributaries to Castile were
dead,Braue answere of the Moorish Ambassadors. and their bondes buried with them, and that the money of Granado was no
more coined of gold or siluer, but the iron of launces, dartes and many other such like
weapons, which they would turne vpon their enemies, and deliuer themselues from all
slauery and bondage.
This braue answere caused the Kings to thinke (who were not yet freed from the
Portugall warres) that it was not good to draw so many enemies vpon them at once,
therefore they graunted them a truce, beeing sufficiently aduertized that King Muley
Albohacen was the best prouided of souldiers, armour, horses, artillery and all other
munition, and more abounding in treasure, by reason of the long peace hee had enioyed,
then any of the Kings of Granado his Predecessors. King Don Fernand beeing
highly offended at the rebellion of the Marshall Don Fernand Arrias de Sahauedra,
would haue had his proces made, and haue punished him as a contemner of the
royall Maiesty: but diuerse of his frends and kinsfolke who were in the Kings fauour,
and their faithfull seruants did saue him from this daunger, and obtained his pardon,
with restitution of all his offices and possessions.
The Admirall recouered the gouernment and captaineship of Tariffa with the castle
thereof, the which was giuen to his brother Don Pedro Henriques Gouernor of the
frontiers of Andaluzia, who placed therein Pedro de Godoy, from whom the three
castles of Carmona had beene taken, and were giuen to Don Guttiere de Cardegna,
who therewith was promoted to the great Commanderie of Leon, because Don
Alphonso de Cardegna who had beene great Commaunder was elected and confirmed

Maister of Saint Iames alone, and the last that hath beene Maister of the same Order,
the which dignity, with the rest of the Maisterships hath euer since continued in
the hands of the Kings of Castile; the Princes and their prudent Councell hauing
considered and well weighed with themselues, that these Maisters were ordinarily followed
by great numbers of Knights of their Order, men of warre; who had for the most
part made such tumults and factions in the Realme of Spaine, as they haue not let for to
make heads against their owne Kings. Queene Isabella would willingly haue had the
Maistership of Saint Iaimes to haue beene for euer after extinct, but shee could not obteine
it. The King her husband leauing her at Siuill, returned to Trugillo, where he made
Sancho de Auila captaine of the castle.
These matters happened in the yeere 1478.An. 1478. in the begining whereof Philip
Archduke of Austria was borne, who was sonne to Maximillian as then King of the
Romaines,Birth of Philip of Austria. and to Donna Maria, the heire of Bourgondy, Flanders and other great
Dominions, this Philippe was husband vnto Donna Ioane of Castile who, succeeded
King Fernand and Queene Isabella her father and mother in all their Kingdomes of
Spaine.
At the same time, King Iohn of Arragon beeing laden with many yeeres and neere 
to his end,Arragon* and Nauarre. was desirous to see and conferre with his sonne King Fernand, concerning
the affaires of Nauarre, Arragon, Sicill, and his other Dominions, hee therefore
sent to request him, if the Portugall warres would permit it, to meete him at Victoria.(...) last enterview of Don (...) of Arragon, and Don Fernand of Castile father and sonne.
King Fernand beeing wonderfull ioyfull to see his father, came thither before
him, where the King of Arragon soone after arriued, accompanied with a great
number of Lords and Gentlemen, chosen amongest the ancientest of Nauarre, Arragon,
and his other countries, so as the beholding of such a company of reuerend old
men was very notable and to bee admited, for the youngest amongest them was aboue
three score yeeres of age, all of them in decent habits befitting their yeeres, and yet
differing one from an other. The sonne beeing gone forth to meet the father they
did a great while striue about complement and ceremonies, and the King of Arragon,
would neuer suffer his sonne of Castile to kisse his hand, neither would hee take
the place of him, but they entred into Victoria, the father riding on the lower hand
of the sonne: and when they were come before the lodging which was prepared for
the King of Arragon, and both of them on foote, as soone as the father perceiued
that it was his owne lodging, hee seemed to bee very sorry, as though hee had committed
a great fault, and said,, You my sonne, who are Lord and head of the Royall
house of Spaine,The King of Arragon the father giueth precedence (...) the King of Castile his son. from whence wee are descended, ought to receiue from vs all honour,
reuerence, and seruice due vnto you, in regard the obligation which in this
respect wee owe vnto you, as to our King and superior, is stronger then that of the
sonne towards the father, therefore take horse againe, and I will accompany you
to your lodging, for reason commaunds it to bee so,, And King Fernand was
constrained so to doe thorough the great importunity of his father, who went with
him to his lodging, where hee left him, and the olde King rode backe againe vnto his
owne.
For the space of twentie daies that these two Kings remained in Victoria, the father
did still giue the honour, vpper hand, and preheminence in all matters to the sonne,
were it in sitting or rising vp, and in speaking, walking and keeping of company in
writing, and in euery other thing belonging to honour and dignitie, wherein great
Lords vse ceremony and complement to honour one an other with. Wherevpon
their arose a disputation and controuersie betwixt the Lords and Knights of the Court,
to weet, whether it a were a seemely, and a decent matter for a father, to shew such great
submission to his sonne, who beside beeing his father, was also his guest, being an vsuall
thing alwaies to honour and giue the places to those whom wee receiue into our
houses, albeit hee were of meaner quality then our selues, and whether the sonne
did well to receiue and accept of these honours. The Spaniards thought that either
of them had done that which was fit. Now the chiefest communication betwixt these

two Princes at this enterview was concerning the affaires of Nauarre, touching Donna
Leonoras future succession to the same, with her grand-child Francis Phoebus Earl of Foix:
and some are of opinion, that the townes and fortes of Saint Vincent, Garda, Bernedo,
Arcos,The father and the sonne cut off diuers places from the kingdome of Nauarre. Larraga, and Miranda de Arga were at the same time wholy cut off from the
crowne of Nauarre, in recompence of the charges which Don Fernand had beene at
for the warre of Perpignan, with an agreement, that the customes rights and priuiledges
which they had, should for euer bee maintained: but seeing it is certaine, that
a long time before this assembly, Saint Vincent, La Garde, and Arcos, were possessed
by the King of Castile, it is most likely, that they were at that time onely confirmed
vnto King Don Fernand. They did likewise intreate of many matters belonging to
the Kingdoms of Arragon and Sicil, and then they returned each of them into his owne
Dominions, and the King of Castile did neuer more after that see his father, who spent
the smal remainder of his daies at Barcelona, afflicted with the goute and other diseases
which doe ordinarily accompany old men.
King Don Fernand returned vnto the campe before Castro Nugno,Castro Nugno yeelded to king Fernand. which was
very faithfully and valiantly defended by the captaine Nicholas de Abendagno of Villareal,
in the Prouince of Alaua, but the great want of victualls and of men (those
which were with him, beeing in part dead, and the others were so tired and weakened
with watchings, wardings and hurts receiued at the assault as they could hold out
no longer) did constraine him to yeeld vp the same place, and yet vpon very honorable
conditions, for he carried away into Portugall all those that were with him, without
ransome, with their armor, weapons and baggage, and their ensignes displaied, and
drummes beating; and was greatly praised by the King, the fort was presently razed
downe to the ground: after the rendring whereof, the King returned to Siuill
to the Queene, where order was taken for the well gouerning of the City, and expresse
commaundement giuen to the Duke of Medina Sidonia, and the Marquis of Cales,
not to remaine there. Don Iohn de Gamboa Gouernor of Fontaraby, and the Licenciat
Iohn de Medina, both of them of the Kings Councell were likewise dispatched into
Guipuscoa, with instructions and authority, to treat and conclude the peace with the
French Kings Ambassadors who were at Bayon.Peace betwixt France and Castile. These, came to Fontarabie, and after
that, both sides did meet, at Saint Iohn de Luz, where they conferred togither, and
concluded the peace, renuing the alliances, leagues, and ancient friendship betwixt
the two Kingdomes. The French Commissioners were the Lord of Lescut, and the
Abbot of Saint Denis: and so the warre ended betwixt France and Castile.
 The King and Queene before their departure from Siuill sent an army to conquer the
Canaries vnder the conduct of Pedro de Vera, where,Nauigations and conquests of the Spaniards in the O^^an sea. for the space of three yeeres, diuerse
notable exploits of warre were performed by the Castillans: Thirty fiue ships were
likewise sent to Guiney, Pedro de Cobides being their generall, from which place great
quantity of gold was brought, with great proffit for the Kings, who had the fifth penny.
In the first, the thing which was most esteemed of that blacke Nation was cockelshels,
who were of opinion that they had great vertue against thunder and lightning, by
meanes whereof they were sold in Spaine at a great rate, so as men could hardly get any
for money.
 This yeere 1478. the inquisition beganne at Siuill, instituted at the first by the Councell
of Don Pero Goncales de Mendoza Archbishop of the same City,Inquisition in Spaine against Iewes and Moores, did beget the negligences of the Bishops and Pastors. against the Iewes
and conuerted Moores, which did returne to their superstitious ceremonies: this
Prelate, and other, deputed for that search, thinking that for to conteyne them in the
profession of Christianity, rigour and ciuill punishment was more expedient then other
milder meanes, or greater care: Beeing content for to take away the occasion of seditions
and troubles which grew in the Townes and Prouinces of the Realme, against
these miserable creatures, most commonly at the instigation of Preachers, and other
Clergy men, inciting the people to mutine against them.
Whereas in deed, they ought to haue beene instructed by good and wholesome
examples: but the Bishops and Pastors had no great care of their soules health:

for the affaires of State, and worldly greatnesse hath so busied them for many ages, as
they haue not had leysure to eleuate their eyes and minds higher then the earth. Since
that time, the power of the Inquisitions tribunall, which is diuided into diuers iurisdictions
thorough euery Prouince of Spayne, hath beene chiefly banded against those who
haue dared to speake against the pompe and pride of the Sea of Rome, and the abuses
brought into the Church, for to entertaine the ease and wealth of the Clergie, a gulph
which hath swallowed vp many good and honest families. Concerning this Inquisition,
which within awhile made it selfe knowne for a fruitlesse inuention, more ample mention
shall be made hereafter.
The King and Queene hauing pacified and ordered the cittie of Seuile, left Diego de
Merlo there, who was a good Knight, in qualitie of an assistant, and went themselues to
Cordoua, which was in like manner afflicted by the factions of Don Pero Fernandes of
Cordoua, Earle of Cabra, and that of Don Alphonso d' Aguilar, who in the last tumults
had driuen the Earles forces out of the cittie, and had taken the forts and places thereof,
which were in the keeping of the Earle, detaining them, with other places also belonging
to the gouernement and iurisdiction of the cittie: they and their followers beeing
moreouer charged with so many robberies, thefts, and murthers, as the King and Queene
had much ado to chastise the offendours,The cittie of Cordoua pacified. and to restore euery man to his owne. Alphonso
of Aguilar was driuen foorth of the cittie, and the fortresses taken from him. Vpon complaint
made against the Iudges and Officers of the legall Courts, who did greatly exact,
the King and Queene caused their fees and stipends to bee rated, more then which, they
were not permitted to take vpon payne of forfeiting seuen-fold as much, which was executed
vppon some, who neither feared God, nor reuerenced the lawes.
As these businesses were mannaged in Andalusia,The Archb. alway disloyal and seditious. the Arch-bishoppe of Toledo, who
was euer turbulent and desirous of innouation, had secret intelligence with the King of
Portugall, vnto whome hee vndertooke to deliuer the Cittie of Toledo, and to kill Don
Gomes Manriques assistant there: and to the same purpose he had practised with the common
people of Toledo, and had executed it, if the assistant had not been a prouident and
polliticke man, who hauing discouered the plot tooke order for it; standing on his guard
and by punishing some of the Conspirators, hee caused the rest to containe themselues
within their bounds for feare of the like punishment. The Arch-bishop who remayned
at Alcala de Henares had inuited the King of Portugall to come vnto his house of Talauera,
assuring him, that hee would put him into Toledo: who was in a readinesse to haue
come thither, had not the Prince his sonne, with his friends and seruants, told him what
small profite hee should receiue, and how great danger hee should incurre by such an enterprise.
The Kings, Don Fernand and Donna Izabella beeing aduertised of the Arch-bishops
dealings, were iustly incensed against him, they caused all his temporalities to bee seized
on, sending the Duke of Villa-hermosa to Madrid, to bridle that cittie, commanding all
his tenants and seruants to forsake him, and no more to obey him, vpon payne of depriuation
of their goods: and for a terrour to the rest, they did cause the houses of diuers
of the Rebels, who had contemned their commaundement, to bee razed downe to the
ground.
Wherefore the Arch-bishoppe within a few dayes was left alone, and his great friend
Hernand Alarcon did forsake him and fled presently into France, not daring any longer
to tarrie in Spaine. Don Tello de Buendia, Arch-deacon of Toledo, and a learned man,
did vndertake to bring the Arch-bishoppe to his dutie,The Archb. enforced to his dutie. he vanquished him by reason, and
perswaded him to humble himselfe to the King and Queene, of whome by his meanes
he obtayned pardon: but hee gaue all the strong castles of his Arch-bishoppricke in hostage
for his future fidelitie. The Marquis of Villena on the other side hauing entred into
the Marquisate, began to picke quarrels with the Gouernor placed there by the Queen,
concerning the limits of his power and iurisdiction, saying, that he did vsurpe more then
the couenants would permit him, and would haue letted him from punishing those of
Cinchilla, with other rebellious and disobedient people, so that a power was sent thither
vnder the conduct of Don George Manrique, and Pedro Ruis Alarcon.

Great was the King and Queenes toyle, in ordering the peace and quiet of the countrey
of Andalusia,Offenders forsake the country to auoyde punishment. for the people thereof were so giuen ouer to all manner of villanies,
as if they had not vsed their meekenesse and clemencie, the citties and towns would haue
beene voyd and empty of people: for it is most certaine, that this yeare and the former,
there went out of Seuile and Cordoua aboue eight thousand men, tainted of notorious
crimes, who left he country for feare of punishment.
 It happened about the same time, that Don Rodrigo de Vergara Bishoppe of Leon,
borne at Logrogno (it is not knowne vppon what occasions) caused Pedro V^^a Treasurer
of his Church,A murtherous Bishop, murthered. to be slayne in the same Cittie, beeing a Knight of a great parentage,
whose death his friends and kinsfolkes reuenged by the death of the Bishoppe, who
assayled him in his owne house, and pursued him, as he thought to haue fled for safetie
to the house of Diego Fernandes Quignones, Earle of Luna, where they murthered him
in the bosome of the Countesse, who intreated them to spare the spilling of his bloud
for her sake.
In the town of Fonteouejuna, the Inhabitants did kill with stones D. Hernand Gomes de
Guzman,Petty tyrants st^ned to death by the common people. great Commaunder of Calatraua, for outrages and tyrannies which hee had
done to them, for the which fact the Iudges which were sent by the King to informe of
the matter, could neuer find any one witnesse, which would charge any one particular
man with that murther, and they could haue no other answer, than this, that Fonteouejuna
had slaine him, which passed for a Prouerbe thorough Spaine. This same yeare the
inhabitants of Saint Helizes de los Galegos, a place neere to Trugillo did in like maner
stone their Lord Gratian de Sese to death, who as it hath beene heretofore sayd, had bene
Captaine of Trugillo.
In the beginning of the yeare,An. 1479. one thousand, foure hundred, seuenty nine, the King
and Queene left Cordoua, and came with great deuotion to the Monasterie of Guadalupa,
and also to take order for the Portugall warre, which they daily feared. From Guadalupa
they sent the duke of Villa-hermosa their brother to Almorox nere to Escalona,
in which place were Don Iohn de Luxan, and Don Iohn de Pacheco the Marquis of Villena's
brother, who ranne vppe and downe burning and spoiling the countrey round
about.
The Marquis on the other side remayning in Garcy Nugnos, did violently resist the
the Kings souldiers, and defeated the troups of Don George Man^ique, who within a few
dayes after, dyed of the hurts which he had receyued in that encounter: By meanes wherof,
others of the Kings Captaines, beeing iustly mooued against him, did hang vp sixe
of his seruants whome they had taken, to serue for a terrour to the rest: the Marquis in
like manner would not be indebted to them for reuenge: but caused as many heads to
bee stricken off, casting lots among the prisoners, which fell vpon a souldier who dwelt
at Villa-noua de Laxara,Notable loue of one brother towards another neere to Alarcon, who amongst others was to bee beheaded,
but a younger brother of his did beseech the Marquis, that he might dye in his brothers
stead, who had wife and children, and did so much importune the matter, as hee redeemed
him from death, giuing his owne life for him: a notable example of brotherly loue,
and well worthie to haue beene considered by those who did cause the execution, if they
had beene possessed with a noble and generous disposition. The names of these two
breethren are vniustly supprest by the negligence of the authors. The Marquis yet notwithstanding
sent Rodrigo of Castagneda to Court to excuse him to the King and Queen,
and to lay the fault vppon their Lieutenants and Officers, whose pride and insolencie had
prouoked him to those courses, the King answered that the Marquis should be heard according
to lawe: but beeing aduertised, that Don Roderigo had intelligence with the
king of Portugall, they sent him away prisoner to Talauera, where hee quickely ended
his dayes.
Whilest the King and Queene remayned at Guadalupa, Donna Maria de Pacheco
Countesse of Medelin, the Marquis of Villena's bastard-sister, beeing a proud and
haughtie woman, who held the towne of Merida, and had driuen her owne son out of
all his possessions, presented a petition to the King and Queene, the effect whereof was,

that shee might enioy the Earledome of Medellin, during her life, with the commandery
of the same citty. An other petition came from Don Alphonso de Montroy, treasorer
of Alcantara, who called himselfe Maister of the same order, and held most part of
the fortresses belonging to the same,Vsurpers, in regard they might not be authorised in their outrages do bandon themse^ues against the king who requested that he might be confirmed in that
dignity, notwithstanding any pretence that Don Iohn de Estuniga Sonne to Don Aluaro
Duke of Areualo could make, vpon whom the Pope had bestowed it. Both of them
were answered, that vpon hearing of the parties, they should haue speedy iustice. The
Countesse and the Treasurer not contented therewith, became enemies to the King
and Queene, and did cleaue to the King of Portugall: Don Alphonso hauing forgotten,
how that when he was taken prisoner by the Captaine of Magancala in Extremadura,
the King had deliuered him and paide his ransome, bestowing diuers other benefits
vpon him.
Ambassadors from the French King Lewis the eleuenth, arriued at Guadalupa
to see the peace agreed vpon by the Commissioners at Saint Iohn de Luz to bee sworne
and ratified. There the Popes Bull was seene, which dispensed with the King of Portugall
about the marriage of Donna Ioane his Neece, not without excuses on the
Popes part, who said, that he had bin circumuented, and sinisterly informed, concerning
that matter. And to the end the French King should on his part sweare, and ratifie the
articles of the peace, the same comissioners, who had first treated thereof were sent into
France, to weet, Don Iohn de Gamboa, and the licenciat Don Iohn de Medina both
of them of the Kings Councell. It was likewise agreede vppon with the French Ambassadors,
that the towne of Perpignan, with other fortresses of the Earledome of
Rossillion, should bee deliuered as hostages, into the Cardinall of Spaines hands, and
that with in fiue yeares following, arbitrators should decide, whatsoeuer king Lewis
could pretend to be due vnto him.
Whilest the Spanish Court remayned at Guadalupa, God (being willing to make
peace, betwixt Christian Princes in Spaine, to the end they might haue leasure to vndertake
more worthy enterprises,) did inspire Donna Beatrice Dutchesse of Viseo,
widdow to the Infant Don Ferdinand of Portugall, Duke of Viseo, and Mother to
Donna Leonora, marryed to Prince Iohn the eldest Sonne and heire of the Crowne
of Portugall, with a desire to imploy her vttermost credit, and meanes for the effecting
thereof, This Princesse hauing sounded King Alphonsos mynde, and finding him to be
inclined to an agreement, sent word to her neece Queene Isabell (for shee was sister
to her Mother Queene Isabell, widdow to King Iohn yet liuing,) that if it would please
her to come to the frontiers of Portugall, shee did hope that some good agreement
would be made betwixt them; wher-vnto the Queene disposed her selfe with the consent
of King Fernand her husband.
King Iohn of Aragon dyed about this time at Barcelona beeing foure score and
one yeares of age,Arragon. hauing reigned in Nauarre fifty three yeeres and foure moneths, and
one and twenty yeares and sixe moneths in Arragon:The death of Iohn King of Arragon. hee was buried in the monastery
of Pobleta. By his last will and testament hee left his Sonne Don Fernand, heire
to his Kingdomes of Arragon, and Sicill, and his daughter Princesse Leonora, widdow
to Earle of Foix, heire to the realme of Nauarre: and soone after deputies were sent
from the states of Arragon, Cattalogne, and Valencia to the Court of Spaine, to request
King Fernand, to come and take possession of his dominions; they came vnto him
in an vnseasonable time, by reason the Portugall warre was hotly beganne, by the practises
of the countesse of Medelin, and Don Alphonso de Montroy, the pretended maister
of Alcantara.
The King and Queene were aduertised that the army of Portugall was in a redinesse
to inuade the country of Extremadura:Castille. by reason whereof they called the Constable,
and other Spanish Knights to Court, and sent forces to the frontiers, with great garrisons
to Badajos, and other fortes of the same marches where Don Alphonso de Cardegna^
Maister of Saint Iames was generall, who lodged his army at Lobon betwixt
Badajos, and Merida, wherein the Tresorer of Alcantara remayned, attending
for the Portugalls, and the Bishoppe of Ebora, their Generall, who came with an

intent to ioyne with him: to preuent which,The Portugall army defeated at Albuhera. the Maister of Saint Iames did march against
the Bishoppe, and gaue him battaile, in the fieldes of Albuhera, the which was
fierce, and bloudy, on either side: but the Portugalls were ouerthrowne, and the Bishop
taken, (although afterward he escaped away) hauing lost their ensignes, bagage, and all
the equigage and munition:Batell of Albuhera. the maister of Saint Iames, and all the King of Castiles
Captaines were hurt: but aboue the rest the valour and prowesse of Don Martin de
Cordoua Sonne to the Earle of Cabra, of Sancho del Aquila, of Alphonso Henriques
and of Rodrigo de Cardegna, Cosin to the Maister of Saint Iames, was admirable: the
which Maister by his Iudgement and valour, hauing gotten the King, and Queene this
victory, was so charitable, as with his owne mony, hee releeued the dearth and famine
which at that time, did oppresse the country of Extremadura, in regard whereof the King
and Queene, did acquit him of three Millions of Marauedis, which he was to pay, as apension
vnto them out of the reuenew of his place. After this battaile the Treasorer
of Alcantara, went to Deleitosa, which had beene taken by Roderigo de Monroy
his brother,Defeate of the Spanish army by sea. and the Bishoppe of Ebora went to Medellin to encourage the
Countesse, who perhaps, was valianter than him-selfe. Gods will was, that the King of
Portugall, in recompence of this losse, should by his army at sea, take the fiue and thirty
Spanish shippes which came from Guiney wherein was great store of gold, which serued
well to pay his soldiors, and the prisoners, to exchang for those which were taken
at the land Battaile of Albuhera. After this manner are the euents of ioy, and sorrow,
mixed in this miserable world.
King Fernand beeing importuned to goe into Arragon, and considering the notable
vnion of those two Kingdomes, being at that time at Trugillo, where after hee had
celebrated the obsequies of King Iohn his father, hee treated with the Queene his wife,
and those of her councell about the forme of precedency, and the order which should
bee kept in the letters, and writings concerning the titles of the realmes, and dominions,
which he commanded: diuers of them were of opinion, that they should intitle themselues
Kings of Spaine, in regard the greatest part thereof did obey them: but they not
beeing willing to exceed the bounds of modesty, nor yet to preiudice in that behalfe,
the Kings of Nauarre and Portugall, with whome they were conioyned in bloud, did
place their titles after this manner.Titles of King Fernand and Queene Isabell Frenand and Izabell, by the grace of God, King and
Queene of Castile, of Leon, of Arragon, of Sicill, of Toldedo, of Valencia, of Galicia, of
Majorque, of Siuill, of Sardi^ia, of Cordoua, of Corsica, of Murcia, of Iaen, of Algarbes,
of Algezire, of Gibraltar, Earles of Barcelona, Lords of Biscay and Molina, Dukes of
Athens and of Neopatria, Earles of Rossillon, and of Cerdaigne, Marquis of Oristagni,
and of Gocian. After this manner, were the titles of these Kingdomes and dominions,
ordered according to their ranke and dignity: and in the shieldes of their armes, and
deuices, it was appointed that the armes of Castile and Leon, should bee first drawne,
and after them those of Arragon and Sicill.
The Court beeing come from Trugillo to Caceres, Queene Izabell was greatly
 solicited by Donna Be^trice Duchesse of Viseo, to come to Alcantara, where shee
promised to meet her, and to conferre about the meanes of a peace betwixt Castile and
Portugall: the King and Queene departed the one from the other, shee towards Alcantara,
which for the same purpose was committed to the keeping of Don Guttiere de
Cardegna the great commander by Don Aluaro de Estuniga Duke of Playsance or
Areualo,Entervew of of Queene Isabell, and the Dutchesse of visco, sorto treat of peace. who held it as lawfull administrator of Don Iohn de Estuniga his Sonne, who
pretended him-selfe Maister of that order: and King Fernand went into Arragon to take
possession of his new Kingdomes. These Princesses beeing arriued at Alcantara, were
lodged in one house, namely in the Castle, where they spent thirty daies in conference,
and agreeing at the last vpon certaine Articles, the Dutchesse beeing highly honored,
by the Queene Isabella of Castile, and rewarded with many rich presents, and Iewells,
returned into Portugall, carrying Roderigo Maldonado, one of Fernand the King of
Castiles councell with her, to communicate more at large with the King of Portugall,
concerning them.

In the meane space whilest these matters were conferred on, the Treasurer of Alcantara
surprized the fortresse of Montanches on the one side, and those of the Countesse
of Medellins part made sharpe warre in Extremadura on the other: the which countrey
besides the miseries which it endured by the warre,Queene Izabella pursueth the R^bels in Extremadura. it was oppressed with extreame famine:
so as euery one perswaded the Queene to go backe to Toledo: but her haughtie
courage, would not suffer her to leaue such places where shee knew trouble and danger
to bee, beeing able by her wisedome, speedily to redresse it. Shee then gaue order to beseege
diuers places at one time, from whence the enemies made sundrie roades with incredible
spoyles, euen to the gates of Trugillo.
The Master of Saint Iames was sent against Merida, Don Lewis Fernandes de Porto
Carrero, Lord of la Palma beseeged Medellin, Rodrigo de Monroy d'Eleitosa, and Don Lorenzo
Suares of Figueroa, opposed himselfe against those which molested the countrey
of Badajos. The Treasurer of Alcantara ranne vppe and downe, and tooke booties now
from one place, then from another, hauing his retreat at Piedra nueua, Castro nueuo,
Majorga, Azagala, and other forts, and not contented therewith, hee went into Portugall,
animating King Alphonso, not to giue ouer that warre, but couragiously to poursue
it with great hope, and not bee carried away by the perswasions of the Dutchesse of
Viseo: and hee did chiefly vrge him to come with a mighty armie, to raise the seege before
Montanches, that place beeing the strength and importance of the warre: which D.
Pero Fernandes de Velasco the Constable fearing, fortified his campe with trenches and
walles of stones, so as he could not easily bee assayled on the sodaine. Don Lewis Fernando
Porto Carrero, beseeging Medellin, where the Countesse, and the Bishop of Ebora
remayned, sustained infinite difficulties: for besides the continuall sallies and skirmishes
of the beseeged, who were very strong, his campe was troubled with a horrible number
of Flies, which constrained him to change his seat, and to retire halfe a mile from thence.
At the end of the seege, which lasted three moneths, those of Deleitosa yeelded, sauing
their liues and goods, and with-drew themselues to Montanches. Great was the paine
and toyle which the beseegers and beseeged of this place did indure, with those likewise
of Merida and Medellin, where the Bishoppe of Ebora spared no care not diligence, to
recouer his honour, and to couer the losses which he had sustayned at Albuhera, and also
at the battell of Toro.
Hunger, sicknesse, and other inconueniences were the chiefe enemies, that either
pa^tie had to warre against: although Queene Izabella to her power had prouided for the
necessitie of her people, who from time to time receiued letters from Maldonado her
Ambassador in Portugall, putting her out of hope of peace, by reason of King Alphonso's
obstinacie, who could not bee brought to any reasonable conditions: she therefore willed
him to returne into Castile. The Ambassadour beeing readie to depart, came to take
his leaue of King Alphonso, who was at the same time accompanied with the Prince his
sonne, and the Lords of his Councell, who did perswade him by diuers reasons and examples
of things fallen out lately in Spayne to condiscend to a peace: which perswasion
of his, beeing better taken and apprehended by the Prince and the other Lords, then by
the King himselfe, were of such force, as he was drawne by them to receiue the peace
which the Dutchesse of Viseo had concluded at Alcantara:Peace betwixt Portugall and Castile. Whereuppon the Ambassadours
departure was prolonged, and the morrow after he assembled his Councel, where
the Articles were againe perused and considered of, which the King allowed, confirmed,
and swore to obserue, after this manner.
First,Articles. that the King of Portugall should lay aside the title of King of Castile and Leon,
and should wipe out of his shield the armes and deuises of the sayd kingdomes.
Secondly, that he should sweare not to marrie Donna Ioane his Neece, who called her
selfe Queene of Castile and Leon.
Thirdly, that shee beeing at that time eighteene yeares of age, should choose one of
these things within sixe moneths, that is to say, to forsake the Realme of Portugall without
hauing ayde, meanes, or any assistance from king Don Alphonso, or if shee would
tarrie there still, then to marrie with Prince Iohn of Castile, who was newly borne, when
he should come to age, or else to enter into one of the fiue Orders of Religion of Saint

Clare in Portugal, and if she would consent to marrie Prince Iohn, shee should liue and
remaine in the meane time, in the company of Donna Beatrix Dutchesse of Viseo.
Fourthly, that the Infanta Donna Izabella, eldest daughter to the King and Queene of
Castile, should marrie the Infant Don Alphonso, eldest sonne to Prince Iohn, heire to the
Kingdome; the which Infant and Infanta should likewise be committed to the keeping
of the Dutchesse of Viseo in the fort of Mora in Portugall.
Fiftly, that the Kings of Castile should in no sort let or hinder the king of Portugalls,
nor the Prince his sonnes voyage into Guiney, and that the States and people of Castile
should bee bound to performe and maintaine that poynt inviolably.
Sixtly, that all crimes and offences, layde to their charge, who had fauoured and taken
the King of Portugals part in those warres, should be abolished, and a generall pardon
graunted to them all, especially to the Countesse of Medellin, and to Don Alphonso of
Monroy, Treasurer of Alcantara, and euery of them to be restored to their goods, liuings,
and dignities.
Seuenthly, that this peace should be kept betwixt the Kings of Castile and Portugall
for an hundred and one yeares.
This peace thus concluded, was proclaymed in the Court of Portugal, to the great
contentment of all men, and presently the Licenciate Figueroa, one of the kings Councell,
and his Confessor, named Friar Martin, were sent Ambassadours to Queene Izabella,
who lay at Trugillo: who on her her part, did likewise sweare to ratifie it, the Castillans
beeing no whit displeased thereat; for they were all tyred with that pernitious warre.
The which warre did wholly cease, and the seeges, from the aboue-mentioned places,
were raysed. Merida which belonged to the Order of Saint Iames, was yeelded to the Master
thereof: Medellin was committed to the keeping of Don Lewis Fernand Porto Carrero,
vntil the controuersie betwixt the Countesse and Don Pedro Porto Carrero her son,
were decided by order of lawe. Newes hereof was carried to Barcelona to King Fernand,
the which was most welcome vnto him, who gaue thankes vnto God therefore, causing
great signes of ioy to bee made euery where, and did worthily recompence the messenger
which brought tidings of so desired a peace: by meanes whereof those two kingdomes
haue beene encreased and maintayned in the greatnesse whereunto they are risen
in the dayes of our fathers, and in our time also.
 In king Fernand, the two kingdomes of Castile and Arragon with their dependancies,Vnion of Castil and Arragon.
were ioyned together, which had beene separated foure hundred, fortie, and fiue
yeares, euer since that the two States of Earledomes, became Kingdomes, after the
death of Don Sancho the Great, King of Nauarre, who was the last Earle of Arragon
and Castile.
Now King Fernand hauing taken order for all things belonging to so great a succession,
wherein hee found no difficultie nor resistance, hee came to the Queene his wife,
who lay in the citty of Toledo, where with great sollemnitie he swore the peace in the
presence of the Portugall Ambassadours: and for a greater confirmation thereof, there
were sent Ambassadours to the king of Portugal, Friar Hernand of Talauera, the king of
Castiles Confessor, of the Order of Saint Hierome, great Prior of Saint Marie du Pre of
Vailliodolit, who was afterward Bishoppe of Auila, and successiuely first Arch-bishoppe
of Granado after the conquest, and with him Doctor Alphonso Manuel of Madrigall,
one of the kings Councell,D. Ioane, called, the Excellent, contemneth the marriage with the b^ire of Castil, Arragon, etc. and becomes a Nunne. to reiterate and sweare the peace the second time. Donna
Ioane, who till then was called Queene of Castile and Leon, and by a particular surname
the Excellent, beeing questioned vppon the Article of peace, which concerned her marriage
with Prince Iohn, did rather choose a Monasticke life, who therefore was shorne
and vailed in the Monasterie of Saint Clare the royall, at Coimbra, and casting off hir
royall habits, shee tooke the Order of Saint Francis, not without great griefe to king
Don Alphonso, to see so great a Ladie in such manner to abase her selfe, where if she had
so pleased, might haue raigned in Castile, Leon, Arragon, and Sicill.
The Ambassadours of Castile hauing executed their commission with the king of Portugall,
went to the cittie of Coimbra, where they did see this Princesse to professe her
selfe a Nunne, with protestation to spend her dayes in such humilitie, notwithstanding

that they brought her King Fernand and Queene Isabella's honourable word and promise,
to accomplish in her behalfe, all that which had beene agreed vppon in the treaty
of peace, and to marrie her to their sonne when time should serue: but she with an incredible
constancie refused all these dignities, and spent the whole time of her life (which
was very long) in religion, and was euer after called, (in stead of royall titles which had
had beene offered vnto her by the King and Queene) Donna Ioane the Nunne.
The troubles beeing thus appeased in Castile, Don Diego Lopes de Pacheco, Marquis of
Villena, who in his Marquisate had made warre vppon the Kings Lieutenants and Captaines,
came to the Court at Toledo to iustifie himselfe concerning the same: and to speak
truth, the matter beeing well weighed, hee was not found to bee the principall cause of
those mischiefes,Marquis of Villena re^onciled to the King and Queene. nor yet to haue any intelligence with the King of Portugall, since his
last agreement made with the Queene, in regard whereof, the King and Queene receyued
him to grace and fauour, vnto whome afterwards in the warres of Granado, hee did
many notable seruices.
This yeare, 1479. in the moneth of Nouember, Queene Izabella was brought to bed
in the Cittie of Toledo, in a house belonging to the Earle of Cifuentes, of a daughter
named Ioane, who in processe of time came to succeed in all the kingdomes, as by the
progresse of this Historie shall appeare. This Infanta did in all poynts so resemble queen
Ioane of Arragon her grandmother, as when the King her father did play with her, hee
called her his mother. In like manner the Infanta Izabella, because she was in lineaments
like to Queene Izabella her Grandmother, mother to the queene then raigning, was by
her called her mother: the rest of queene Izabella's children were commonly called her
Angels. At the same time that these things happened in Spayne, the armie of Mahomet
the second of that name, Emperour of the Turkes, did houer about the Isle of Rhodes,
the seate of the Knights of Saint Iohn of Hierusalem, Peter d' Aubusson a French-man,
beeing great Master of that Order: the Sicillians fearing left the Turkes would haue landed
in their Isle, sent messengers to king Fernand, to obtaine of him ayde and succour,
vnto whome certaine shippes laden with munition, armour, and other prouision, were
sent.

Donna Leonora Queene of Nauarre,
and 33. in order.
AS King Fernand succeeded in the kingdomes of Arragon, Valencia, Sicill, Majorca,
and principalitie of Cattalonia,Nauarre. with other dominions and dependancies therof
by the decease of the late king Don Iohn his father: the Princesse Leonora in like manner,
daughter to him and to his first wife Donna Blanche, queene of Nauarre, did inherite the
same kingdome, nine yeares after the death of the Earle of Foix her husband, remaining
all that time a widow. She was crowned queene in the cittie of Tudela, where she did
sweare and promise to maintaine the rights, lawes, priuiledges, franchises, and liberties
of the country, in the same manner as her predecessors had done before her. Her raigne
was so short, as we haue no matter affoorded to speake of, but onely her death, which
happened by a sudden sicknesse fifteene dayes after she was crowned, in the same citie of
Tudela: she was buried in the couent of S. Sebastian of the Order of S. Francis, neere to
the citty of Tafalla, which was since ruined by the commandement of Cardinall Francisco
Ximeenes, Archbishoppe of Toledo, and Gouernour of Castile, who thought that
the strong building of that Monasterie, was no good neighbour to such a towne. Albeit
we haue alreadie in the precedent booke spoken of this Princesses children, yet wee will
somewhat more amply enlarge the discourse thereof in this place.Genealogie of Nauarre. Their eldest sonne
was Gaston, who bearing the title of Prince of Viana, was married to Donna Magdalene
of France, and dyed at Libourne, beeing misfortunately hurt with the splinter of a
Launce, as hee there ranue at Tilt: hee was father of two children, that is to

say, Francis Phoebus and Katherine, who were King and Queene of Nauarre, and Earles
of Foix, successiuely the one after the other. Their second sonne was Iohn, who had the
Vicounty of Narbonne for his portion, purchased by his father for readie money, and
married Marie, who was daughter to Lewis, Duke of Orleance, who was French king,
and the twelfth of that name. Paradin sayes more truly, that she was daughter to Charles,
Duke of Orleance, of whome were borne, Gaston of Foix, Duke of Nemours, who dyed
in the battaile of Rauenna, and Germaine, who was second wife to Fernand, the Catholicke
King, and after that shee was secondly married to Fernand of Arragon, Duke of Calabria,
lawfull son to Fredericke king of Naples, who dyed being Viceroy of Valencia.
This Iohn Vicount of Narbone, was Gouernour of Daulphine, and afterwards of
Guyenne, a hardie and valiant Knight, renowned in the warres against the English, and
in those of Italy, whither hee went with King Charles the eighth, in great credite and authoritie,
and afterwards dyed in the raigne of King Lewis the twelfth at Estampes where
he lies buried.
The third sonne of Earle Gaston, and Donna Leonora, was Peter borne at Pau in the
countrey of Bearne, the yeare one thousand, foure hundred, forty nine, who gaue himselfe
to studie, and did choose an ecclesiasticall life, vnder the gouernement of his great
Vncle, the Cardinall of Foix, Bishoppe of Lescar, and the Popes Legate in Daulphine
and Prouence: after whose death hauing profited at the Vniuersities of Tholousa, Pauia,
and Ferrara, in the ciuill and canon Lawes, hee was also by Pope Sixtus the fourth, made
Cardinall of the title of Saint Cosmo and Damian, beeing before Bishop of Vannes, and
prouided of many rich Benefices, by the fauour of Francis Duke of Brittaine his brother-in law,
who had married his sister Ladie Margaret of Foix, mother to Queene Anne.
The fourth sonne of the Earle of Foix, and of Donna Leonora, was called Iames, hee
onely of all their children was borne in Nauarre, and was a Knight highly esteemed, and
honoured by King Lewis the twelfth, with the Order of Saint Michaell, and with the leading
of an hundred men at armes: in the warres of Lombardie and elsewhere; he purchased
the commendation of a valiant and wise Captaine, but hee dyed young, hauing not
attayned to the age of thirtie yeares, and was neuer married. Hee left certaine base children,
who professed an ecclesiasticall life, and did possesse rich benefices, euen till the later
dayes of King Francis the first.
Besides these foure sonnes, Earle Gaston and Donna Leonora had fiue daughters, the
first whose name was Mary, was married to William Marquis of Montferrat, who, by the
Popes authoritie, erected the church of Casall into a Bishops Sea: this Ladie was brought
to her husband, the yeare one thousand, foure hundred, sixtie sixe, by her brother Peter
of Foix, by Bernard the Bastard of Foix, Godfrey Basileac, Bishoppe of Riues, by the Bishop
of Conserans, and Peter of Sobreuille, and by diuers other Lords and Knights:
Of this marriage no male children were borne, but daughters onely, the eldest of whom
was married to Lewis, sonne to Thomas Marquis of Salusses, and these daughters did not
succeed their father in the Marquisat, but a brother of his. Ioane second daughter of Earle
Gaston, and Donna Leonora, was married to the Earle of Armagnac, sonne to him who
was slaine by the commaundement of King Lewis the eleuenth: with which marriage,
the King beeing displeased, the Earle was so persecuted, as hee was constrained to flie for
safetie into Castile, where trusting to the faire speeches, oathes, and promises of the
Cardinall of Albi, the French Kings Ambassadour, in the sayd kingdome, beeing returned
into France, hee was there cruelly stabbed to death with daggers. Whereuppon his
wife Donna Ioane of Foix, returned into Bearne, hauing had no children by him;
The third daughter was Marguerite, wife to Francis the last Duke of Brittaine, by whome
hee had two daughters, Anne and Izabella; Izabella dyed young, but Anne was married
to two French Kings successiuely, Charles the eighth, and Lewis the twelfth: by Lewis she
had two daughters Claude and Rene; Claude who was first promised to Charles, who was
since king of Spain, and afterwards Emperor, the fifth of that name, did marrie Francis of
Valois then duke of Angoulesme, and afterwards French king, first of that name. Rene
was married to Hercules of Este duke of Ferrara: the Earle Gaston and his wife D. Leonora,
had besides these, Catherine, married to the Earle of Candale, and mother of 3. children,

the eldest of whome was Lord of Candale, the second Arch-bishoppe of Bourdeaux,
and the third who was a daughter named Anne, Queene of Hungarie and Bohemia, wife
to Vladislaus, son to Casimir King of Polonia. This Vladislaus first king of Bohemia, had
before married Donna Beatrix of Arragon, widdow to King Mathias of Hungarie, for
whose sake the Hungarians chose him for their King: but he was diuorced from her in regard
of her loose life, and afterwards maried this Ladie Anne of Foix, who was brought
to her husband thorough the Dutchie of Milan, at that time possessed by the French,
and by the cittie of Venice, the great friend and ally of this King, Leonardo Lauredan being
at that time Duke thereof. Of this marriage was borne Lewis, who succeeded his father
in the kingdomes of Bohemia and Hongarie, husband to Queene Marie of Castile,
who was sister to the Emperour Charles, and a daughter named Anne married to Ferdinand
of Austria, afterwards Emperour and Brother to Charles, and by her, king of Bohemia
and Hungarie, after the death of his father-in-law King Lewis, of the which Fernand
and Anne, the Emperour Maximilian was borne, and many other children: the
fifth daughter of Earle Gaston, and Donna Leonora of Nauarre, dyed vnmarried, beeing
onely promised to the Duke of Medina Celi, issued from the same house of Foix, and
was called after her mothers name Leonora. This house of Foix and Nauar hath brought
foorth this of spring of great and illustrious Princes, giuing to Christendome at one
time foure Queenes, who were cousin-germaines, namely, Catherine Queene of Nauar,
Germaine Queene of Castile and Arragon, Anne Queene of France, and Anne Queene
of Bohemia and Hungary.


Francis Phoebus, the foure and thirtith
King of Nauarre.
LEt vs now go forward with our Historie: after Queene Leonora's decease, her sonnes
sonne Francis Phoebus of the age of twelue yeares, succeeded by right to the Crowne
of Nauarre,Seditions awaked by those of Beaumont and Grammont in Nauarre. the yeare, one thousand, foure hundred, seuenty nine, beeing brought vp
in his Earledome of Foix, and Lordship of Bearne, vnder the gouernement of Donna
Magdaleine of France his mother, and the Cardinall his Vncle: but three yeares were expired
before hee durst passe into his Kingdome, by reason of the seditions which suddenly
after the Queene Leonora's decease, were renewed betwixt the Beaumontois, the Earle
of Lerin beeing their head, who held the Cittie of Pampelona, and those of Grammont,
who followed Pedro of Peralta the Constable, and Philip of Nauarre the Marshall, who
had for their forts the places of Estella, Sanguessa, Olita, and a great part of the cittie of
Tudela.
The young Kings mother made a iourney thither, as appeareth by letters graunted
by her this same yeare, dated at Pampelona; where shee laboured (though in vaine) to
settle peace and quietnesse in the Countrey: diuers Prelates and great Lords of Castile
and Arragon did in like manner, but to none effect, go about to appease these obstinate
seditious persons, who were hardened in their wickednesse. The Faction of Grammont
was much discontented, to see the Earle of Lerin married to a Ladie of the bloud royal,
sister to King Fernand of Castile, and for that hee was possessed of the cittie of Pampelona,
the chiefe of the Kingdome, they sayd, that hee thought to make himselfe king of
Nauarre. These quarrels beeing sharpely poursued by either side, it happened that Philip
of Nauarre,Viana surprised by the Marshall Philip. successour to his father in the office of Marshall, and in hatred to the Earle
of Lerin, did surprize the cittie of Viana, but he could not get the castle, wherein a knight
of the house of Gongora was captaine for the Earle: and beeing out of hope of beeing
able to keepe the towne, so great was his hatred towards the Earle, as hauing complotted
with Don Iohn of Riuera, Gouernor of Logrogno for the king of Castile, Captaine
Mudirre, and other Spanish knights, he deliuered the towne into their hands: the which
deed of his,Exploites of the Earle of Lerin. the Earle of Lerin greatly resenting, endeauored to recouer that losse, which
did not so much touch him nor his faction, as the whole Realme in generall, and hee, did

so well bestirre himselfe, as he did not onely recouer Viana, but Larraga likewise, which
had beene before that time possessed by the king of Castile, and if he had beene as strong
as hee was couragious and skilfull in martiall affaires, he would, without all doubt, haue
recouered the places of Saint Vincent, la Garde, and Arcos, the which hee attempted:
but hee was too weake: with this good happe, yet neuerthelesse hee tooke the towne of
Miranda vppon Arga, and caused those which held it, to leape into the riuer. In these trobles
was the Realme of Nauarre, when this young King, Francis Phoebus, came to the
Crowne, in danger vppon such like occasions, to haue the kings of Castile attempt some
thing to his preiudice, as well thorough the euill offices of the chiefe of the Factions, as
by the superfluous duties of th^ Captaines of the frontiers, who to bee accounted good
and profitable seruants, do oftentimes draw their masters into vniust quarrels, contrarie
to their owne minds and dispositions.
 The Court of CastileCastile. remayned yet at Toledo, in the which cittie in the beginning of
the yeare, one thousand, foure hundred, eightie, the kings had called a Parlament:Parliament at Toledo. there
the Deputies of the citties, who were accustomed to haue voyces, hauing well weighed
and considered the disposition of the royall reuenue, which was alienated to particular
persons, in recompences, perpetuall rents, superfluous gifts, and other such like wastes,
which were not well digested, did craue reformation thereof, and demaunded to haue
those things which had beene giuen from the Crowne, to be restored to the same: and
they were the more instant therein,Consultation touching the re-union of the royall reuenue. because they did fore-see, that if the kings did not
looke to it, necessitie would constraine them, to seeke money in another nature, and to
charge the people with new tributes and taxes.
The matter beeing consulted on by the kings, the Cardinall of Spaine, and by other
Prelates, Lords, and Knights, it was determined, that regard should bee had to the peoples
admonishment: but concerning the manner how, the opinions were diuerse: some
thought it fit, that whatsoeuer had beene alienated should be vnited againe: others were
of opinion, to call that onely in question which had beene euill employed: others sayd,
that no distinction ought to be made in that point, but either to take all, or leaue all. Vppon
this diuersitie of opinions, the Kings knew not what to resolue; but wrote their letters
to the great Lords of Spaine to come to Toledo to giue their opinions concerning
that businesse, and if some of them could not come thither in person, that they should
set downe in writing, what they thought was fit to be done, and to send it. The most part
of them thought it requisite, that the whole reuenew of the Crowne should be re-united.
Whereupon the Cardinall did secretly aduise the Kings, to make this difference in the
matter: namely, to take away from those vppon whom the late King Henry had bestowed
any thing, that is to say, from the Lords and Knights which had beene the cause of the
troubles, and had followed the Prince Don Alphonso: and not to mention those gifts
which they themselues had giuen vnto such as had serued them. In these difficulties the
Kings made this conclusion: That all those who had gifts, reuenues, and other such like
pensions out of the ordinarie reuenue of the Crowne, should by a certaine prefixed time
come and shew cause, how and wherefore they had obtayned such graunts: and Friar
Fernand of Talauera was appoynted to search out the truth, and set downe an order, vppon
whose good conscience and integritie, all men reposed great trust, and to satisfie euery
man according vnto right and reason; who with other assistants did so order the matter,
as hee brought backe three millions of reuenues into the kings coffers, and diuers
men had their graunts confirmed, others were cut off in part, others had all taken from
them, and others enioyed their pensions during their liues. The Estates were likewise
very much busied about other matters, and euery day was a Councell held, in fiue
seuerall chambers: one was for the State, another for the administration of iustice, another
for the affaires of Arragon and Sicill, another for the businesses of the commons,
and for the iurisdictions of the Hermandades or brotherhoods, and the fift and last, for
the treasure and royall reuenue.
At the same time iustice, which had a long time beene banished out of Spayne, was
called home againe and reuerenced, and diuers wicked persons punished, among whome

Hernand Alarcon,(...) the familiar friend and instigator of the Arch-bishoppe of Toledo, a
seditious and turbulent person, was beheaded, by meanes of which example, euery man
submitted himselfe to law, and framed himselfe to a ciuill and honest life: then did the tyrannies
of great men cease, the thefts and robberies of their followers were suppressed,
in such sort, as the fields were as safe as good townes, those things which were vsurped
were restored to the right owners: the seates of iustice were well ordered, and diuers
good lawes and Edicts were made.
It was there enacted, that the Iewes and Moores in townes and citties, should dwell
in streetes and places by themselues. All Noblemen were forbidden to carrie Guards about
with them, to place Crownes vppon their shields and armes, or to haue vshers to
carrie maces or roddes before them, vnlesse they were Magistrates, not to vse titles in
their letters,Charity of K. Fernand and Queene Isabel. belonging to Princes and Soueraigne Lords. And for that the Kings felt
their consciences burthened with the death of many poore people, who had followed
them in their last warres, whose widowes and children were in great necessitie, they appoynted
a summe of twentie millions of Marauidis to bee distributed vnto such people
by Friar Hernand of Talauera, as he should thinke it meete and conuenient, thinking by
laying this charge vppon him, to discharge themselues.
In this assembly of the Estates in the moneth of May,Prince Ioane sworne vnto with great sollemnitie. the Infant Don Iohn was, according
to the custome of Spayne, sworne vnto, as Prince of the Asturia's, and heire to the
Kingdomes of Castile and Leon, in the presence of the Prelats and Lords, whose names
follow: The Cardinall Don Pedro Goncales of Mendoza, Arch-bishoppe of Siuill, and
withall, Bishoppe of Siguenca: Don Diego Hurtado of Mendoza, Bishoppe of Palence,
Friar Alphonso of Burgos, Bishop of Cordoua, with others of the Clergie. For the Nobilitie
and State militarie, Don Alphonso of Cardegna, Master of Saint Iames, Don Pero
Fernandes of Velasco, Constable of Castile, and Earle of Haro: Don Alphonso Henriques
great Admirall of Castile, and the Kings Vnkle: Don Pero Aluares Osorio, Marquis of Astorga,
and Earle of Transtamara: Don Aluaro of Mendoza, Earle of Castro: Don Lorenzo
Suares of Mendoza, Earle of Crugna: Don Inigo Lopes of Mendoza. Earle of Tendilla,
Don Diego Lopes of Estuniga, Earle of Miranda: Don Fernand Aluares of Toledo,
Earle of Oropesa, Don Guttiere de Sottomajor Earle of Benalcacar: Don Bertrand de
la Cueua, Earle of Ledesma, Don Diego Fernandes of Quignones, Earle of Luna, Don
Iohn de Ribera, Lord of Montemajor, Don Aluar Peres of Guzman, Lord of Saint Eulalia:
Don Guttiere of Cardegna, great Commaunder of Leon, with diuers others of
name and place: For the third estate, the Deputies of the Citties on this side, and beyond
the mounts, did take the accustomed oath, to wit, for old Castile, Burgos, Leon,
Segobia, Auila, Soria, Zamora, Toro, and Salamanca: and for the other part, Toledo,
Guadalajara, and Cuenca: and for Andalusia, Siuill, Cordoua, and Iaen, and the Cittie
of Murcia for that Countrey: Diuers Lords likewise of the Realme Arragon were present
at this solemnitie, as Don Raymond Bishoppe of Vrgell, and Don Philip of Arragon
bastard-sonne to the late Prince Charles, Nephew to the King, and cousin germaine to
Prince Iohn.
At this assembly, Don Andrea de Cabrera, and Donna Beatrix of Bouadilla his wife
were created Marquises of Moya, with graunt of twelue hundred vassals neere to Segobia
for the good seruices which they had done to the kings Don Ferdinand, and Donna
Isabella, at whose table, the more to honour them, they did eate, the same day. The Parlament
or assembly of States being ended, the Court came to Medina del campo, where
they began to take great paines to haue the ordonances of the Estates executed, and put
in practise, vppon the vsurpations, tyrannies, quarrels, and enmities which were past. In
the same towne a knight, whose name was Aluar Ianes of Lugo, was put to death, who
being couetous to adde to his owne great wealth the goods of a certaine Cittizen, hired
a certaine Notarie or Scriuener to make some false and counterfeite contracts, and to
the end the deceit might not be knowne, hee foorth-with payed him his hire, cutting his
throate, and burying him secretly in the back-side of his owne house: the which murther
was discouered by the diligent inquirie of the poore widdow, whose husband was neuer
seene abroade, since hee was seene to go into the Knights house.

This Gentleman was taken,A mu^ther^us gentleman c^e^u^ed. conuicted, and beheaded notwithstanding his great friends
and kindred, who offered fortie thousand Duckets for to saue his life, which was a great
summe in those dayes, which sundrie of the Councel wished the Kings to take: but these
Princes beeing great Iusticers, would not hearken to it: but the Knight was executed according
to his deserts.
The yeare 1481. the Kings departed from Medina,King Fernand and Queene Isabell zealous of Iust^ce. and did take leaue the one of the
other for a certaine time, the Queene went to Vailliodolit, and the King made a voyage
into Arragon with intent to haue the like oath made, there to his son Prince Iohn, as the
States of Castile had done at Toledo, and to order the State of his owne patrimoniall
Kingdome, as also to demaund a certaine subsidie of money of his subiects there.
 The King beeing at Sarragossa, the Cardinall of Foix, and his brother Don Iames, Vnkles
to the young King Francis Phoebus of Nauarre,Nauarre. came thither to him, to beseech him
to ayde him with forces and meanes to suppresse his audacious subiects, which did disturbe
the peace of his Kingdome, who contemning his youth, did commit infinite tyrannies
there, whom king Fernand did most louingly receiue as his Nephewes, sonnes to
Queene Leonora his sister, and did promise concerning their demaunds, to performe the
office of a Christian Prince, friend, and neere kinsman to the young king. During his aboade
at Sarragossa, the Marshall of Nauarre, who was at Tudela, had ordinarie intelligence
with diuers Castillan Lords, some of whome knowing their masters will, did beginne
to treate of meanes for the pacification of the factions of Beaumont and Grammont,
by whome the kingdome was spoiled. Amongst those which did most earnestly
employ themselues therein, was a Friar, Preacher to king Fernand, whose name was Abarca,The Estates of Nauarre at Tafalla.
who dealt in such sort, as hee agreed vpon a marriage betwixt Philip of Nauarre
the Marshall, and a daughter of the Earle Lewis of Lerin, which he thought would bee a
meanes, that these two Lords would forget all former hatred, and become heartie and
affectionate friends, by whose example, the rest of the factions would do the like, but the
poore Friar was deceyued in his hope: for those of the Grammontois faction, rejecting
this marriage, as hurtfull to their side, and fearing to lose so mighty a Captaine, did so
preuayle with the Marshall Philip, as notwithstanding that matters were in such forwardnesse,
as neither of the parties could go backe with honour and credit, the Marshall neuerthelesse
refused that allyance, and went wholly backe from his former promises:
whereat the Earle of Lerin beeing extreamely enraged, and beeing of a haughtie and
proud spirit, was fore reuenged, by killing the Marshall, as hee rode from Sanguessa to
Villa-franca to speake with Don Iohn de Ribera, the Earle hauing attended for him vpon
the way, as well for to chastise his lightnesse and inconstancie, as for iealousie that hee
had, concerning the businesse that the Marshall went about in conferring with that Castillan,
doubting some treason as well towards himselfe as the kingdome, like to that of
Viana which he still remembred, and could by no meanes forget.
In this manner, the father and the sonne, both of them Marshals of the Realme of Nauarre,
did perish by one self same hand: in which Office Peter of Nauarre succeeded, who
was younger brother to Philip, and the fourth of that family, who had held the same dignitie.
The Constable Pedro de Peralta was at the same time out of the Realme, who hauing
with great labour obtayned absolution from the Pope, for the murther committed
on the person of Don Nicholas of Echauarri,Bishop of Pampelona slaine by D. Pedro de Peralta. Bishop of Pampelona, did publikely acknowledge
his fault in the cathedrall Church of Valencia, and liued not long after, leauing
one onely daughter who was called Ioane of Peralta, heire of his house, who was
wife to Don Troilo Carillo of Acugna, sonne to the Arch-bishop of Toledo, of whome
we haue often spoken in this Historie.
This house of Peralta, descended from the royall stocke of Nauarre, and by the
death of Pedro of Peralta, the office and dignitie of Constable ended in that family, the
successors whereof were called Earles of Saint Steephen, and great Chamberlaines to the
Kings of Nauarre. Lewis of Beaumont, Earle of Lerin, entring into that Office was afterward
dispossessed thereof, and the Constableship fell since to Don Alphonso, grandchild
to Pedro of Peralta, the heires of whose house, in processe of time, were called Marquis
of Falses,Marquis of Falses. a towne in Nauarre.

Ciuill warres spoyling after this manner the poore Kingdome of Nauarre, the young
Kings vncles returned into the Realme, accompanied with diuers Lords and Knights
of the King of Castiles Court, who promised them that if by faire meanes, they could
not bring the Kings rebellious subiects to his obedience, the which hee wished them in
any case to trie, that he would them furnish him with men, munition and money for the
warres: these Lords being come to the towne of Tafalla, they did forthwith assemble
the generall Estates,The Estates of Nauarre at Tafalla. by vertue of a commission which they had from the King, the
Cardinall and Lord Iames of Foix promising free and sure accesse and safe conduct to
all men.
The Deputies of the three Estates of the Kingdome being assembled, and hauing vnderstood
by the Cardinall the cause why they were come into Nauarre, wherevnto
were ioyned the French King Lewis the eleuenths letters, which did exhort the Nauarrois
to continue obedient to their King, and to acknowledge and serue him as faithfull
subiects ought to doe, prouiding thereby, for the welfare, rest and quiet, of their county:
they did all with one generall consent make answere, that the Lords and people
of Nauarre, did neuer meane to forsake their obedience towards Francis Phoebus the
young King, whom they did acknowledge for their naturall and lawfull Prince, but that
on the contrary they had euer till now beene iealous and fearefull, in regard of his
youth and absence from the Realme, least some stranger should haue made himselfe
Maister thereof, and therefore they did no lesse desire his comming then himselfe, and
they humbly besought him to make hast as a thing most necessary: and if his comming
had beene hindred by meanes of the ambition and tiranny of a few priuate persons,
they gaue him to vnderstand, that it was to the great griefe of others, and in no sort
occasioned by common consent; therefore they intreated him to come in a lucky hower,
seeing they were ready to receiue and honour him, accordingly as it did become
them. The Cardinall and his brother vnderstanding so pleasing and desired an answer,
did forthwith write thereof to the young King Francis Phoebus, and to King Fernand
his great vncle. And because whatsoeuer was done, was to no purpose vnlesse those
two great houses of the Earle of Lerin and the Marshall Don Pedro were reconciled,
the Cardinall did vse the best meanes hee could to make them friends: but by reason of
their inueterate quarrels hee found matter enough whereon to set his iudgement and
industry a worke, and also incredible resistance against his brothers authority and his
owne,Perseuerance ouer-commeth all difficulties. so as diuers times they were in despaire of the matter: neuerthelesse, knowing
that by perseuerance, all difficulties are surmounted, and that in such holy and laudable
actions we ought to vse our best endeauors, they laboured so earnestly therein, as in the
end they thought that they had wholy reconciled them. And for a greater and more
strict band of this alliance,Feigned reconciliation betwixt the Earl of Lerin and the Marshall of Nauarre this assembly of the Estates beeing in the time of Lent, the
Cardinalls would needs haue the Constable and the Marshall to receiue the Sacrament
together, in an hostie parted betwixt them in the Monastery of St. Sebastian in Tafalla.
But as the heart of man is oftentimes different from the outward shew, so this reconcilliation
prooued but feigned and counterfeit; for notwithstanding promises, oths, and all
respect to Religion which are oftentimes but maskes to euill intents, the Earle of Lerin
thinking with these ceremonies to haue suffitiently secured his aduersary, did determine
to kill him vpon the first proffered occasion, perswading himselfe that if he could dispatch
this man, as hee had done his father and brother in time before, that then in Nauarre,
hee should haue no more great enemies left to make head against him. Therefore
vpon the very next day after their reconcilement which was good Friday,Treachery of the Earle of Lerin against the Marshall. he hauing
intelligence that the Marshall rode from Tafalla towards Tudela, or else to the Monastery
of Oliua, hee came with a great troupe vnder the hill of Agnorba and there lay in
ambush intending to assaile him on the sodaine as hee should passe that way. The Marshall
who feared no such matter, came riding in the company of the Earle of Saint
Steuens the Constable of Peraltas successor with their traine, and beeing come neere
to the place where his death was prepared, Gods will was that hee had some inckling of
the Earles treachery, wherevpon on a sodaine hee galloped backe againe as fast as hee
could, beeing so hardly pursued by his enemy, as without the assistance of Arnaud

gouernour of Vncul, who speedily thrust him into a Church, he had beene there slaine.
The Earle beeing madde that the Marshall had escaped, did the very same day execute
his furie vpon other Gramontois, for with his owne hand hee slew Leon de Garro the bastard,Mur^h^res committ^d by the Earle of Lerin.
the Arch-priest Mendiogorria left Iohn de Velez of Medran for dead, with diuerse
others slaine and hurt, and then returned home to his house: not long after that, certaine
of the family of Artieda, hauing murthered some of the house of Ayanc, the murtherers
were vpheld and receiued by the Constable the Earle of Beaumont, by reason
whereof, those of the family of Aranc, who had euer followed the Beaumontois faction,
reuolted from their side to those of Grammont. These things are set downe by some,
to bee more likely to haue beene done after the assembly of the estates, and they say,
that it is not to bee beleeued that the Constable would so much forget himselfe, as to
commit such an act the next day after his reconcilement, which was made in so religious
a manner, especially seeing the Cardinall and his brother were in the realme, and the
estates of the kingdome there assembled, and they rather beleeue, that this quarrell was
renewed a long time afterward in the reigne of Queene Catherine, vppon some new
wrongs offered betwixt these Lords.
 The peace of Castile, according to the determination of the States at Toledo,Castile. was
vertuously procured by Queene Isabell,The decrees of the Estates executed. who in her husbands absence remained at Valiodolit,
beeing accompanied and councelled by the Cardinall of Spaine, the Earle of
Benauent and others; by whose aduise were sent into Galicia, to order the affaires of
that Prouince, which had been greeuously shaken by the fore-passed tempests, Don Ferdinand
d' Acugna a good and a vertuous Knight, sonne to the Earle of Buendia, with
title of Gouernor, vnto whom the Licenciat Garci Lopes de Chinchilla of the Kings
councell, and a man of great integrity, was ioyned in qualitity of Corrigidor, or Iudge,
who found much to be reformed there; for diuerse tyrants oppressed their neighbours,
vsurped the temporall and spirituall patrimony and reuenews of the Church, not caring
for God, the King, nor Iustice, nor acknowledging any superiority, and did keepe backe
the Kings tribute. The citties of Lugo, Orense, Mondognedo, nor the townes of Biuero
and Corunna were exempted from such calamities, in regard whereof the Gouernour
and the Corrigidor, accompanied with two hundred horse* went to the citty of S. Iames,
there to make their residence, and to begin to order the affaires according to the forme
of law: The inhabitants of Saint Iames seeing their company so small, were afraide
that they were too weake to take in hand to bridle so many tyrants as were in that countrey,
did make some difficultie to let them into the citty: but at the last being satisfied by
the reasons of the Licenciat, they opened their gates, and promised to their power to
aide and assist them to execute iustice:Iustice established in Galicia. wherefore they began to fall to worke, and they
made such executions, without partialitie or respect of persons, as they were not afraide
to strike off the head of the Marshall Pero Pardo, who had committed infinite mischiefes,
so as in lesse then three moneths, more then one thousand fiue hundred persons, attainted
with notorious crimes worthy of death, went out of the countrey of Galicia: and these
Commissioners did raze downe to the ground diuerse strong houses, which serued for
places of retreate to theeues and robbers: by meanes of which executions, euery one
did acknowledge his dutie, and there were many, who without any constraint by iustice,
did restore that which they held of other mens, by meanes whereof Don Ferdinand de
Acugna, and Garci Lopes de Chinchilla got much honor and credit.
 This yeare, fiftie ships of warre,Spanish Army in Sicilie. with men and munition, were set forth out of Biscay,
Guipuscoa and Castile, vnder the title of warre against the Turkes, wherevnto the people
of Bicay did contribute, not preiudicing their priuiledges and exemptions, onely
for the present occasion of so holy a warre, the Armie met together at Laredo, and was
sent into Sicill, vnder the conduct of Don Francisco Henriques, sonne to the Admirall
of Castile, and serued at the taking of Ottranto, which the Turkes had taken from Don
Ferdinand the bastard of Arragon, who at the same time reigned at Naples: Before the
Armie departed from Laredo, the standards and banners of the ships were blessed, Don
Iohn de Ortega Pouruoier of Villafranca, singing a sollemn masse: then they sailed alongst
the coast of Spaine, and ioyned with other twenty vessels that came from Galicia, so as

the whole army of Castile consisted of three score and tenne ships gallantly rigged and
furnished, who sayling towards Ottranto perceiued the army of Portugall to be there
before them. By this succor the towne was recouered from the Turkes, who yeelded
it vp vpon the newes of the death of their Emperour Mahumet, which happened at
the same time. The Turkes being gonne forth of Italy, and the suspition of other
enterprises ceasing, the Spanish and Portugall ships returned home into their owne
country.
The first acts of the new Inquisition in Spaine were at that time so sharpe and violent,Rigor of the Spanish Inquisitien moderated.
as this yeere 1481. Don Pero Goncales de Mendoza Cardinall of Spaine vpon the
extreame complaints which the Conuerts did make, by reason of their vniust persecutions
were enforced to take some milder and gentler course: for there were already
more then three thousand house-holds destroied and rooted out, onely in Siuill, and
the Diocesse thereof. For these causes the Cardinall and other Prelats met together
to moderat the cruelty and violence of the pittilesse Inquisitors.Frier Thomas of Torquemada. Then friar
Thomas of Torquemada, a Iacobin, was chosen chiefe inquisitor: who by the Kings
leaue did appoint diuers Iudges in the Prouinces of Spaine, which by the Popes authority
did enquire of euery ones faith and manners. This iurisdiction hath beene
oftentimes since then amplified and reformed vntill that the tribunalls and seates
were established in manner following. Valiodolit, and Calaorra on that side of the
mounts towards Burgos, and Toledo and Cuenca on the other side, Murcia in her owne
iurisdiction: Siuil and Cordoua in Andaluzia: and Erena in Extremadura: then after the
conquest of Granado in the same city.
The Inquisition was successiuely receiued into Arragon,Power of the Inquisitors. at Saragossa, and Valencia,
and at Barcelona for Cattalognia: All which Prouinces are twelue in number. Nauarre
answereth to Calaorra, the seate whereof was transported to Logrogno for better
ease and commodity. The knowledge of these Iudges Inquisitors did at the same
time chiefely extend to the Iewes, and Moores, which were conuerted, and yet neuerthelesse
did secretly adhere to their old sects: then to heretikes, and such as were reuolted
from the Catholike saith, to Magitians, Blasphemers, and those that were attainted
with the sinne against nature. The generall Inquisition remayning at Court neere to
the Kings person did rule and were chiefe ouer all these other Tribunalls. At the same
time Pope Sixtus the fifth, did allow and authorize all that the Cardinall and his Councell
had decreed concerning that matter, and he did confirme the election of frier Thomas
of Torquemada of the order of the Preachers, and Prior of the Monastery of
Santa Cruz in Segobia, vnto whom Diego de Merla the Assistant of Siuill, and Pero
Martines Camagno the Kings Secretary were ioyned as coadiutors. The first effect
of the Inquisition after that it was ordained, was to set downe an edict that all Heretikes
and Apostotaes should appeare, and re-unite themselues to the Church of Rome, acknowledging
their offences: More then seuenteene thousand persons, did appeare
at this commaundement, who were enioyned what to say and doe; then they proceeded
against the obstinate and rebellious, more then two thousand of them were
burned and their goods confiscated, and taken from their children and heires: the same
sentence was executed vpon those that were absent and dead,Sharpe and rigorous executions of the Inquisitions. digging vp their
bones and burning them: in such sort as the Inquisition continuing thus rigorous,
great numbers did leaue Castile, and with-drew themselues into the Kingdomes
of Nauarre and Portugall; others went into France, England and to other farre
Countries.
Let vs now returne vnto the Court, which was then at Valiodolit where the
Queene of Castile was accompanied after the accustomed manner with a greate
traine of Ladies and Gentlewomen, the Nobility (who in these latter times giue
themselues wholie to the exercize of armes, and doe for the most part contemne
all other course of life which causeth them and not without cause to be esteemed of all
men as people very vnproffitable in time of peace) did in this Court thinke vpon
nothing else then for to serue and court the Ladies and Gentlewomen, and gaue themselues,
to such other like vaine and idle pleasures, accustomed in Princes Courts, and most

of all in that of Spaine from whence did spring such fruites as vice doth produce,
namely quarrels and dishonour and losse, which euills had almost spred themselues
from the particular to the generall, corrupting the publike peace, by troubles, seditions
and mutinous wars.
Don Ramir Nugnes de Guzman,Quarrel betwixt D. Frederike Henques and Don Ramir Nugnes de Guzman. sonne to Don Goncall de Guzman Lord of Torall,
being in an euening in talke with Donna Maria Manuel in the Queenes presence Chamber,
was interrupted in his speech by Don Frederike Henriques eldest sonne to the Admirall,
who either thorough the insolency of his youth, or else to content Don Guttiere
de Sottomajor his brother-in-law, who made loue to that Lady, and was loath to
haue an other man walke in his purlewes, caused Don Ramir to arise as hee sate by
her, making as though he would haue gonne by him to haue spoken with Don Marine
Zapate, and sodainely sate downe in his place by her, whereat Don Ramir beeing offended,
beganne to murmure against Don Frederike, so as they threatned to bastinado one
an other, and fell to bitter and reproachfull speeches: in such manner as Don Ramir
Nugnes his honour was greatly interessed: for Don Frederike going forth of the
Queenes lodging called him drunkard, and base fellow, with many such like bitter termes.
The Queene hauing notice of this quarrell, commaunded both of them to depart forth
of the pallace, then shee confined Don Frederike to the Admirall his fathers lodgings
and committed Don Ramir Nugnes to the keeping of Garci Laso de la Vega, Maister
of the Hall, vntill it were knowne who was in the fault, as also to keepe them from
hurting one an other in action as they had done a little before in words. Hauing
vnderstood afterwards that Don Frederike had committed the greatest insolency, her
will was to haue them still to keepe their Chambers till such time as shee had made
them friends.
Notwithstanding which commaundement of the Queenes Don Frederike went abroad
to a turnament which was held the next day following, by reason whereof the
Queene was extreamely mooued against him and the Admirall his father, and told
them that if they went about to vse their power against Don Ramir Nugnes, hee should
finde those to take his part as would not suffer him to susteine any wrong or iniury at
their hands. The Admirall finding the Queene to bee much displeased, did beginne
to humble himselfe, and did assure her that Don Ramir needed not to feare any wrong
either from himselfe, his sonne, or any of their followers; wherewith the Queene being
contented did permit Don Ramir freely to goe out and come into the palace, acquainting
him with what the Admirall had promised her, bidding him to relie vpon her
word, and to walke abroade vnder her royall safe-gard and protection. Don Ramir was
well assured by her Princely and comfortable words, and. Don Frederike had saluted
him, and talked familiarly with him and met diuerse times for the space of three daies
togither, yet notwithstanding this outward shew of reconcilement, Don Ramir was vpon
a day bastonaded as hee walked in the streetes by certaine persons vnknowne vnto
him, who presently after hauing their horses ready, galloped away.
The Queene beeing aduertized of this disgrace offered to Don Ramir, contrary to
the Admirals promise, and her owne royall assurance, did rigorously pursue the Admirall,
and did not leaue (hauing seized vpon two of the chiefest places that he had namely
the castle of Simancas and ^iosecco) vntill shee had his sonnes person in her power,
saying that those blowes lighted vpon her selfe, and that she had felt them, and that shee
would know whether it were the manner of Spaine, that Kings should bee so contemned
and despised by their subiects. The Admirall notwithstanding that hee was the Kings
vncle, was constrained to deliuer his sonne Don Frederike to the Queene; with promise
that he should receiue no harme in his person, who by the Queenes commaundement
(who would not see him) was sent prisoner to the castle of Areualo. Don Ramir
hauing receiued this disgrace went to Torall with an intent to bee reuenged in a most
rigorous manner,Effects of immoderate choller. and was very glad to hea^e of his Aduersaries imprisonment: but
not contenting himselfe with the right which the Queene ment to doe him, he inuented
meanes how to bee reuenged on him with his owne hands, wherefore diuers nights
togither he caused the castle of Areualo to bee watched whether that he might finde

any meanes to enter the same, and to kill Don Frederike, who was to narrowly garded:
so as hatred daily encreasing in Don Ramir, who not being able to execute that which
his choller had pretended, he did resolue to kill the Admirall Don Alphonso Henriques,
father to his aduersary, and in the same minde he rode secretly towards the Court, whether
he had first of all sent Aluaro de Valderas one of his confederats to obserue the Admiralls
actions, and to espy^a fit time when hee might execute his deseigne, that hee
might aduertize him of the time and place. Aluaro de Valderas cunning enough in
other matters, communicated the businesse to Garci Franco, reposing trust in him, because
that his eldest sonne had married not long before Don Ramir Nugnes sister, but
he found himselfe deceiued, for Garci Franco did forthwith aduertize the Admirall thereof,
to the end that hee might stand vpon his guarde: therefore Don Ramir lost his labour,
and had no other recompence for that painefull iourney, but onely daunger to bee
drowned, as hee did inconsiderately and hastily passe ouer a riuer neere to Saldaigne.
The Admirall did not faile to complaine that the Queene, how that, notwithstanding
they were vpon termes of law, Don Ramir had practized against his life: this was done
in the presence of the Cardinall of Spaine, who afterward pursued the matter in his
behalfe: wherevpon shee did write to Don Ramir Nugnes, commaunding him by no
meanes to attempt any thing against the persons of the Admirall, his kinfolkes and
seruants; and Pedro Mercado, who brought the Queenes letters, did demaund letters
of assurance from him to performe that which the Queene commaunded him. Don
Ramir answered the messenger that hee would send his brother to the Court with his
answere, and hauing consulted therevpon with his friends and kinsfolkes, within a few
daies after, he did write to the Queene that hee did assure the Admirall and all his followers
vntill her returne from Arragon, whither she was then going, and for fiue and
twenty daies after her returne, the which did content the Queene, who gaue the Admirall
that letter.
In the meane time Don Frederike was deliuered out of the castle of Areualo,D Frederike Henriques confined in^o Sicill where he marrieth with the Countesse of Modica. and
confined into Sicill, whether he was to haue gonne how-soeuer, to marry the Countesse
and heire of Modica, who was one of the greatest Ladies in the Island, and of
whom Queene Isabelli in time made more account, then of any other whatsoeuer, and
it is reported that before King Fernand was married to her, his father King Iohn had
thought to haue married him to this Countesse of Modica. When Don Ramir vnderstood
what they ment to doe with his Aduersarie, hee thought that the punishment
was not sufficient for the offence which he had committed, therefore he sent to beseech
the Queene, that it might please her to permit him to endeauour to repaire his lost honour,
and reputation, by taking vengeance on Don Frederike, or else to grant them the
single combate against him now whilest she held him in her power: The Queene answered
that these combats were no matters belonging to women, and that therefore
he should content himselfe till the King were returned, who would see that right should
be done vnto him, and that his honour and reputation should bee maintained. Don
Frederike went into Sicill, passing by Saragossa, and accomplished his marriage. Don
Ramir Nugnes being continually sollicited by the spirit of reuenge, perceiuing that hee
could haue none other remedy, did pursue his former enterprize against the Admirall
Don Frederikes father, and was with great difficuly conteined by his friends and kinsfolkes
from killing of him, but at the last hee determined onely to crie quittance with
him, and to entertaine him with bastonadoes as they had serued him; the which hee executed
after the Queenes returne from Arragon; so soone as the fiue and twentie daies
were expired within the which terme he had promised not to touch him, the Court being
at Medina del Campo: hee assailed the Admirall as he came out of the Queenes
house in the company of the Marquis of Astorga, which being done Don Ramir fled
away hauing men and horses ready in the streete and at the gates to further his escape,
and tooke the ready way towards Tordesillas, the bridge of the which place vpon Duero
he passed by night, the gate being opened to him by one that had beene sometime his
seruant, and as then did serue the porter and kept the keyes. When he was passed ouer
and the bridge locked againe, they tooke the keyes from the poore fellow and threw

them into the riuer, fearing to bee pursued by the Queenes people, and by the brea^^^
day he arriued at Villalobos, where he changed horse and kept on for his greater sue^^^
the way of Benauent though it were the longest, and passing the bridge of Castro G^ncalo,
he turned on his left hand towards Saint Ciprians Church into the which he entred,
as triumphing of his victory, with his vncle Don Pedro de Guzman, and his
brother Don Pedro Nugnes de Guzman, who waited for him there, and from thence, they
came altogither to Torall, the which place they beganne to fortifie fearing that the Admirall,
who was a great Lord, and the Queene likewise would send thither to beseege
him. Ramir Nugnes leauing his vncle and his brother at Torall, came to Leon, where
diuerse of his friends met him, reioycing with him for what he had done. It is reported
that entring into the Church of Saint Dominike in the same city, where diuers of his
predecessors were buried, after that he had said his praiers he said openly before all men,
that since the time he had beene disgraced, hee durst not come into that Church, being
ashamed to be found in a place where the memories and remembrances of so many illustrious
and honourable persons did remaine: but hauing now recouered his owne
honour, his fathers, and that of their whole family, he was boldly come to visit them. Hauing
afterward visited his mother, and his betrothed Lady Donna Maria de Quignones
youngest daughter to the Earle of Luna, and tarried a while in the city, he withdrew himselfe
by his vncles counsell to the castle of Auiados, where he told him that he should be
in greater safety then at Torall. Now after that this outrage was committed at Medina
del Campo, the Marquis of Astorga, beeing present thereat, did enforme the Queene
who commaunded Alphonso Osorio to pursue Don Ramir Nugnes and his people with
fifty horse, who hauing rode all that night and the next day without finding any of those
whom he sought for, he came and lodged at Villademor, a place not farre distant from
Torall, where afterward, other captaines and souldiars sent from the Queene did meet
together, who made a shew as if they would beseege the towne. The Bachelor La Font,
came thither likewise to commaund Pedro de Guzman in the Queenes name to yeeld
the place, hee receiued this answere, that if Don Ramir Nugnes had done any thing for
the recouery of his honour, it was not a fault that did deserue to haue him spoiled of his
patrimony and goods, left him by his predecessors, therefore he besought the Queene
 to proceed in this businesse by order of law, and if that Don Ramir should be found guilty,Quarrell betweene D. Ram^r Nugnes de Guzman and D. Frederike Henriques.
then to punish him: with these speeches they entertained La Font, and gained time
to the end that Don Ramir might haue leasure to fortifie himselfe. Whilest La Font
went to the Court, the souldiars did much hurt in the country neere to Torall, and prouoked
the Inhabitants and souldiars which were within the towne, to come forth and
skirmish with them, albeit that Don Pedro de Guzman with-held them from so doing,
as much as in him lay: for hee would not giue that aduantage to Don Ramires aduersaries,
to say that those of Torall had fought against the Queenes forces, who commaunded
Alphonso de Quintanilla to vse all fit meanes that hee could to take the towne and
castle of Torall, Alphonso hauing demaunded to speake with Don Pedro de Guzman and
Pero Nugnes his Nephew, acquainted them with the Queenes resolution, exhorting
them not to delay the time till they brought the canon, they answered that they would
in no sort shew themselues rebellious to the Queenes commaundement, but they onely
entreated that Don Ramir might be proceeded against by the ordinary meanes of Iustice,
which beeing graunted they were ready not onely to yeeld vp Torall, but the castle of
Auiados in like manner, and namely if need required to put Don Ramirs person into the
hands of the Duke of Medina Sidonia in hostage, or to Don Gomes Suares de Figueroa
Earle of Feria: the which was agreed vpon betwixt them and signed by a Notarie,
and a truce made betwixt the beseegers and beseeged whilest that Alphonso de Quintillana
might goe and come from the Court. That Queene was at the same time gone
to Cordoua, wherefore Alphonso being come to Valiodolit, and hauing conferred with
the Admirall, sent the dispatch to Cordoua to the Queene, who appointed for depositor
of D. Ramirs lands and person the Earle of Feria who had married D. Constance, D.
Ramirs Aunt; the Earle accepted it vpon condition, that he should be aduertized fiue and
twenty daies before the sentence should bee pronounced, and that the Kings should

promise him by writing, not to demaund Don Ramirs person during the time of the
processe, for he would assure him whilest he was in his power: On the other side, Don
Ramir sent to the King of Portugall to know, whether that if it should happen, that a
sentence should be pronounced against him which might touch his life and honour, hee
would permit him to come into his Kingdome and Court in safety. These things being
graunted, Don Ramir was brought to the castle of the towne of Feria, for greater
surety, and there kept in prison, vntill his processe was ready to be iudged, and then the
Kings according to their promise, did aduertize the Earle of Feria thereof at the appointed
time, who sent Don Ramir well accompanied into Portugall, where King Iohn
the second of that name did then reigne, who entertained him very curteously, as shalbe
hereafter declared.
Queene Isabella as hath beene said made a voyage into Arragon,The States of Arragon sweare to Prince Iohn. and carried thither
with her her husband Iohn Prince of the Asturia's, and was receiued into the city of Calatajub
with great and magnificent triumph, whether the King came not long after, who
at the same time was at Barcelona with the Lords and Deputies of the States of Arragon,
by whom Prince Iohn was likewise sworne vnto and acknowledged for Prince of
Girona, heire vnto Castile and Arragon, and true successor in these Kingdomes, the
Kings in like manner did sweare and promise to maintaine the rights, priuiledges and exemptions
of the country: That being done they went to Saragossa, where they made
as triumphant an entry as at Calatajub. Thither was newes brought of the death of
the great Turke Mahumet, of the succession of his sonne Bajazet in that Empire, and of
the discord betwixt him and his brother Zemin, and also how that King Fernand of Naples
had recouered the towne of Ottranto which Acomat Bascia had taken from him the
yeere before. For all which desired newes, the Kings yeelded thankes vnto God by generall
processions after the accustomed manner.Estates at Barcelona and Valencia. The Kings did in like manner assemble
the Estates at Barcelona and Valencia, where the like othes were made vnto Prince
Iohn as next future heire: but touching the subsidies they demaunded, it was impossible
to obtaine any, and they were faine on the contrary to grant many things to the people,
and in diuerse sorts to supply their wants, being but poore euer since the last warre
that the Cattelans made against the King Don Iohn.


Don Iohn the second of that name, and 13. King
of Portugall.
ABout the same time died Alphonso King of Portugall at Sintra, who since the last 
warres betwixt him and Castile,Portugal. had euer led a melancholy and discontented life:
he lay sicke fiue and twenty daies, and deceased the three and fortith yeere of his reigne,
being of the age of nine and forty yeeres and seuen monthes: his body was buried with
great solemnitie and funerall pompe in the royall Monastery of the battaile, of the Order
of the Friers preachers: the Catholike Kings remayning still at Barcelona did there
celebrate his obsequies. After him reigned his sonne D. Iohn, father to D. Alphonso who
did not succeed him, because he died before his father, as hereafter shalbe mentioned.
King Fernand hauing ordered the affaires of Arragon,Castile. Cattalonia and Valencia, returned
with the Queene his wife into Castile, where, during her absence, the Constable
and the Admirall were appointed Viceroys, who committed the Earles of Luna
and Valence to prison, in regard of certaine tumults and seditions which they had raised
in the Kingdome of Leon. The Court remayning at that time at Medina del Campo,
happened, as hath beene heretofore declared the reuenge of D. Ramir Nugnes de Guzman
against the Admirall.
There arose at the same time a new contention betwixt the Kings of Castile and 
the Pope, wherein they shewed no want of courage. The Episcopall Sea of Cuenca
was vacant by the decease of the Bishop, Pope Sixtus gaue it to a Nephew of his
borne in Genoa, Cardinall of the title of Saint George, without the knowledge or

consent of the Kings, who being highly displeased that the Bishoprikes and great benifices
of Spaine should be possessed by strangers, against the ancient decrees of the Estates
of the Kingdome, obserued from time to time, did hinder this Cardinall from
taking possession of the Bishoprike, and gaue the Pope to vnderstand how preiudiciall
it might be to the Realmes of Spaine, whereof the Pope making no account and continuing
in his former purpose, the Kings commanded all their subiects that were in the
Court of Rome, to depart from thence, and made protestations to the Pope that they
would procure a generall Councell to bee called to redresse these and other such like
disorders.
The Pope who abhorred that more then any thing int the world,Generall counsels abhorred by the Popes. sent a Gentleman
of Genoa, whose name was Dominico Centurion for his Ambassador into Spaine,
who being come to Medina del Campo, and crauing audience, it was refused him, and
he was told from the Kings, that because their Ambassadors were euill intreated and
contemned at Rome, they would not entertaine nor harken to the Popes, therefore
he should doe well and wisely, speedily to depart from thence, and concerning his owne
person, they would no farther assure it in their dominions, then whilest he could returne
towards Italy. The Ambassador being amazed at this commandement, did forthwith
reiect the name and priuiledge of an Ambassador, and besought them to hold him
as their subiect, for he was borne in their Kingdome. The Kings in regard of this humillity,
committed him prisoner to the fort of Medina, from whence soone after he was
deliuered, by the meanes of the Cardinall of Spaine. When the Pope vnderstood
what the Kings had done, hee was content to let them enioy their antient rights, and
they made couenants and agreements together,Couenants betwixt the Pope and the King of Spaine. by the which it was decreed, that the
Kings of Spaines presentations to the Bishoprikes, should from thence-forth bee admitted
in the Court of Rome, and they should be bestowed vpon such as had well deserued
of the Spanish common-wealth: and by this meanes it hath beene oftentimes
seene that diuers good religious persons haue beene, against their willes, constrained
to become Bishops, as Don Pedro de Maluenda, generall of the Order of Saint Ierosme,
who was enforced to take the Bishoprike of Coria, and Doctor Don Tello de Buendia
that of Cordoua.
 Before we end this booke, it shall not be amisse to returne to Nauarre where wee
left the Cardinall of Foix,Nauarre. and his brother Iames of Foix, much busied to ouer-rule
the chiefe of the factions in that Kingdome. They hauing had an answere of the
States such as they desired, and ordered the affaires of the country as well as they could,
came backe into Arragon before King Fernand went thence, with whom hauing consulted,
they concluded that it was expedient, that King Francis Phoebus should come
into his Kingdome, and enter it in armes and military Order as soone as conueniently he
could, before the peoples mindes and affections should be changed by any occasion that
might happen; wherefore as soone as they were returned into France, they declared
to the King and to Donna Magdaleine his mother, what they had effected, as well
in Nauarre, as in Arragon, signifying vnto them that the chiefest hope consisted in
in dilligence: wherefore they sodainely assembled their friends and seruants from all
partes, and gathered togither a thousand or fifteene hundred horse; and like number of
footmen, with which forces, this young Prince, accompanied with his mother, and the
Cardinall his vncle entred into Nauarre,King Francis Phoebus entreth into his Realme of Nauarre. where hee was receiued by the Nobillity
and townes, without any difficulty or resistance at all, namely the Earle of Lerin
albeit he was not pleased with his comming, did deliuer vp the city of Pampelona
vnto him, considering that if he should doe otherwise, the young King had the King
of Castile on one side, and the French King on the other, mighty Princes and his neere
kinsmen, who would constraine him to doe his duty.
King Francis Phoebus in the month of Nouember the yeere 1482. made his entrie
into the City, where the three Estates were assembled, he was there crowned,
and did giue and receiue the othes of fidelitie, and good gouernment, in the Cathedrall
Church after accustomed manner, in the presence of the Cardinall
his vncle, the Lords of his Kingdome, the Princesse his mother accompanied

with Ladies and Gentlewomen, and by the Ambassadors of Castile, France, and from ^other
potentates being at that time not aboue fifteene yeeres of age: and the same day
and many daies after, tilts, turneys, and other royall feasts were there made in magnificent
manner. These matters being ended, he went in person to visit the townes, cities
and fortresses, as well to see the manner of the gouernment of the country, as to receiue
the particular othes of the captaines and gouernors, to see iustice administred, and to
marke how firme and constant euery one was in his seruice:Rules and orders for the ^ranquillity of the Kingdome of Nauarre. and the better to prouide
for the publike peace and quiet, he commanded proclamation to be made by sound of
trumpet both in his owne Court and ouer the whole Kingdome, that no man vpon paine
of death should any more vse the seditious names of Beaumont and Grammont. And
the more to gratifie the Earle of Lerin and to binde him more strictly to his seruice, hee
confirmed the office of high Constable vnto him which Peter de Peralta deceased had
held in time before and gaue him moreouer Sarraga and other places which he had won
from the Spaniards, Viana excepted, because it was the chiefe of the principallity, and
the title of the eldest sonne of Nauarre. In the Cathedrall Church, where hee was
crowned, he gaue guifts, and graunted priuiledges, namely to be free from lodging, the
letters whereof were dated at Tafalla in the month of Ianuary, the same yeere: he did
gratifie in like manner other Lords, Knights, Churches, Townes, and particular persons
with such moderation and equity, as all men did admire so great wisdome in such young
yeeres, and did praise God that had giuen so good a King vnto Nauarre:Titles of Lady Magdaleine of France. In all which
matters, he was ruled by the wisdome of the Princesse his mother, of the Cardinall his
vncle, and other persons of State and experience which were in his Court and neere his
person. Whilest in his nonage his mother the Princesse did gouerne the Kingdome, shee
vsed these titles in her letters. We Magdalene daughter and sister to the French King,
Princesse of Viana, gouernor and protectresse of our deere and best beloued sonne Francis
Phoebus by the grace of God King of Nauarre etc. This Prince was surnamed Phoebus
because he was faire as the sunne among the starres, and also in regard diuers of his race
were of the same name. Diuers marriages were procured for him, but none was accomplished:
for he died fifteene monthes after he was crowned, hauing but shewed
himselfe to the world, and sodainely vanished in the prime of his youth. King Fernand
his great vncle, would haue married him to his second daughter Donna Ioane, who was
since heire to all his Kingdomes: but the Princesse his mother following the counsell
of King Lewis the eleuenth, who did not greatly affect the affaires of Castile, did hinder
that match. The like hinderance was ministred by her and King Lewis in the marriage
of his sister Catherine who was Queene of Nauarre and the Prince Don Iohn of Castile
heire to the same crowne: for King Lewis who had great deseignes in his head, did goe
about to marry this King Francis Phoebus to Donna Ioane the Nun at Coimbra the pretended
Queene of Castile: and by that pretended right, and the forces of his owne
Kingdome, to cast King Fernand and Queene Isabella out of the Realmes of Castile
and Leon, and for euer to keepe the Earledome of Rossillion to himselfe; with other
purposes which vanished into aire: and the better to effect what hee had determined
sent Ambassadors into Portugall to King Alphonso, whose death happening this yeere
with that of the King of Nauarres soone after, did quite frustrate these practizes: to the
which, King Iohn of Portugall, who succeeded his father Alphonso, would by no meanes
harken.
The end of the two and twentith Booke.




SEMPER EADEMTHE THREE AND TVVENtith
Booke of the Generall History of Spaine.

The Contents.
1 THe beginning of the long warre of Granado against King Muley Albohacen.
2 Death of King Francis Phoebus. Marriage procured by the Kings of Castile for their
sonne D. Iohn with Queene Catherine of Nauarre.
3 Continuance of the warre of Granado. Conquest of that great Canaries: Switzers hired for
this warre against the Moores.
4 Causes of suspition of King Fernand and Queene Isabella against the heire of Nauarre. Intelligences
and practizes with the factious to get that Kingdome.
5 Continuance of the warre of Granado.
6 The reigne of King Iohn the second of Portugall. Discouery of Manicongo: the King intitles
himself Lord of Guiney: Conspiracies: Death of the dukes of Braganca and Viseo, with
other tragicall acts in the same Court.
7 Continuance of the warre of Granado against Muley Boabdellin the one and twentith
King of that Country: The Pope helpeth forward the warre of Granado: Pollitike acts of
the Kings of Castile.
8 Christofer Columbus his first comming to the Court of Castile: his disposition and quallities.
10 Seege of Malaga.
11 Hermandades or brother-hoods: Inquisition in Arragon.
12 Iohn d' Albret, and Catherine of Nauarre the fiue and thirtith in Order of the Kings of
Nauarre: The vicount of Narbonne quarrels about the Earledome of Foix: Enterprises of
Castile against Nauarre by meanes of the factions.
13 King Fernands fauours towards Amand d' Albret: aide graunted by him to the Princes
and Lords confederate against the French King Charles the eight.
14 Death of the duke of Alua, and other Lords of Castile. Exploits done against the
Moores.
15 Nauigations of the Portugalls into the Ocean sea: search and discouery of vnknowne
lands, and great dilligence of King Iohn of Portugall about these matters.
16 Treaties of marriage, and other domesticall acts in the Court of Castile, oppression of the
Conuerts.
17 Continuance of the warre against the Moores of Granado. Seege of Baca.
18 Mastership of Calatraua incorporated to the Cowne of Castile, with other matters belonging

to the same Order.
19 Pursute of the Moorish warre, Baca yeelded vp.
20 Pursutes against Mahomet the Little, the last King of Granado, to dispossesse him of the
same city, vnder collour of right.
21 Marriage of Prince Alphouso of Portugall with Donna Isabella the Infanta of Castile.
22 Seege of Granado, and yeelding vp of the same city.
23 Pollitike acts of King Fernand and Queene Isabella of Castile.
34 D. Alphonso of Portugall his pittifull death.

In this three and twintith Booke, for continuance
of the Kings reigning in Spaine, mention
is made of.
35. Iohn D' Albret, and Catherine his wife, King
and Queene of Nauarre, himselfe
the second of that name.

THe warre which King Fernand began and ended against the Moores of
Granado, was one of his most memorable acts: for the Kingdome of
Granado did florish more at that time,Qualities of King Muley Al^obacen. then it had done in many yeeres
before, being full of men, riches and armor, and gouerned by one of
the wisest and pollitike Kings that euer reigned ouer that Nation:
namely Muley Albohacen, if hee had beene a little more faithfull, and
lesse ambitious and proud, which qualities did plunge him into troubles, and miserable
diuisions as well against his subiects in the bowels of his owne country as against the
Castillians his neighbours. Hee had enioyed a long peace, and as it were with pride
and brauing he pulled vp the assurance thereof by the rootes from the Kings of Caile,
hauing freed and discharged himselfe from the tribute which his predecessors were
accustomed to pay them. And albeit the same was greeuous to King Fernand and
Queene Isabella, which were magnanimous and impatient of all losse and diminution
of their royall Estate: who besides that, were pricked forward as well by their owne
zeale to Christian Religion, as by the perswasion of the Popes and Prelates to vndertake
the same warre: yet notwithstanding, the truce agreed vpon, the charge and discommodities
of the warres which they had newly ended against the King of Portugall, the
present confusion wherein the Realme of Castile was at the same time, did counsell them
to waite for a fitter opportunity. Now when it pleased God (vnto whom all times
and occasions are subiect) that this Mahometan superstition should take an end, and
that this race of Moores should bee rooted out of Spaine by armes, seeing that other
more conuenient meanes could not bee vsed by the Church, the warre which was constantly
pursued against them, and wholy ended in the space of tenne yeeres, did beginne
in this manner.
 King Muley Albohacen hauing beene aduertized that the city of Zahara was negligently
kept by the Christians,Nauarre. and presuming vpon the truce, caused it to be taken in the
night by scaladoe, togither with the sort and castle; he carried away the men, cattaile,
and all the riches that he could finde therein, and manned it with a good and strong garrison
of Moores. The taking thereof being knowne in Granado, one of their Philosophers
which they call Alphaquies cried out publikely: Either mine Oracles deceiue mee,
or the end of the ancient reigne of the Moores in Spaine is at hand: the which in
deed came to passe, the surprising of this towne giuing King Fernand occasion to lay
hand vpon this conquest, with all his forces and meanes, and with incredible perseuerance:
The newes that the truce was broken by the Moores being vnderstood at Medina
del Campo where the Court then was, diuerse companies were dispatched to the
frontiers of Murcia and Andaluzia, vnder the charge of Don Alphonso de Cardenaz
Maister of Saint Iames, who lay in garrison at Eccia, Don Roderigo Telles Giron Maister
of Calatraua, remained at Iaen and others in other places, besides the ordinary garrisons
and forces of Don Pedro Henriques Gouernor generall of the frontiers of Andaluzia
assisted by Don Pedro Ponce de Leon Marquis of Cales, the Duke of Medina Sidonia and
others: the King commaunded all of them to make sharpe warre in the country of
Granado with fire and sword, the which they beganne to execute with all violence;
for hauing ouer-runne and ruined a great part of the country, they did winne
by the industry of Diego Merlo assistant of Siuill,Alhama taken by the Castillins. the city of Alhama, as carelesly guarded
by the Moores as Zahara had beene by the Christians: by reason that it was almost
in the middest of their country: the castle was the first that was taken; being scaled,
a valiant souldiar of Carmona called Iohn de Ortega a great scaler of walles beeing the
first man that entred it, being neerely followed by Martin Galindo a Knight borne at Eccia,
Iohn of Toledo and others to the number of thirty, who cut the next Court of garde
in peeces, whom they found fast a sleepe, then they breake open a posterne gate, and
gaue entrance to the rest of the army.
The Moores which were resident in the towne, hearing the noyse and clamour
of this surprise, ranne confusedly and in great disorder (and not yet thorowly a
waked) to succour the castle: but they soone perceiued that it was past all remedie:

therefore they fortified themselues in the Mesquites or Churches, and in the towers of
the walles, with all sorts of armes and engines for defence: giuing notice to their next
neighbours of what had befallen them, and craued speedie ayde, which they expected also
from Granado, which was ten miles distant from thence. The Christians who in like
manner made account, that if they did not driue the enemies foorth of the towne the
same day, they themselues should be ouer-runne with the multitudes which wold come
thither, did resolue valiantly to assaile them, by the perswasion and example of Sancho d'
Auila Captaine of Carmona, and of Nicholas de Roras Gouernor of Areos: but finding
great resistance, the opinion of those was almost followed, who would haue the castle
razed downe to the ground, and so to returne: yet for all that the Marquis of Cales, nor
the Assistant of Siuil not consenting thereunto, they began onely to ouerthrow that part
of the castle which looked vppon the towne, and the souldiers beeing againe brought to
the fight, did behaue themselues so valiantly, as, notwithstanding the Moores braue resistance,
before the latter end of the day, all the churches and sorts were taken, and the
towne wholly wonne, which was esteemed the goodliest prize, that they could haue wished,
for the importance of the warre. Three thousand Genets or light-horse were
brought to this expedition, and as many foot-men by Diego Merlo, Don Pedro Henriques,
and the Marquis of Cales, who for the hatred which he did euer beare to the duke
of Medina Sidonia, would not haue him made acquainted with this enterprise. The
Moores of Granado beeing greatly astonished for the losse of Alhama,Euill presages of the Moores. beganne to make
euill presages of the end of the warre, and to murmure against King Muley Alboacen, not
sparing to say, that his taking of Sahara would sticke to him and to his posteritie to the
worlds end. He did speedily send a thousand horse to their ayde, but they could not come
time enough.
In the meane space he gathered together all his men at armes from all parts of his
kingdome,The king of Granado before Alhama. and came in person to beseege Alhama, not bringing any artillerie with him,
imagining that the Christians not beeing yet fortified therein, would quickely leaue it,
but he was deceiued; for hee found them sowre and stubborne aduersaries, but chiefly
there was a bloudie incounter at such time as the Moores went about to turne away the
riuer which passeth by the towne, where diuers of both sides lost their liues: and it is to
be doubted, that without the ayde of God sent to the beseeged, they had beene ouercome
by so great a power, as then fought against them, for they began to be out of hope
and beganne to spoile all that they could not carry away, and were resolued to yeeld it,
when Don Henry de Guzman, Duke of Medina Sidonia, arriued with a sufficient armie of
his owne tenants, friends, and followers, with others entertained with his owne money,
which (they say) amounted to three thousand horse, and forty thousand foot, with whom
were ioyned the Earle of Cabra, and Don Alphonso of Aguilar, and his brother Don Goncal
Hernandes of Cordoua, who was afterward called the great Captaine in the warres
of Italy, bringing with him the troupes of Seuile, Eccia, Cordoua, and other places. All
these forces, which were great and wonderfull, for the short time wherein the were gathered
together, did march towards Alhama.
King Fernand hauing notice of the taking thereof, made himselfe foorthwith readie
for to come into Andalusia, hauing in his company Don Bertrand de la Cueua, Duke of
Albuquerque, and the Earles of Treuigno and Tendilla, with many other knights, the
Earle of Cifuentes meeting them at Toledo, and then they altogether passed the mount
called Sierra Morena, to ioyne with the armie which the king commanded to attend him
there: but the Commanders knowing the necessitie of those of Alhama, went forward
with great diligence to deliuer them, the which they did onely by the noyse of their comming:
the Moore King beeing retired in the night with his whole armie. The king who
followed, passed on to Anteguera, and there receyued newes, that the seege before Alhama
was raysed, wherefore he returned to Cordoua to meet the Queene whom he had
left to leauie souldiers.
Now the Marquis of Cales, who was beseeged with great danger in Alhama, considering
the generosity of his aduersarie the Duke of Medina, who for the weale-publike
and seruice of the king, hauing forgotten all enmitie, had come to his ayde, he did highly

esteeme of him,D Hen^y de Guzm^n comes to the succour of his aduersarie. and casting away all euill will and hatred, he ranne to him and embraced
him with great loue, giuing him infinite thankes for so great a fauour: and these two
Lords had such louing and pleasing conference together, as euer after they liued in strict
and vnfained friendship, this Moorish warre hauing brought foorth effects contrarie to
the seditions in Castile. The Chieftains beeing agreed, there arose contention betwixt
the souldiers,Debate betwixt the beseeged, and those that came to their ayde. those which came to their ayde did say, that they ought to haue their part
of the spoyle of the towne, the others gaine-sayed it, in such sort, as if the wisedome of
their Captaines, and their new reconciliation had not preuented it, they had fallen into
tumult. The spoyle remayned to those who had defended the place, and the new come
souldiers were appeased with reason and good words, and they all dislodged with
the Duke and the Marquis, and returned euery man to his home: after the garrisons were
refreshed, and the towne well manned, where Diego de Merlo, Don Martin of Cordoua,
and Hernand Carillo remayned Captaines. After that the armie was gone, the King of
Granado hauing notice thereof, he did foorth-with returne backe to assayle Alhama, and
brought at this time no more engines of batterie with him, than at the former, but only
a great number of ladders, thinking in regard it was not yet thoroughly fortified nor
rampired, to take it by the multitude of his souldiers: and at last hauing assayled it day and
night without ceassing, he earely in a morning scaled it in a place which was not thought
vppon: so as he put three-score and ten Moorish souldiers into it, and had caused greater
numbers to haue entred, had not a souldier perceyued them, and giuen the alarme:
wherefore the Christians running to that place, did cut in peeces those that were entred,
and repulsed the rest who endeauoured to follow them. The successe of those assaults
was not according to king Muley Albohacens expectation, therefore he went thence once
againe, with an intent to returne thither with artillerie. In the meane space Queene Izabella
hauing left the Admirall Viceroy of Castile, marched with those forces which she
had leauied, towards Cordoua, to meete the King, being attended on by the Constable,
who refused to be Viceroy of Castile, saying, that warre and armes were the proper offices
belonging to an high Constable of Spaine. The Kings Councell did determine and
almost conclude to raze the Cittie of Alhama,Alhama preserued at the instance of Q. Iza^el. inregard it stoode in the middest of the
Realme of Granado, and therefore very hardly to be kept: but the Queene, who was desirous
to preserue it, as the first conquest of her raigne, did perswade the contrarie, so as
it was not ruined; and order was giuen to assayle, and take in all the sorts and castles nere
adioyning.
The Kings came after that to Eccia,Death of Don Alphonso Carill^. where they receyued newes of the decease of D.
Alphonso Carillo of Acugna, Arch-bishop of Toledo, who dyed at Alcala de Henares:
they procured the election to the same dignitie for the Cardinall Pero Goncales of Mendoza,
the seuentith Arch-bishop of that Sea and Primate of Spaine, and the Arch-bishoppricke
of Siuile was giuen to Don Inigo Manriques Bishop of Iaen. There were at
the same time with the King, Don Diego Hurtado of Mendoza Bishop of Palence, the Masters
of Saint Iames and Calarraua, the Constable, the Dukes of Villa-hermosa, Infantasgo,
Medina Celi, Albuquerque, the Marquis of Villena, and Cales, the Earles of Vregna,
Cabra, Treuigno, Tendilla, Cifuentes, and Benalcacar, Don Alphonso d'Aguilar,
Don Henry Henriques great Master, and the Kings vncle, Iohn Chacon, Roderigo of Vlloa,
Don Frederick of Toledo, sonne to the Duke of Alua, Don Iohn de Ribera Lord of Montmajor,
Don Alphonso of Cardenaz, Don Antonio Fonseca, Hernand of Vega, with other
Lords and Knights of great name: Don Iohn of Estuniga, master of Alcantara, by reason
of his young yeares was absent, with his father the Duke of Plaisance. With this companie
the king departed from Eccia, with eight thousand horse, and great numbers of foot,
and came to Alhama, the which they fortified with rampars, bulwarkes, and other sufficient
defences, and the king made Don Lewis Fernandes Porto Carrero, Lord of Palma,
Gouernor thereof, leauing him foure hundred horse: the Cardinall did purifie and blesse
the three Mesquites or churches with the accustomed ceremonies, and dedicated them to
other vses: then the army began to ouer-run the country on euery side, whilst the queene
busied her selfe in prouiding victuals, armes, munition, and other necessaries for the wars.
The Christian army being strengthened with new supplies, did presently beseege Loxa

and was lodged amongst the Oliue trees, vallies, and little hils neere to the riuer of Guadaxenil.
The Mooreking on his part lost neither time nor courage, but fortified and desended
the passages and streights, by the which the enemies might assayle him, and approch
towards Granado: sending to the Kings and Potentates of Affrica, to aduertize
them of the dangerous warre wherein he was ingaged, intreating them for the religion
common betwixt them, for the honour of their nation, for the equall danger which
threatned them, if Granado should be lost, that they would come or send to his ayde: and
he did in the meane time oppose his owne forces against the Christians, and on either
part there were valiant incounters and skirmishes performed, where neuerthelesse Don
Roderigo Telles Giron Master of Calatraua's happe was hard, who dyed beeing shot thorough
the bodie with two poysoned arrowes,The Moores make surious sa^lies vppon the Christians. and Don Garcia Lopes of Padilla was promoted
to his place, and was the last Master of that Order. King Fernand beeing desirous
to change and alter the seate and lodging of his armie to a more conuenient place, there
were sharpe skirmishes in the remoouing of the campe, where the Constable receyued
two wounds in his face: the beseeged, who were not aboue three thousand, made continuall
sallies vppon the Christians with such furie and brauing, as it was to be wondred at:
and did oftentimes put the great Lords and Captaines which kept those quarters which
they assayled, in great danger of their liues: committing notable spoyles vppon their
troupes, and the Duke of Medina Celi, and the Earle of Tendilla, did hardly escape with
their liues, beeing rescued by the forces of the Earle of Playsance, which his sonne Don
Franciso of Estuniga brought to their ayde: the Kings owne person was likewise succored
by Don Iohn de Ribera, Lord of Montmajor, assisted greatly by Don Fredericke of Toledo,
sonne to the Duke of Alua, Don Antonio de Fonseca, Don Alphonso of Cardenaz,
and Hernand of Vega. Such was the enraged hardinesse of the Moores, as notwithstanding
that they were beaten backe and streightly shut in by the valour and industrie of the
Marquis of Cales,The seege of Loxa raised. yet they constrayned King Fernand to raise his seege and returne to
Cordoua.
The souldiers which lay in Alhama hauing notice of what had happened, and of the
Kings retreate from before Loxa, fearing that the Moores would returne to beseege
them, cryed out to haue the towne razed and ouerthrowne, and to returne home to their
houses: but Don Lewis Fernandes Porto Carrero, and Pero Ruis of Alarcon, with others,
did oppose themselues against it, and hindred it. The king of Granado came thither the
third time, and did greatly annoy them: but they valiantly defended themselues vntill K.
Fernand came with succour to deliuer them from the seege, who changed both the garrison
and the Gouernour, and left other souldiers there, vnder the commaund of Dou
Lewis Osorio Arch-deacon of Astorga, and brother to the Marquis of the same place.
That beeing done, the Christian armie did forrage, burn and spoyle the countrie of Granado,
from whence they carried away much spoile, and many prisoners to Cordoua.

Mahomet Boabdellin called the Little, and the
twentith king of Granado.
THe Christian souldiers found smal resistance in this latter roade,Seditions betwixt the father and sonne. in regard the Mores
were greatly diuided among themselues, by meanes whereof King Muley Alboacen
was dispossessed and driuen away; for hee was much feared and hated, because
of his tyrannies which extended chiefly to the Nobilitie, and he had namely euill intreated
the family of Abencaraxes, one of the most illustrious houses among the Granadins.
These men with their complices and allyes constrayned Muley Alboacen to giue place,
and they deliuered the cittie with the Alhambra or fort thereof, to his sonne Mahomet Boabdellin
surnamed the Little, who was fled to Guadix for feare of beeing slaine by his father,
who was carried away with vnreasonable amorous passions, and false suggestions
of a second wife, a renied Christian, whom hee had married for her rare and excellent
beautie, in regard whereof she was called Zoraya, which signifieth Morning-starre. This

woman beeing desirous to aduance her children which shee had by the King, did indeauour
by all meanes to roote out those which hee had begotten on the Queene Aixa his
wife, a Ladie of a great and illustrious house, and his neere kinswoman, who because she
would not see her eldest sonne murthered, which was this Boabdellin, she caused him on
a night to be let downe out of the window of the castle with the helpe of her woman by a
rope made of their vailes, and night tyres, and thereby gaue him meanes to saue himselfe
in the cittie of Guadix, where the Abenceraxes his kinsmen, who were of great power
there, did kindly receiue him, and dealt in such sort with their friends of the citty of
Granado, as they acknowledged him for their king. The father hauing retired himselfe
somewhere else, made fierce and sharpe warre vpon his sonne, which caused the losse of
their Crowne, and totall ruine to the raigne of the Moores in Spaine.
Albeit that those barbarous people were at such dissention among themselues,The Moores take Cagnette. yet
when there was any cause they wold agree together to annoy the Christians, so as they
tooke the towne of Cagnette, spoyled it, and carried away all the inhabitants and souldiers
for slaues, and afterwards razed it downe to the ground. These things were done
in the yeare 1482. wherein is to be noted, that foure seuerall Christian armies entred in
a few moneths space into the kingdome of Granado.An. 1482. King Fernand and Queene Izabella
appointed Captaines for the frontiers, namely, for Iaen Don Pedro Manrique Earle
of Treuigno, who was newly made Duke of Nagera: the Master of Saint Iames for Eccia,
and Don Iohn de Silua Earle of Cifuentes for Siuill, the assistant Diego Merlo beeing
lately dead.^onna Mary borne. Towards the end of the yeare, the Queene in the cittie of Cordoua was deliuered
of a daughter, called the Infanta Maria, who was afterward Queene of Portugall,
and after she was churched, the Court remooued to Madrid.
The beginning of the yeare 1483. was sorrowfull to the Nauarrois,Nauarre. by reason of the
death of their king Francis Phoebus, whome the Princesse his mother had carried backe
into France, to auoyde the importunate solliciting of marriages which they would haue
procured in Spaine both for him and his sister Donna Catherina, wherewith King Lewis
the eleuenth was not contented: hee dyed not without suspition of poyson: for without
any apparance at all of sicknesse,Francis Phoebus poysoned. he felt himselfe to be stricken with a deadly pricking, as
he was playing vppon a flute, which was presented vnto him, in which, and all other instruments
of musicke, he did greatly delight. Beeing neere to his end hee repeated these
words taken out of the Gospell: My kingdome is not of this world, therefore I leaue the
world: trouble not your selues, for I go to the Father. He dyed in Bearne, in the castle of Pa^
the fourth yeare of his raigne, if we reckon from his grand-mothers death, Queene Leonora,
being but fifteene yeares of age fully compleat: hee lyes buried at Lescar in the
Cathedrall Church of S. Mary.
King Fernand and Queene Izabella receiued newes of his death at Madrid,Castile. where they
had called a Parlament, and because the Crowne of Nauarre descended to the Infanta
Donna Catherine sister to the deceased king, they sent the Licenciate Rodrigo Maldonado
of Talauera, one of their Councell Ambassador into Bearne, to the Princesse Magdalen
her mother, to demaund the Infanta in marriage, for the Prince Don Iohn their sonne.
The mother Princesse notwithstanding that shee would willingly haue condescended
thereunto, made answer that shee could not bestow her without the consent of his brother
the French king. Vppon this answer, the Catholike kings sent Iohn de Ribera with
troupes of men at armes towards the frontiers of Nauarre, to haue intelligence with the
Earle of Lerin, who had married King Fernandes bastard sister, to the end to hinder the
French-men from enterprising any thing, and from entring into that kingdome. The Estates
assembled at Madrid granted a subsidie to the King, towards the warre of Granado:
and besides that, the Pope permitted them to leauie one hundred thousand Crownes vpon
the Clergie of Spayne, and sent them a Croizado, to gather contributions and gifts
for the same purpose: and in this Parlament, the power, authoritie and iurisdiction of
the Hermandades and vnions of the Communalties was ordered and reformed. Afterwards
the Kings diuided the affaires betwixt them, that they might the better prouide
for all matters: shee remayned in Castile, and he prepared himselfe to returne into Andalusia,
but the troubles which were raised in Gallicia, by the meanes of D. Pero Aluares

Osorio, Earle of Lemos did call him into those parts. The Earle dyed there before the
Kings arriuall,Sedition in Gallicia. and by that meanes saued the King a labour, who otherwise would haue
had him arraigned by order of lawe. Another contention arose betwixt a bastard sonne
of the late Earles called Rodrigo Osorio, whome his father had appointed heire in the
Earledome of Lemos, to the preiudice of his lawfull daughter, who was married to the
Earle of Benauents sonne: she sayd, that in regard Rodrigo was a bastard, he was incapable
to inherite: he on the contrarie alleaged his legitimation by the Pope: the king imposed
silence and peace to both parties, and referred the cause to his Councell to bee ordered
according to iustice: and in the meane time did commit the towne of Ponferrada, and
the Lordship thereof, beeing a parcell of the litigious inheritance, to the keeping of his
Vncle Don Henry Henriques great Master, excepting one strong hold of the same Lordshippe,
which he gaue in keeping to Don George d'Abendagno his countri-man, and a
Knight of the Kings house. These matters thus ordered, the king returned to Madrid,
from whence he dispatched Ambassadours to procure the peace of Italy, which flamed
with intestine warres, the Pope and the Venetians hauing ioyned, to the preiudice of
King Fernand of Naples and the Florentines, drawing all the Potentates of Italy to their
Factions:VVars of Italy appeased. who by the diligence and good meanes of Don Iohn Bishoppe of Girone,
chiefe of that Ambassage, and by the fauour and authoritie of the Kings of Castile were
reconciled: albeit the Venetians did alwaies nourish a secret hatred and contempt of
King Fernand and Queene Izabella, and did not greatly care to obserue the peace.
In this meane space the Captaines, which lay vppon the frontiers of Granado, made
inroades and incredible spoyles vppon the Moores, especially those of the Garrison of
Alhama, from whence a craftie and cunning Squire, whose name was Iohn de Corrall, of
Diego Lopes d'A^ala his companie, came foorth by meanes of a safe-conduct, to conferre
with the King of Granado, giuing him to vnderstand, how that hee of himselfe
could vse meanes to cause Alhama to bee restored vnto him, wherewith the Moore king
was so pleased, as he offered readily on his part to yeeld vp Zahara, and to set all the
Christian prisoners at libertie, giuing a great quantitie of gold, and besides that, to pay
tribute, and for euer to become vassall to the kings of Castile. Iohn de Corrall with these
promises, came to the Kings, and declared to them in part what he had treated with the
King of Granado, his chiefe drift beeing onely to get gif^s and rewards, whereuppon
the Kings giuing credite vnto him, gaue him limited authoritie to contract with the
Moore.
Beeing returned to Granado, the Moore King, who thought that the principall Article
of his Commission, was for the restitution of Alhama, had not the patience to consider
and looke vppon Iohn de Corral his authoritie, but beganne readily on his part to
performe what hee had promised, causing diuers Christian prisoners to be set at liberty.
Then Iohn de Corall contenting himselfe with that which was done, came to Iaen and told
the Duke of Nagera how he had deceiued the king of Granado, who presently sent to
the Duke to complaine of this deceipt. The Duke sent Iohn de Corrall to the Court, aduertising
the Kings what he had done, whereat they were highly discontented, and they
did commaund that the prisoners ransomes should bee payed,Integrity of ^ Fernand, and Q. Izabel. and that Iohn de Corrall
should pay backe the money, iewels, and other presents that hee had receiued of the
King of Granado, and that hee should bee kept prisoner in Antequera, vntill hee had
made full restitution, and that the warre should stand vppon the selfe-same tearmes as
before.
Notwithstanding that the Kings had begunne the warre of Granado, and did greatly
suspect the French on the side of Nauarre, yet for that they did not giue ouer to vndertake
matters of great importance, either of them beeing of an haughtie and magnanimous
courage.
Of the seauen Ilands called the Canaries, which are girdled with the Atlantick Ocean,
foure of them were alreadie conquered by the valor and industrie of certaine inhabitants
of Seuill,Canaries made subiects to the Kings of Castil. euer since the raigne of King Iohn the second, and there remayned yet the great
Canarie, Thenerif, and the Ile of Palmes to be brought vnder the subiection of the kings
of Castile: therefore this yeare 1483. they sent thither Alphonso of Muxica, and Pedro de

Vera, valiant Captaines, and no lesse skilfull in sea-fights than at land, who landed in the
great Canaries, where they found two kings striuing for the principalitie thereof: they
fauoured one of them, and dealt in such sort, as hauing rooted out the other, they obtained
the gouernement of the Island: the Cittie was erected into a Bishops Sea, and
translated from the Isle of Lancarot.
In Andalusia the Master of Saint Iames, the Marquis of Cales, the Earle of Cifuentes,
Gouernour of Siuill, Don Alphonso d'Aguilar, Don Pedro Henriques, Captaine of
the frontiers, and others, came to Antequera with an intent to spoile the countrey of
las Lomas de Malaga,The Christians defeated. called Axarquia, a territorie abounding in cattell: of the which
enterprise the Moores had notice, who made themselues readie to charge them on the
sudden, when they should least looke for it, hauing driuen their cattell into streights and
strong places. The Christians beeing entred into the countrey beganne to spoyle, and
they soone found sharpe resistance: wherefore in regard of the streightnesse of the countrey,
and because they found not such booties as they expected, they thought to turne
backe: but beeing ignorant of the wayes, and ouertaken by the night, they fell into
streight and narrow places betwixt certaine hilles, which were filled with enemies, at the
last they came into a valley, where with great labour and disaduantage, they were enforced
to fight all that night with the Moores, the which did greatly amaze the whole army.
The Master of Saint Iames beeing valiant and couragious, in striuing to ascend an hill,
lost his Ensigne-bearer, and a kinsman of his owne called Iohn d'Osorno, Iohn Bacan, and
other Commaunders, who sold their liues at a deare rate: the Marquis of Cales did in
like manner follow the Master of Saint Iames, but the victorious Moores ouerthrew his
troupes likewise, and slue Don Diego, Don Lope, and Don Bertrand his brethren, and
Don Lorenzo, and Don Manuel his nephewes euen in his sight: yet notwithstanding,
himselfe, the Master of Saint Iames, and Don Pedro Henriques did escape with great danger.
The Earle of Cifuentes making meanes to escape among the rest, was taken prisoner,
with Don Bernardin Manrique, the Captaines of Antequera, and Moron, and diuers
others: great was the slaughter of the souldiers at this defeate, the which was notable
and of great consequence.
The Moores carried away the Earle, and the rest of the prisoners to Granado: but they
did not long reioyce in the good hap of their victorie; for the Christians soone after
tooke a sharpe veng^ance on them: for King Mahomet Boabdellin, surnamed the Little,
hauing with great troupes of horse and foote ouer-runne and spoyled the territorie of
Lucena and Aguilar, at his returne backe beeing pestred with great heards of cattaile and
other booties, Don Diego of Cordoua Earle of Cabra, who lay in garrison at Beana to
resist such enterprises, and Don Diego Fernandes of Cordoua, on the one side, did pursue
him to cause him to leaue his bootie behind him, and Don Alphonso of Aguilar on the
other side with his troupes placed themselues in ambush in a narrow streight, thorough
which they were to passe at their returne with intent to charge them on a sudden. Now
the King who had tenne Moores for one Christian of the Earle of Cabra's band which
followed him, made no difficultie to stay for them, yet they charged one another with
great furie,The Moores defeated, and their King taken prisoner. where the Moores notwithstanding their multitudes prooued the weaker:
and thinking to make a safe retreate, they fell into Don Alphonso d'Aguilars ambush, who
slue a thousand of them vpon the same place: the rest, leauing their prey behind them,
fled away as fast as they could, forsaking their king, who was there taken prisoner. There
were taken at this encounter nine hundred mules, fiue hundred horse, and nine Moorish
Standards, besides other spoiles, which were distributed among the souldiers, and the
Kings person fell to the Earle of Cabraes share: in token of which victorie the Earles of
Cabra,The Earle of Cabraes armes. by the aduice and grant of the Kings of Castile, do beare for their armes a Mores
head in prison, tyed with a chaine of gold, with a bend ouerthwart their shield, wherein
nine standards are painted. By this ouerthrow king Mahumet the Little lost much of his
reputation, and many strong Castles reuolted from him to his father Muley Albohacen:
during his imprisonment he was honorably vsed and like a king.
King Fernand beeing ioyfull for this victorie did thinke it fit to follow the occasion,
and with a great armie to assayle the Moores, who were astonished with their losse:

wherefore he tooke order that the Affrican Moores should not come by sea into Spaine
to their ayde: and then hee entred into the Countrey of Granado with an army of tenne
thousand horse, and thirtie thousand foote: among whome there were great numbers of
Switzers,Switzers in the wars of Granado. with a great trayne of Officers, victuallers, Merchants, and other people who
serued and followed the campe: before which the Earle of Cabra and Don Alphonso of
Aguilar did march with troupes of auantcourrers, who burned the country round about
Illora and Montefrio: the armie passed by Illora which was not easie to be taken without
great Artillerie: but they tooke the towne and castle of Tagara, which lies betwixt Alhama
and Loxa; the King would not take those of the Castle to his mercie, because they
did not yeeld at the first assault, which together with the town was razed to the ground.
Diuers valiant men of the Christian campe were hurt at the taking thereof, as namely,
Don Henry Henriques the Kings Vncle, and Lord great Master of his house. Being come
to Alhama, the King caused it to be well fortified, and left Don Inigo Lopes de Mendoza,
Earle of Tendilla Gouernour there, who was a very vertuous Knight: then he led his armie
farther into the countrie of Granado, ouerthrowing and destroying all that stood
before him, but for want of victuals, he returned to Cordoua. The Moores beeing thus
persecuted and afflicted, did beginne to intreate for peace, and offered to pay the King
tribute, and some Moore children of Noble houses for hostages: Wherewith King Fernand
acquainted the Queene his wife, who then lay at Victoria to looke to the affaires of
Nauarre, which shee feared would shortly stirre, who was of opinion to haue the hostages
to be townes and castles, and not children, whereunto the Moores not consenting,
the warre stood at that same stay as it was before. Thereuppon the Moore Queene, mother
to the King, made meanes for her sonnes deliuerie, and sent to offer King Fernand
perpetuall homage, twelue thousand Duckets for yearely tribute, and a great summe of
readie money for his ransome, and besides, to set three hundred Christian prisoners at
libertie, such as he would please to name, and shee offered sufficient hostages for the performance
of what shee promised.
The King commaunded the Earle of Cabra to deliuer the prisoner vnto him; the which
he did, and deliuered him to Martin Alarcon, Captaine of Porcuna, whether King Fernand
sent to visite and comfort him, for the which, Mahumet gaue him infinite thankes,
saying, that he could not be in care, so long as he was in the hands of so great and courteous
a King, whome he had euer desired to serue beeing at his full libertie, and to receiue
the Crowne of Granado at his hand, in the same manner as king Ismael his Grandfather
had done from King Iohn. And because the King had occasion to go into Castile, and
also to Arragon,King Mahomet deliuered. he did determine to deliuer the Moore King: the opinions concerning
his deliuerie were diuers, some agreeing thereunto, and others, not, wherein the master
of Saint Iames, and the Marquis of Cales were contrarie one to the other: Wherefore
they sent to haue the Queenes opinion in the matter, who therein agreed with the Marquis,
that he should bee deliuered: the prisoner was brought to Cordoua, where he wold
haue kissed king Fernands hand, but he would not permit it, the better thereby to oblige
him to himselfe: hee did there sweare to accomplish whatsoeuer was agreed vppon, and
he was set at libertie hauing beene honoured with rich presents. King Fernand after that
went to Victoria, from thence he passed into Arragon, and going by Guadalupa, being a
deuout Prince, he there performed a vow.
The Frontier was well furnished and prouided of all things necessarie against the assaults
of the Moores: yet notwithstanding, they hauing notice of the Kings departure out
of Andalusia, did make diuers roades into the countrey, beeing extreamely mooued against
King Mahumet, in regard he had beene so well intreated by the Catholicke King,
and was become his vassall, and of whom, besides other benefites, he had promise of aide
and assistance against Muley Albohacen his father, and they sayd, that it was a matter displeasing
to God, and against all right for the Mahometan Kings to beg any assistance of
Christians against the Princes of their owne religion: wherefore diuers forsaking him,
they tooke part with Muley Albohacen, and brought him with fiue hundred Knights into
the Castle of Alhapubre, where he slue all such as were of his sonnes faction, who retired
himselfe to Almeria.

Now the army of the Moores beeing strong and resolute to do their worst, entred into
the marches of Andalusia, the Garrisons and chiefe Commanders of the warre being
in the citties, were foorth-with aduertised thereof by the souldiers called Almogaraues,
or ordinarie watches of the frontiers: therefore Don Lewis Fernandes Porto Carrero, Lord
of Palmes, who was afterward made Earle thereof, with the forces of the Master of Saint
Iames, of the Marquis of Cales, those of Eccia, Xeres, Arcos, and others which were
gathered together, did march against the enemies, whome hee found disbanded, spoyling
and destroying the territorie of Vtrera:The Moores defeated at Vtrera. whome he charged with such resolution and
courage, as in an instant they were all defeated and put to flight, with losse of diuers of
their captaines, great numbers of souldiers, fifteene ensignes, and all their spoyle: of
which victorie the Queene beeing aduertised, shee caused generall processions to bee
made in the cittie of Victoria: and because this encounter happened vppon the sixth day
of lanuarie beeing Twelfth day, shee sent a gowne of cloath of gold to the Lord of Palmas
wife, to the end shee should weare it euery yeare vppon that sollemne festiuall
day.
The Christians in Andalus^a hauing this good hap,Zahara surprized by the Christians. the Marquis of Cales was aduertised,
that Zahara was ill furnished of souldiers and victuals, wherefore hauing communicated
his desseigne with the Lord of Palmas, they went foorth on a night beeing accompanied
by the troupes of Xeres, and hidde themselues in couert places neere the
towne, whither they sent tenne men, who in great silence lodged themselues at the foote
of the wall, towards the Castle: these were seconded by three-score and tenne other souldiers.
At the breake of day, the Marquis sent certaine light horse to runne about ^he
towne, against whome three-score and ten Moorish horse-men came foorth, (and with
them also, the Sentinels and Guard leauing their places) to skirmish, then the ten men
did set vp ladders against the Castle, and beganne to make a shew, as if they would haue
skaled the walles, to the defence whereof as many as stayed within came running: in the
meane space the three-score and tenne souldiers which were hidden, did seize vpon one
of the gates: besides that, those which were come forth against the Christian light-horsmen,
perceiuing themselues to be charged by others, who came to their ayde, turned
their backes and fled towards the towne, and were so narrowly pursued, as they all entred
pel mel together: and beeing in this sort surprized on euery side, they lost the town.
The castle would haue made resistance if it had beene well victualled, but for want thereof
they yeelded, compounding for their liues.
The Earle of Tendilla who kept Alhama, would not suffer the Moores his neighbors
to rest, but he oftentimes annoyed them, so as he was feared like lightning ouer all the
Countrey. The winter this yeare was very rainie, by meanes whereof a great part of the
wall of Alhama fell to the ground, making a large breach for the enemies, if they had
then assayled it: where at the soldiers which were within were greatly amazed and thought
vppon nothing but ^light, but the courage and valour of the Captaine, which is euer of
much woorth, contayned them in their duties, who delt in such sort by hanging of painted
cloathes against the breach with such art and cunning, as the enemies neuer knew,
that the wall was fallen downe, till it was made vp againe stronger then before. The Earle
Don Inigo, true sonne to the Marquis of Santillana, caused the tower of Alcala la reale
to bee repayred, on the toppe whereof euery night a burning lampe was set, which serued
to direct the poore slaues that fled from Granado. His souldiers beeing disobedient
for want of pay, (money beeing very dangerous to bee sent vnto them without the conuoy
of an armie) the Earle inuented a certaine kind of counterfeit money,Counterfeit money* and of diuers
stampes, the which hee named and prized according to the coynes of gold and siluer
which were currant in Spayne, and with the same hee payed his souldiers, promising
them to change all that false money into good, according to the value of euery coyne,
and by this meanes hee did appease them.
 Whilest these matters fell out in Andalusia, King Fernand and Queene Izabella
were in great doubt to bee disturbed on that side of Nauarre by the French:Nauarre. it may bee
that this suspition came from their owne consciences touched with their sinister

proceedings with the Earle of Lerin, and with the treaties of marriage of these poore
Princes of Nauarre, and matters happened vppon those occasions. Now Queene Catherine,
who was newly come to the Crowne of Nauarre, besides her beeing wholly at the
deuotion of France, and vppon the poynt of her marriage with Iohn d'Albret, sonne to
the Earle Alaine* King Lewis his death happened a little before, which had openly
troubled and hindred the allyance betwixt these two great kingdomes of France and
Spayne: for Ambassadours beeing sent from one to another, as well for to make the accustomed
condolements, and consolations ordinarie at such accidents, as for to treate
of the allyances, and moreouer, about the restitution of the Earldome of Rossillon which
the French held, the Ambassadours of Spayne receyued no pleasing answer from the
young King Charles the eighth, who succeeded King Lewis his father, nor from his tutors
and councellors, so as they made the protestations and declarations which Princes
vsually do make, when they are vppon the point of making warre one against another:
therefore Queene Izabella had furnished the frontier of Castile ioyning to Nauarre with
strong garrisons, and sent forces to Tudela a towne in Nauarre which held their partie,
vnder the conduct of Iohn de Ribera.
After the death of King Francis Phoebus, his mother the Princesse fearing, and not with
out cause, the reuolt of that nation, which was an enemie to rest and quiet, had sent thither
the Cardinall of Foix, and the Lord of Abenas, brother to the Lord of Albret, who
did call a Parlament, to receyue a new oath of fidelitie for Queene Catherine, and commaunded
them moreouer to receiue the sayd Lord of Abenas for Viceroy, notwithstanding
that the Constable Earle Lewis of Beaumont did resolutely oppose himselfe against
it, hauing secret intelligence with his brother-in-law King Fernand for the same purpose.
The Lord of Abenas was a graue,Don Lewis of Beaumont wholy affectionate to the Kings of Castile. wise, and modest Knight, who by these qualities and
vertues had well gouerned the Realme of Nauarre, and maintained it in peace and quiet,
vntill such time as Queene Katherine, hauing married his Nephew Iohn d'Albret, came
her selfe in person to rule and gouerne the same. The Constable in the meane time, who
held the Cittie of Pampelona vnder his power, and many other places besides, did rayse
troubles, and brought the Castillan men at armes into the Kingdome, vnder colour of
the Factions of Beaumont and Grammont, during all these actions they still poursued
the marriage, so that after King Lewis his death the Princesse Magdalen beeing continually
sollicited to marrie her daughter Queene Katherine to Prince Iohn of Castile, shee
was aduised to make a finall answer, and to say, that the inequalitie of their yeares would
not permit it to be done, in regard her daughter was marriageable, and the Prince a little
child in his cradle: and that in the meane time, before hee should come to age, there
might bee great troubles and combustions in the Realme of Nauarre, which stoode in
need of men to gouerne it, and to suppresse the vsuall contentions and quarrels which
those people did naturally entertaine: and that without this let, her selfe, and her daughter
would thinke themselues happie in so great an allyance; for they esteemed no match
in the world like to that of Prince Iohn, who was presumptiue heire to so many rich and
mightie Kingdomes. All this notwithstanding, Queene Isabella perswading her selfe to
effect this marriage in despite of all these hinderances, tarried still at Victoria, the most
part of this yeare 1484. at which time (as hath beene sayd) shee sent Don Iohn de Ribera
with forces into Nauarre, who hauing intelligence with the Earle of Lerin, tooke Viana,
the Castle of Saint Gregorie, that of Irureta and others: which disorders the Viceroy
sought to redresse with great prouidence, and kept the people in their obedience to the
Queene their naturall Princesse. About this time Pope Sixtus the fourth dyed, in whose
place succeeded Iohn Baptista Cibo, Cardinall of the title of Saint Laurence in Lucina, and
Bishop of Malfetta, who was called Innocent the eighth. The yeare before King Lewis
the eleuenth dyed, who (as it is reported) had ordayned by his last will, that the Earledome
of Rossillon should bee restored to King Fernand the lawfull Prince thereof: but
his sonnes Councellours thought it not conuenient. This King beeing very deuoute
and greatly honouring Saint Iames, had giuen tenne thousand Crownes, and sent great
store of mettall and worke-men to make the greatest bell there in all Christendome.

Now for the causes heretofore declared,Castile. the Kings of Castile did enterprise against
Nauarre and France, notwithstanding the warre of Granado, the which they would in
no sort giue ouer, but did earnestly sollicite it, and prouided sufficiently for it.
King Fernand beeing yet in his Kingdome of Arragon,Moores. there were assembled in the
cittie of Cordoua, and afterwards in Antequera, the number of sixe thousand horse,
and twelue thousand foot-men, which ouer-ranne and spoiled the Countries of Alora,
Coin, Cacaranouella and Carthama,, where diuers notable skirmishes were made: the
Master of Saint Iames, the Marquis of Cales, and Don Alphonso d'Aguilar were Captaines
of them. This armie was refreshed with victualls from Siuill and Xeres, and then
returned to Antequera laden with spoyles. The Queene in the meane time visited the
Prouinces of Guipuscoa and Biscay, and at her returne to Victoria, the King arriued
there out of Arragon, where he found much to do, for the Arragonois were not so easily
gouerned,Estates of Arragon. nor so ready to please their Kings appetites, as the Castillians, both of them
left Victoria, and came to Tarassone, where the Estates of Arragon were appoynted to
meet; whose Deputies, did set downe such difficulties and delayes, as they would by no
meanes contribute money towards the warres of Granado, nor against France for the
Earledome of Rossillon, so as they were at the point to dissolue the assembly: for the
time of making warre beeing come, it behooued them either to assayle or defend on the
frontiers of Granado.
The Kings Councell made long disputations vppon the difficultie of making this
double warre: for King Fernand was desirous to assayle the French for the recouerie of
the Earledome of Rossillon, and the Queenes mind was to poursue the Moores, euen to
the totall ruine of their State, and expulsion out of Spaine. The most part of the voyces
fauoured the Queenes desire, and shee, to please her husband, was of opinion, that hee
with the forces of Arragon, Valencia, Cattalonia, and some part of Castile should war
vppon the French, and her selfe with the rest of the armie would poursue the Moores.
Hereuppon they seuered themselues, the Queene went towards Toledo, and the King
stayed to make an end of the assembly. The Cardinall of Spaine did accompanie the
Queene,The Cardinall entreth Toledo as Archb. The king giues him place that day. and hauing not yet made his entrie into the cittie of Toledo, since hee was
Arch-bishop thereof, he entred the same in great pompe, in which sollemnitie vpon that
day by an auncient custome the Arch bishop of Toledo was preferred in all honors and
ceremonies, aboue the Soueraigne Magistrate: neuerthelesse the Cardinall gaue place
to the Queene, albeit shee would haue had the old custome obserued. From thence they
went to Andalusia, where they ordered and reformed certaine customes which the people
of Iaen, Baeca, Vbeda, Caslona, Andujar, and others had concerning feasts and plaies
nothing profitable to the common-wealth. When they came to Cordoua the great
Lords did there meete to conferre about the warres: there came also diuers French and
Almaine Gunners; for Cannons and Bombards were not as yet much vsed in Spaine.
There was likewise a great army by sea set foorth, Don Aluaro of Mendoza, Earle of Castro
beeing Generall. The Queene would haue made the Cardinall Generall ouer all her
land and sea forces: but the kings vnlookt-for returne, who could do no good with the
States of Arragon, gaue end to his commission. They were determined to beseege Loxa:
but for the easier execution thereof, they first of all did assayle Alora, the which they took
hauing beaten downe two towers with the Cannon: The Moores fledd into the Castle,
and did afterwards by composition saue their liues and goods.
The King and Queenes custome was,Ceremonies vsed after the taking of any towne from the Moores. so soone as they had taken any towne from the
Moores, to send three ensignes thither which were consecrated or blessed, (as they tearm
it) the which were to be set vp on the highest tower or place of the same towne: the first,
was of the Crucifixe for a signe and token of the redemption of mankind, the which was
carried to the highest toppe of the towne or fort, and there by an ensigne-bearer displayd
and flourished in the ayre: the whole army kneeling downe, and giuing thankes to God
in diuers prayers: but this prayer was chiefly rehearsed with a loud voyce, as followeth:
Deus qui per crucem tuam, populo in te credenti triumphum contra inimicos tuos concedere
voluisti, quaesumus, vt in tua pietate adorantibus crucem, victoriam semper tribuas and
honorem. Others did say: Exaudi nos Domine salutaris noster, et per Triumphum sancta^

Crucis a cunctis nos defende periculis. The Clergy and Ministers of the Church did
afterwards sing, Te Deum laudamus.
The second standerd was that of the Apostle Saint Iames the Sonne of Zebede, whom
the Spaniards acknowledge for Patron, and protector of their Country and state, and
for guide and defender of their Kings of Castile and Leon: at the sight wherof the army
and the people cried out with great ioy, Santiago, Santiago. Saint Iames, Saint Iames,
And the third was the King and Queenes royall Banner, wherein were pictured the
armes of all their realmes, and dominions; and when that was lifted vp and displaied,
they all cried aloude Castile, Castile, for King Fernand, and Queene Isabell. After all
this, the prelats, and Clergy did expiate, and purge the mesquites, or Churches, which
had serued for the reprobate vse of the Mahometan religion, blessing and dedicating
them to some Saint or other; and if in the towne or Citty taken, any Christian Captiues
were found, as vsually there were some, they after the Priests had sung Te Deum laudamus,
were made to answere, Benedictus dominus Israell, quia visitauit et fecit redemptionem
plebis suae. These were the ceremonies; vsed by King Fernand, and Queene Isabell,
at the taking of any towne from the Moores.
Alora beeing taken and fortified, Don Lewis Fernandes Lord of Palma had the keeping
thereof, then the royall army passed on to the valley of Carthama, the Marquis of
Cales led the vantgard with two thousand horse and as many chosen foote-men.King Fernand promiseth the Moores, liberty of their conscience. Those
of Alozagra yeelded vpon condition, they might bee mayntayned in their consciences,
and religon, the which the King graunted; then they beseeged the towne of Cacaranouelle
where the Moores made incredible resistance, killing in diuers skirmishes greate
numbers of Christians, as namely Don Guttires de Sottomajor Earle of Benalcacar,
a young Noble-man, of foure and twenty yeares of age, hardy and valiant, who was
shot throw the body, with a poysoned arrow, for whose death the king and the whole
army were very sorry, because these braueries of the Moores, did make them become
obstinate, and encouraged others, which would haue yeelded, to make resistance. The
Army,A couragious woman and constant in her enterprises. with this losse, and without performing any other exploit, then burning the country,
did returne backe to Antiqera, where the King receaued letters from the Queene his
wife, which caused the whole army to blush for shame; for shee let them vnderstand
how that so goodly an army, ought not to liue vnprofitably, nor returne without doing
some notable exployt: wherefore, being incourraged by a woman, they retired againe
into the enemies country, and spoyled it euen to the mountaine called, Sierra Neuada*
the King beeing lodged with a great body of an army, within halfe a mile of the Citty of
Granada, to oppose him-selfe against the sallies, which they of the towne might make
vpon those that did forrage, the Duke of medina, and the Earle of Cabra, being in an other
place, where as much as in them lay, they spoyled the country, and made it vnfit to
beare frute, the sooner therby to starue them. The Queene had laden 5000. beasts of carriage
with victualls which by the helpe of this army, entred into Alhama where the King
left Don Guttiere de Padilla gouernour, who was nephew to Don Garcia Lopes de Padilla,
Maister of Calatraua, in regard the Maister had promised to defend that place,
with the forces of his iurisdiction. After-wards the army returned to Cordoua, where
the Queene being demaunded if shee were pleased with what they had donne, shee answered,
that it was not fit they should spend the rest of the yeare in idlenesse: where-vpon
the King returned, and marched against Septenil, which for three daies space was
batered, and afterwards the Moores yeelded it vpon composition, that they might
depart with their liues, goods and liberty; the place was committed to the keeping of D.
Francisco Henriques: from thence the army went to ruine the country of Ronde, and
because winter did draw neere, it did attempt nothing else, and was brought backe to
Siuill, whether the Queene came. The garrisons of Alhama, Alora, and Septenill, were 
commanded by the King and Queene to aide King Mahomet the little with all their
power against Muley Albohacen his father.Portugal. King Iohn a gre^te iusticer, namely against the nobillity, with other of his qualities.
Wee will here for a while lay by the affaires of Castile and Arragon, and speake of Portugall,
and of the raigne of Iohn the 2. who succeeded Alphonso 1481. beeing sixe and
twenty yeares of age. This Prince was a great Iusticer, and it may be, ouer rigorous

in the execution thereof, especially against the Nobilitie and great Lords of his kingdome,
whome he did punish, and reclaymed from many oppressions which his father had
tolerated: this caused him to be hated, and gaue cause vnto some who were very neere
vnto him in bloud, to practise against his life and state.
He was of a quicke and sharpe iudgement, and of an excellent memorie, he could discourse
eloquently of all matters, and would haue those that did talke with him, to consider
how and what to speake, and he would ordinarily say, that it was impossible but that
Kings should be wise men, because euery one that spake to them, whether they were foolish
or wise, did striue to speake well and wisely. He shewed great wisedome in all his actions,
not suffering himselfe to be carried away by Court-flatterers, and if hee did fauour
any one,Medioc^itie is to be obserued in the aduancement of Princes
seruants. hee would aduance him but to a certaine meane and no further, giuing authoritie
to no man more than was needfull: hee was a louer of good councell, very true,
firme, and constant in whatsoeuer he graunted or denyed, liberall aswell to strangers as
to his owne seruants: he was religious according to those times, and charitable towards
the poore, for whose ease and comfort, hee builded the royall Hospitall of Lisborne, in
the honour of all Saints: he shewed himselfe very obedient towards his father, and had
the good hap,Discouery of Manicongo. to haue the kingdome of Manicongo discouered in his raigne, at which
time with great care and diligence, the nauigation for spices did beginne, for which
things, hee was surnamed the Great. When hee beganne to raigne, hee was already father
to the Infant Don Alphonso begotten on Queene Elenor, daughter to Don Fernand
Duke of Viseo his Vncle, and to the Infanta Donna Beatrix, shee who had procured the
peace betwixt Spaine and Portugall:Genealogie of Portugal. the Infant was seauen yeares old when his father
came to the Crowne, who the yeare 1481. had a sonne by a Mistris of his called Donna
Anne de Mendoza, whose name was George, Master of Saint Iames and Auis, Duke
of Coimbra, Lord of Auero and Montemajor the old, who was brought vp openly as
the Kings sonne, by his Aunt the Infanta Donna Ioane, a Nunne in the Monasterie of
Iesus d'Auero: hee was father to Don Iohn Duke of Auero, a worthie Prince in our
age.
This King Iohn of whome wee speake, was the first King of Portugall that entitled
himselfe Lord of Guiney, the nauigation into which countrey hee mayntained and continued,
and builded the Cittie and Castle of Saint George, the fort of Tanger and others.
Hee called a Parlament in the Cittie of Ebora, there to receiue the oath of fealtie and homage
due to the Kings his progenitors: at the same time it happened, that Don Fernand
Duke of Braganca, beeing at his house of Villa-viciosa, did search for certaine records
and titles of lands with other letters of priuiledge, to haue them renewed and confirmed
by the new king: his Secretarie whome hee employed in this businesse, found certaine
letters of intelligence and practise in a chest, betwixt the Duke his master, and the King
and Queene of Castile, contrarie to his allegeance to King Iohn: Wherefore this Secretarie,The Duke of Braganzaes practises discouered by his Secretarie.
whose name was Lope de Figueredo, beeing mooued either with zeale towards his
Prince, or with hope of some good reward, did embezil those writings, and gaue them
to the King, who hauing copied them, re-deliuered the originall to Figuereda, who layd
them among the rest of the papers which hee had found, his Lord not perceyuing it: the
Duke neuerthelesse was still fauoured and welcommed by the King, who in matters of
weight could very well dissemble, and was continually at Court accompanying and seruing
the King and Queene; vntill vppon a time the Court beeing at Almerin, where the
Queene was brought a bed before her time, and in great danger of her life: the Duke of
Braganca came to visit her, with Don Dominicke Duke of Viseo, one of his complices,
who was brother to the Queene; the King entertained them with a pleasant countenance,
and vppon a certaine day hee tooke the Duke of Braganca aside into his chappell, within
the with-drawing Curtaines, and did brotherly admonish him of his fault in these
tearmes:

Cousin,A gentle admonishment made by King Iohn to the Duke of Braganza. I haue vnderstood a matter, which I must acquaint you with in this holy place,
where I stand in the presence of God, before whom I will not dissemble: therefore beleeue
it, I speake nothing but truth: I heare that you haue secret intelligence and practise
with the Kings of Castile, against my State and seruice, greatly forgetting therein

the honour faith and loyaltie which you owe vnto mee: in regard whereof, considering
the reasons on both our sides, I for my part hauing giuen none occasion to your
selfe or any other, and seeing no cause why you should hope for more honour and fauour
of any other Prince then of me, I can not but be very much troubled, and I know
not whether I may firmely beleeue it or no: yet notwithstanding, howsoeuer it is, I
thought good to admonish you, that if vpon any false surmise, you haue entred into
this vnreasonable imagination, to giue it ouer: protesting to you that I meane to forget,
and graciously to pardon your offences, requesting you, seeing it hath pleased God
to make me heire to his crowne to stand stedfastly to me, and to acknowledge this fauors
towards you, and the place and rancke which you hold in this Kingdome, wherein by
your owne deserts, and those of your ancestors, you are the chiefe person next vnto my
selfe, the which should stirre you vp to maintaine and procure the safety and greatnesse
thereof, espetially considering, that God hath as it were parted the faculties and
riches of this royall patrimony betwixt vs two: and that of two sisters borne of the
noble race of the Infants Don Fernand and Don Beatrice, Dukes of Viseo, I haue married
the one and you the other. It may be that I am taxed with some fault, common to
Kings newly come to their crownes, as to proceed ouer rigorously against some persons,
and to shew small liberality and meekenesse in certaine matters, which could not
be otherwise managed: but if it were so that some bee offended with my new gouernment;
you before all men, ought to tollerate it, and to be a singular president of loyaltie
and obedience vnto others. If my Iudges and Commissioners sent into your iurisdiction
haue exceeded the bounds of modesty in their charge, you know very well that
they haue had great cause so to doe, and that they haue many reasons on their sides to
iustifie their proceedings, in respect of the present state; but if they were in fault, should
not you greatly binde me vnto you for bearing with those things? and for your owne
part you may be assured, that in regard of your place, wisedome and deserts, I can not
refuse you any thing that you should craue of mee. Now, you are bound, in regarde I
am planted in the royall seate of Portugall, to aide mee both with counsell and armes if
need were, and whensoeuer I shall craue it; therefore I intreate and commaund you
both in heart and will to dispose your selfe therevnto euer hereafter.

When the Duke heard these words, he would haue excused himselfe, and entreated
the King not to beleeue those reports, which (he said) were contrary to his meaning, and
that whilest hee had a heart, a hand and meanes, they should all bee imployed in his seruice.
And so the King left of, hoping that the Duke would amend, and that he should
no more neede to speake vnto him concerning it. But the Court being not longe after
remooued from Almerin to Saint Iren, Iasper and Peter de Iubartes brethren and seruants
to the Duke of Braganca, came to the King, and certified him that the Duke their
Maister did continue his practizes with Castile, and that Iasper had beene twice sent as
messenger to the Kings of Castile, and that the Marquis of Montemajor, and the Earle
of Faro the Dukes bretheren, were consenting to those practizes. The King did largely
recompence these two bretheren for their aduertisement, and did resolue to punish the
Duke of Bragancaes treachery, and hauing a fit occasion by his comming to the court,
which lay then at Ebora, whether hee accompanied the Prince Don Alphonso, hee
caused him to bee arrested of high treason and to bee committed to prison in May the
yeere 1483.
The Kings Aturney General pleaded against him, and he was found guilty of treason, and
was iudged and condemned by the Lords,The Duke of Bragansa beheaded a^ Ebora. to haue his head cut off, and al his goods to be
confiscate to the crowne: the which sentence was executed; and Fernand Duke of Braganca
was brought to the publike place of execution in the city of Ebora, where he was
beheaded and made a pittifull spectacle to all men. Six other gentlemen were likewise
beheaded with him, and diuers banished, in which number, was the Constable of Portugall.
The Dutchesse Isabella the Queenes sister, as soone as she heard of her husbands
imprisonment, sent her three children Don Philip, Don Iames, and Don Denis into Castile
who were kindely receiued and welcomed by Queene Isabella their Aunt: the
poore Lady their mother, hauing no other comfort in her widdow-hood but a little

daughter called Marguerite, whose company she enioyed not long, for within a while after
she died. D. Philip her eldest sonne died in Castile: the second Don Iames returned
into Portugall, and Don Denis this third sonne, did marry the Countesse of Lemos in
Castile.
The Marquis of Montemajor, and the Earle of Faro, the Dukes brethren, did likewise
flie into Castile, where they spent the remainder of their daies beeing honoured and
maintained by King Fernand and Queene Isabella. Now Don Dominico the Queenes
brother, was one of the conspiracy as hath beene already said; and the King the next
day after the Duke of Braganca his execution called him into his presence, and knowing
him to be young both in yeeres and discretion, he did admonish him as a father, to
behaue himselfe discreetly,The Kings fatherly adueruerticement to D. Dominico Duke of Viseo. and told him diuers things which concerned his honour
and wel-fare, and did freely pardon him all offences past: to which speech of the Kings,
Don Dominico could not answere one word but onely kissed the Kings hand in signe of
thankes. This young Prince had aspired to reigne, and being young and inconsiderate,
he did oftentimes permit his hand to bee kissed, and would receiue other honours belonging
to a soueraigne Prince, the which in the end bred his ruine.
After all these things the King being gon to visit the townes and fortresses vpon the
frontiers of Galicia and countries neere adioyning,D. Ramir Nugnes de Cuzman commeth into Portugal. Don Ramir Nugnes de Guzman arriued
in Portugall, of whose quarrell to the Admirall of Castile and his sonne we haue
amply spoken heretofore. This Lord came to the Court at Saint Iren, where hauing
a time appointed him to come into the Kings presence, as hee was going to masse in
Saint Iames his Church, he kneeled downe at the great doore with his traine and seruants;
the King presented him his hand to kisse with his gloue vpon it, but Don Ramir
thinking that the King did either contemne or scorne him, and being a knight of an
high and couragious spirit, he did plucke the Kings gloue off, and so, kist his bare hand,
then the King said, I could haue done that my selfe if it had pleased me; but Don Ramir
did not heare him in regard he was some-what deafe: for this cause he was called euer
after in Portugall El de la luba, which is as much to say, as He of the gloue. Yet neuerthelesse
the King vsed him very graciously; and did assure him that he was in a place
of safety, and therefore willed him to be merry and not to feare any daunger at all. Don
Ramir gaue him many humble thankes, and excused his boldnesse in plucking off his
gloue, beseeching him not to take it as done vnreuerently, in regard it was the custome
of Spaine to kisse the Kings bare hand. Not long after, done Ramir, had some iealousie
of the Marquis of Villareall a friend and kinsman to the Admirall of Castile, King
Iohn hauing notice thereof, called the Marquis before him, and told him that his pleasure
was, that Don Ramir should liue safe and secure in Portugall, free from feare either
of the King of Castile or any else, and therefore if any euill did happen to him, his life
should answere it: the Marquis answered, that for him Don Ramir should liue in all safety,
and that he neither had not would procure him any displeasure.
But the Duke of Bragancaes death did displease diuers great Lords of the Kingdome
of Portugall, in regard whereof, new conspiracies were made against the Kings
life. The chiefe of the conspirators were Don Garcia Meneses Bishop of Ebora,
and Don Fernand de Meneses his brother, Don Lope de Albuquerque Earle of Pegnamacor,
and Don Pedro de Albuquerque his brother, Don Aluaro de Atayde, and Don
Pedro d'Atayde the father and sonne, Don Guttiere Co^tino Commaunder of Cezimbra
sonne to the Marshall, and Fernand Selueyra, who againe did draw Don Domingo
the Duke of Viseo into their practises, determining to make him King, and they watched
for a fit time and occasion to kill King Iohn, who being at Setuball did discouer the treason,
by the relation of one called Diego Tinoco, who knew it by the meanes of a sister
of his who was concubine to the aboue named Bishop no lesse secret then chast and
faithfull, and this Tinoco came of purpose disguised in a Friers habit, to disclose it to the
King, who in recompence of his good seruice, gaue him fiue thousand Cruzados in ready
money and sixe hundred thousand Marauedis of yeerely rent, the which hee did not
long enioy, for soone after, he died. Within few daies after, the King receiued the same
aduertizement from Don Vasco Coutino, vnto whom Don Guttiere his brother, one of

the confederats had reuealed it, thinking that without any danger he might haue spoken
it to him by reason that he was in disgrace with the King, and ment to haue fled into
Castile: but he was therein deceiued; for Don Vasco by this meanes made his owne
peace, was created Earle of Barba with hereditary right, and beside the Castle of Estremos,
hee receiued many other aduancements. The same day that the confederats
should meete the Duke of Viseo at the Court, the King hauing visited a Church neere to
Setuball, he went a boord of a little fisher-boot to see them take fish, hauing with him
onely foure of his faithfull seruants, namely Fernand Martines Mazearenas captaine of
the genets or light-horse, Diego d'Almeida, Don Iohn de Meneses, and Don Ramir Nugnes
de Guzman: In the euening, as he was returning to Setuball, thirty of the confederates
stood vpon the banke of the riuer, with intent to haue executed their treason,
whereof the King being aduertized at his landing, by a Groome of his Chamber named
Anthony Faria, who told him in his eare that it behooued him at that time to dissemble,
and to shew his Kingly courage, expecting a fitter time and opportunity to punish them
according to their deserts: the King who could very well dissemble, being leapt on
horse-backe, called the Duke of Viseo to him with a smiling and pleasing countenance,
and gaue him and the rest of the conspirators, many gratious and louing words, so as
for that present they had not the hearts to proceed in their determinations: in the
meane time, the King who was weakely accompanied, went into a Church called Our
Lady the Old, wayting for his guardes arriuall, and beganne to talke with them leaning
his back against the wall, the better to keepe his enemies from comming behinde him, among
whom was D. Vasco Coutino, whom he called vnto him and made a shew to diuert
him from going into Spaine, the better thereby, vnder collour of this talke, to draw the
whole conspiracy from him. By these meanes it was Gods pleasure that the King
should escape that daies daunger, and returne in safety to his pallace. Certaine daies
after, the King being more suffitiently aduertized of these Lords conspiracy against his
person, sent to commaund the Duke of Viseo, who was then at Palmela with his mother
the Infanta Beatrice, to come to him to Setuball, who forthwith did so, not doubting
any thing, and he was no sooner arriued and come into King Iohns presence, but hee
was stabd to death with a poniard by the Kings owne hand,The yong duke of Viseo slaine by King Iohns owne hand. in the night, in a Chamber
in Don Nugno d'Acugnas house where the King then lay, in the presence of Don Pedro
Deca, Diego d'Acambuya and Lopes Mendez, with no other words but these, You
shall die, and goe carry newes to the duke of Braganca in what state the treason stands which
he beganne.
In this manner the Duke of Viseo died a young Prince of twenty yeeres old,The Duke of Viseo seduced by Astrologians. by following
naughty counsell, and giuing credit to the vaine predictions of Astrologers,
who had assured him that hee should bee King. The Dutchesse his mother was by the
King certified of what had happened, who excused himselfe, in regard that hee was constrained
by necessity to commit so sodaine an execution, and intreated her to beare
it patiently: and in some sort to comfort her, the very same night he called Don Manuell
her other sonne into her presence, who was more wise and discreet then his brother
vnto whom hauing told the Dukes death, and the causes wherefore he died, hee gaue
all that his brother did possesse and more, and conferring with him, with a fatherly affection,
hee promised to cause him to be sworne and acknowledged for Prince and heire
to the crowne of Portugall, after his death and Don Alphonso his sonne: but hee would
not permit him to name himselfe Duke of Viseo as his brother had done, but Duke of
Beja, Lord of Viseo, and Maister of the Order de Christus, and hee made him Lord of
the Isle of Madera, and gaue him other lands.
The Duke was at the same time onely seauenteene yeeres of age,A Spheare vpon the armes of Portugall. and the King gaue
him a Sphere for a diuise to beare in his armes, the which the Kings of Portugall doe
yet at this day beare in their armes and royall scutcheon: the same was a lucky presage
vnto him of the conquests and discoueries which were afterward made in his reigne and
name vnder both the Poles: the same was likewise fore-told by the Bishop of La Garde
a great Mathematicien; in regard of his Horoscope, and position of the heauens at his
Natiuity, being in the yeere 1468. albeit that such iudgments are deceiuable and vnlawfull,

for the actions of Kings, and the euents of all other matters depend vpon Gods
onely Ordonance.
Now when the confederates vnderstood of the Duke of Viseos death, and that
their practizes were discouered, each of them thought to saue one, but all of them were
not quicke enough: for Don Pedro d' Albuquerque was taken as he fled towards Lisbone,
and Don Pedro d'Atayde at Saint Iren who were brought to the Court. The
like happened to the Bishop of Ebora, and to Don Fernand de Meneses his brother, and
to Don Gutierre Coutino, As for D'Aluaro D'Atayde who remained at Saint Iren accompanied
with men at armes attending the successe of their businesse, meaning to haue
taken Donna Ioane surnamed the Excellent, who was a Nunne, from the Monastery of
Saint Clare at Coimbra, and to haue lodged her in the castle, he fled away into Spaine,
and so did Don Lopes d'Albuquerque Earle of Pennamacor with all his family. D. Fernand
de Silueyra hauing beene hidden by one of his father seruants,A Seruants faithfulnesse. who neither for grieuous
threatnings nor for promises of reward from the King could euer be drawne to disclose
him did likewise escape, and fled into Spaine. The King, to iustifie the Duke of Viseos
death, and to giue notice thereof to all men, caused his processe to be made after that
he had slaine him, and condemned the rest. D. Fernand de Menses and D. Pedro were beheaded
and quartered as traitors. As for D. Guttiere Coutino he was committed to the
tower of Auis,The Duke of Viseos complices and conse^derates are executed. for D. Vasco his brother who had reuealed much of the conspiracy to the
King, did a while prolong his life, neuerthelesse hee did not escape, nor is it certainely
knowne how he died. D. Garcia de Meneses Bishop of Ebora, beeing prisoner in the castle
of Palmela, was found dead vpon the cesterne of the said fort, and there is great presumption
that his daies were violently shortned. At the same time, the Kings of Castile
were at Siuill, where receiuing newes that the conspiracy was discouered, and imagining
that the Duke of Viseo should bee committed to prison, and that King Iohn would not
haue proceeded against him so indiscreetly, they hauing no notice of his sodaine death,
did send D. Inigo Manriques Bishop of Leon, and Gaspar Fabro a Knight of Arragon Ambassadors
into Portugall, with instruction to entreate the King to saue the Duke of Viseos
life, if he were yet liuing, and if he were dead, to comfort the Dutchesse his mother,
who had beene the cause of the peace betwixt Spaine and Portugall. The Ambassadors
perceiuing the Duke of Viseo to bee dead, did their best to comfort the sorrowfull
mother, and so returned into Spaine without speaking to King Iohn, who neuer
ceassed to pursue Don Fernand de Silueyra, vntill hee had driuen him out of Spaine:
He was afterward slaine in Auignon by an Earle of Cattalonia, who was likewise banished
from his country, but the French King had like to haue taken his head from his
shoulders in requitall of his paines. This Earle was afterward liberally rewarded by king
Iohn, for that he had rid him of an enemy. The Earle of Pegnamacor died in Castile, D.
Aluaro of Atayde liued a banished man during the life of King Iohn, and in King Manuels
time returned into Portugall. By these seuerities King Iohn was feared of all his subiects,
in regard he had not spared those two great Lords who were of the greatest parentage in
Portugall.
The yere 1485. the commons of Castile sent their Deputies and Commissioners to Orgas
where D. Alphonso of Arragon,An. 1485. Duke of Villahermosa lay,Castile. who was captaine generall
of their Hermandades or brotherhoods, and with him D. Alphonso de Burgos Bishop of
Cuenca, president of the royall Councel, and Alphonso de Quintanilla, who hauing propounded
the great costs and charges which the Kings were at in following the Moorish
wars, did dema^d a subsidy, the which was very readily graated, in regard they did see that
it should be emploied in matters so worthy and proffitable for the commonwealth.
 The Gouernors and captaines on the frontiers of Andaluzia would lose no fit occasion
that might anoy the Moores, who did all of them in a manner follow King Muley Albohacen,Moores.
and had almost restored him to all his lands in Granado, reuolting from Mahumet
the Little, because he had beene aided by Christian Kings; so that they left him no other
place of retreat, but only the city of Almery, from whence hee made cruell warre vpon
the Moores which tooke his fathers part: they meaning altogether to despoyle him
of all rule and gouernment in Granado, and perceiuing King Muley Albohacen to bee

already old and vnfit for warre, did elect, a brother of his, one of King Ismaels sonnes
for their gouernour in Granado, who was likewise called Muley Boabdalin, who thinking
it most necessary for the establishing of his Kingdome to ridde his Nephew Mahomet
out of the world, hee had secret intelligences, with the chiefe men of his faction
which were neere in credit about his person in Almery, whom he induced by promises
to deliuer their Prince and City into his hands at a certaine time appointed, before
which place Muley Boabdellin shewing himselfe, they failed not to open him the gates,
and they let him in vpon such a sodain, as Mahumet hardly escaped with life, but God gaue
him meanes to escape, leauing a young brother of his behinde him, who was cruelly
murthered by his enemies: after the taking of which towne, Muley Boabdellin openly
and without contradiction was chosen King of Granado both against the father and the
sonne, who were driuen away, in the yeere 1485. and the 868. yeere of the reigne of the
Arabians there; Muley Albohacen hauing reigned nineteene yeeres. Now these two
Princes of one name did make such cruell warre vpon each other for the crowne of Granado
as is not almost to bee beleeued. Boabdellin is a corrupted word, those which
speake it better, call both of them Aben Abdileha, but the truest is Aben Abdella. The
Moores to make a difference betwixt them by some surname, called King Albohacens
brother, Zagall, which signifieth valorous, and Mahumet the little his Nephew, Zagois,
that is to say, the vnhappy.


Muley Boabdelin 21. King of
Granado.
IN the beginning of the reigne of Muley Boabdelin el Zagal, hee had to doe with the
Earle of Cabra, with Martin Alphonso de Corduba, Lord of Montemajor, Diego del
Castillo great Commander of Calatraua, Pedro Ruis d'Alarcon, Diego Lopes d'Ayala,
Francisco de Bouadilla, and other, braue captaines and Knights, who ouer-ranne the
country neere to Nixar and Guejar beyond the City of Granado neere to the hilles
called Sierra Neuada, where they tooke great booties, and made their retreate by meanes
of the good guarde which they had left at the difficult passages, by the aduise of Pedro
Ruis d'Alarcon, albeit the new King had drawne great numbers of Moores out of the city
of Granado and else-where to enclose and defeat them.
King Fernand and Queene Isabella did then lie at Siuill where Don Inigo Manriques
the Archbishop being dead,Castile. the Pope by his full power and authority gaue that Archbishoprike
to the Cardinall Don Roderigo Borgia,Popes cannot keepe themselues from breaking the concordats which restrain their power. who was afterward Pope Alexander
the sixth: these holy fathers being not able to abstaine from breaking the concordats
which did in some sort restraine their power, the which they pretend to bee absolute: but
these couragious Kings, brideled them at this time likewise, and delt in such sort as the
Cardinall hauing resigned that Archbishoprike, and put it into the Popes hands, it was
giuen at the Kings entreaty to Don Diego Hurtado de Mendoca Bishop of Palence,
and his Bishoprike of Palence resigned to Don Alphonso de Burgos Bishop of Cuenca,
that of Cuenca to Don Alphonso de Fonseca Bishop of Auyla, and that of Auyla to
Frier Hernando of Talauera, and Oropesa, Prior of the Monastery of Pre of Valiodolit
and the Queenes Confessor: In this sort did euery one affect good Bishoprikes in
recompence of their seruices: I call them good, in respect of their reuenues.
Whilest the Kings remained this yeere at Siuill, they made diuers good Edicts and
Ordonances for Iudges, and for the administration of Iustice, as also for the mannaging
of the future warre: and the time drawing neere when as armies vse to march into
the field; and diuerse companies of horse and foote being already arriued from all parts
of Spaine vpon the frontiers of Andaluzia, they left Siuill and came to Cordoua: diuerse
great Lords, Knights and people of all sorts did come thither, who suted themselues
the best they could, which made a gallant shew, wherein great cost and superfluity
was vsed, as likewise, in feasts, games and other military sports: in regard whereof,

the Kings thought to redresse those matters by two courses* both profitable and milde,Proffitable waies for to redresse (...), expences.
namely, by admonishments which they themselues made to the noblest, and to others
by religious persons of credit, and afterwards by their owne example shewing in their
apparrell, traine and manner of life great modesty, wherein neuerthelesse some Maiesty
did appeare, as was fitting for their degree.
As concerning the warre the opinion was, that Malaga should be beseeged, and by
the way they laboured (but in vaine) to take the castle of Montefrio. Passing forward,
they did ouer-runne, spoile and destroy the country neere to Carthama, where
the common opinion was to seeke to take Carthama and Coin before they did attempt
any thing against Malaga, to the end to haue the country more at their commandement,
the which was not the worst counsell: and because the army was great, part
thereof was sent to beseege Carthama vnder the conduct of the Maister of Saint Iames,
the Constable, and D. Alphonso* D'Aguilar, and the other part to Coyne which was
commanded by the Marquis of Cales, the Earle of Crugna, and D. Hurtado de Mendoza,
with the Cardinalls people. The King with some part of his forces was lodged
betwixt both these seeges, to succor either of them as need should require. In the mean
time the towne of Benamexi yeelded as it had done in time before: but it did reuolt
when the Earle of Benalcacar was slaine, into the which fault it fell againe after it had
yeelded, and was now taken by assault, the Inhabitants were taken or slaine, and the place
razed to the ground:(...). the King did choose out one hundred of the principall prisoners
and caused them to be hanged for a terror to the rest, chiefly for an example to them of
Carthama, Coin and Ronde; yet notwithstanding they were not negligent in their
owne defence. Certaine Affrican Moores of Velez de la Gomera, being mooued with
zeale to their religion, came ouer into Spaine, and espied a fit occasion whereby to enter
into Coin, which they did at such time, as a great and large breach was made, which
the Christians did assaile, who by this new aide were rudely repulsed with great slaughter:
there were slaine Pero Ruis Alarcon, a most wise and valiant captaine, and Tello d'
Aguilar likewise, whose death did greatly greeue King Fernand, wherevpon hee
caused the (...) to bee redoubled and did so presse the beseeged, as they beganne to
talke of composition. The King being highly displeased for his losse receiued at that assault,
would not receiue them at the first vpon any condition, but at the last he graunted
them their liues and goods, and so the towne was yeelded vp. Coin was a great towne
and very hard to bee kept, wherefore it was razed. Those of Carthama hauing notice
that Coin was yeelded,Coin, Carthama, and other places taken by composition from the Moores. did compound in like manner, whose example was followed by
(...), and others. The garde and defence of Carthama was committed to
the Maister of Saint Iames vpon his entreaty, who left there for Lieutenant vnder him a
Gentleman of his owne, named Iohn de Cespedes. About the same time, Don Alphonso
Henriques high Admirall of Castile died at Valiodolit, in whose place and dignity Don
Frederike Henriques his sonne succeeded. The Queene beeing at Cordoua tooke care
to prouide the army of money and victualls,D. Frederike Henriques Admirall of Castill. wherein she vsed incredible dilligence and
dexterity.
After the taking of the places aboue mentioned, the King passed on with a great number
of men at armes and came within sight of Malaga, a strong towne and exceeding
well furnished with men and all things necessary for a towne of warre. The Moore King
who lay within it made a sally with a thousand horse, which were the floure of his cauallery,
where they skirmished valiantly on both sides, where D. Fernand D'Ayalos the eldest
of that family was slaine. And because the army wanted water, the King went backe
to Carthama; where sitting in counsell what was best to bee done, it was concluded to
goe and beseege Ronde. D. Pedro Henriques Marquis of Cales and captaine of the frontiers
of Andaluzia with other captaines marched on before with three thousand horse
and eight thousand foot to inuest the place, and the King followed them at the heeles
with the rest of the army. The towne was strong and defended by very warlike Moores,
being beseeged and furiously battered, the Christians in a few daies won the suburbes
thereof, where Alphonso Fayardo shewed great proofe of his worth and valor. The battery
continuing against the towne albeit the Moores which were sent to the succor thereof,

did their best to enter into it and did put the campe in continuall alarmes, the Christians
neuerthelesse did so presse them as the beseeged were faine to yeeld, vpon condition that
their goods and liues might be saued, with liberty to liue in their owne sect in any place
of Castile where they pleased.Ronda taken, and the Moores liues, goods, and religion granted vnto them. The King entred into the towne of Ronda vpon Whitsunday;
D. Bernardin de Velasco, sonne to the Constable hauing first seized vpon a
tower of the castle, and as soone as the Moore gouernor was gonne forth of it with his
people to retire himselfe into the King of Castiles country to a place in the territory of
Siuil, the towne was repeopled with Christians drawne from the same city, from Cordoua
and other places of Andaluzia. The Queene made prouision for the ornaments of
the Churches, and things necessary for their seruice, and the gouernment of the towne
was giuen to Antonio de Fonseca. The Moores of that country hauing made themselues
Mudejares,Equity of the King and Queene of Castile. that is to say, vassals to Christians, were at that time religiously maintained
and preserued, according to the capitulations and promises, by meanes whereof, diuers
other townes did voluntarily yeeld themselues to the Kings, namely, Burga, Iunquera;
Monda, Gan^in, Caseres, Montija, with other castles and ^ortresses of the mountaines of
Ronda, Villalonga, and Carthema, who were permitted to liue in their owne religion,
paying the same tribute which they were wont to giue to the Moore Kings. The places
which did yeeld were more then forty in number. And because Cacaranouella did make
delaies, King Fernand caused the Inhabitants thereof to bee summoned to yeeld, vpon
paine of tasting of all the rigour of warre: wherevpon they submitted, vpon the same
conditions as the rest had done, and the garrison thereof was giuen to D. Sancho de Rojas.
Those likewise of Marbela, a sea towne, being sommoned to yeeld, made answere that
they were contented so to doe, and they sent their gouernor or Alguazil Major to the
King, who desiring to bee present at the yeelding thereof, brought thither his army by
the way of Antequera, fetching a long circuit but easie and commodious: By the way
he receiued letters from the Moores of Marbela, who demaunded new capitulations, the
which were not answered till the army was in sight: wherewith they being amazed, deliuered
vp the town, and retired themselues, some into Affrica, and others into the Kingdome
of Castile: Montemajor and other places of the country of Marbela did likewise
yeeld. And because the army beganne to want victualls by reason that the tempests
and stormes at sea did hinder the ships of burthen from sayling, the King was aduised
to make retreate to Cordoua, so the army marched within sight of Malaga once againe,
from whence the Moores came forth and skirmished, but to no purpose, the seege
whereof had not beene in vaine nor without effect, if victuals had not wanted. The
army being returned neere to Antequera, it was aboundantly refreshed with victuals
sent thither by the Queene. The King afterward entred into Cordoua with great ioy
and applaud of the Queene, Prince and Infantas of the Court, the people, Clergy, and
sundry Ambassadors: there were sollemne processions made, where the King in manner
of a triumph caused great number of Christians to bee led in pompe, and in a glorious
shew, which were redeemed from captiuity, whose shackles and irons were afterward sent
to Toledo, and there hung vp against the wal of the Monastery of Saint Iohn of the kings,
which are to be seene at this day.
For the maintenance and preseruation of what had beene wonne and conquered, Iohn
de Torres, a knight of the Kings house, was sent vnto the frontiers with a Prouost or Alcayde
of the Court, named the Licenciate La Font, who destributed the lands to the
new Inhabitants,Equity of the Kings of Castile. for the ordinary garrisons were vp in the country of the Moores more
then twenty leagues; and because diuers Pirates had robbed sundry Moores as they passed
out of Spaine into Affrike, contrarie to the capitulations, informations beeing
made therevpon, the Licenciat recouered all that had beene taken away, who demaunding
a safe-conduct for his passage ouer into Affrica to restore to euery one
what was his owne, the Moores made him answere that hee needed none other
safe-conduct then the greatnesse and renoune of the Kings of Castile his Maisters:
wherevpon the Licenciate made himselfe ready to passe ouer, yet diuers of his friends
counselled him not to giue ouermuch credit to the light faith of the Moores, wherevnto
with great boldnesse and constancy hee replied, that God forbid, that the power

and greatnesse of his Kings honor should be impaired or diminished thorow his feare: a
couragious speech of a most faithfull and affectionate subiect and seruant. And so he passed
ouer and restored the Moores their goods, and promise was kept with him. In the
meane time the garrisons of Alhama hauing ouer-runne the country neere to Granado,
as they returned with great quantity of cattaile and other booties, they met on a sodaine
and vnlooked for the King of Granado who came from Malaga thither, accompanied
with great numbers of horse, by whom they were charged and pursued vnto the
very gates of Alhama with great losse of their people, beside the spoiles which were recouered
from them. There remained yet some small feason of this yeere 1485. fit to
make warre in, the which the Kings would not haue vnproffitably spent, without enterprizing
some matter of worth: therefore they caused the forces of Andaluzia, Extremadura,
and the Marquisate of Villena to bee assembled (for they had licenced the men of
warre of the farthermost prouinces of Spaine to depart as soone as they returned to
Cordoua) whereafter diuers consultations, they resolued, at the perswasion of the Earle
of Cabra to goe and beseege Moclin: the Earle with Martin Alphonso de Cabra Lord
of the house of Montemajor, was sent before to shut in those of the towne with the forces
which he had in Baena, then their followed him with foure thousand horse and other
forces the Maister of Calatraua, the Earle of Buendia and other Knights; the King
with the rest of the forces came after, and the Queene with the whole Court came to
Baena.
Those that went first with the Earle of Cabra beeing arriued on a morning neere
to Moclin fell vnawares vpon the King of Granadoes army which was come to Moclin
consisting of twenty thousand Moores as well horse as foote, who neuerthelesse began
to flie as soone as they did see the Christians whom they thought to bee farre more in
number then they were: but hauing better viewed them they returned and charged
them so brauely as they disordered and put them to flight: diuers were there slaine and
taken,The Christians defeated at Moclin. the Earle escaped being hurt in the hand with a Harquebuze shot, his horse hauing
receiued foure wounds with a launce, his brother D. Goncall de Cordoua was slaine, the
Moores following the chase were staied and constrained to turne their backes, by the
troupes of the Maister of Calatraua and the Earle of Buendia. This newes did greatly
displease the Kings, who altering their determination left Moclin and turned their forces
against Cambill and Alhabar, very strong places on the confines of Iaen, and within
three leagues of the city, alwaies well kept and defended by the Kings of Granado. The
Marquis of Cales with the vantgard did approach neere vnto their forts, whether the
Artillery was brought with great difficulty, and the battery made with all dilligence:
but they yeelded forthwith and the Moores which were within it were sent away free
with their goods into Granado: the Queene gaue these two forts to the city of Iaen,
where the King with the Maister of Saint Iames did determine to strengthen Alhama
with foure thousand horse and fiue thousand foot which were appointed for the same
purpose. The Treasorer of Calatraua beeing gouernor of Alhama was sollicited by a
Moore of the garrison of Salea, to come thither with his forces, and hee did assure him
that he would finde meanes to cause him to enter into it: the Treasorer hauing first of
all well examined the Moore, and being assured that he ment no deceite went on a night
to Salea, where the traitors brother did let downe a rope from the walles, and helped
to erect the scaling ladders by which the Christians mounted, who after a dangerous
fight made themselues Maisters of the place, the Inhabitants whereof were all made
slaues.
Pope Innocent the eight being daylie aduertized of these goodly victories, graunted
this yeere to the Kings to raise greater subsidies vpon the Clergy, the which were moderated
by the Cardinall of Spaine to one hundred thousand golden florins of the
coine of Arragon. About the end of the yeere the Court leauing Andaluzia, came to
Alcala de Henares,Birth of the Infanta Catherine. where Queene Isabell was brought in bed of a daughter named
Catherin who was wife to Arthur Prince of Wales heire to the crowne of England,
and afterward married to his brother King Henry the eight of that name.
In Alcala which was a place belonging to the Archbishop of Toledo, the Alcaides and

Prouosts of the Court executing their offices, were hindered by the Cardinall, who
was Archbishop of Toledo,Contention betwixt the Arch^^shop of Toledo and the Queene. who made greeuous complaints to the Queene, how her
Officers did vsurpe vpon his authority: the Queene told him, that shee being Soueraigne
in Castile, and in all other her realmes, might execute iustice in any place. The matter
being debated on both sides, it was referred to the compromise and iudgment of fiue
persons of the counsell, whom the Queene would name, and to fiue Channons of the
Chapter of Toledo for the Cardinall: but the other affaires of Court, the short staye
thereof at Alcala, with other hinderances, did end this strife, the which remained vndecided.
Then were the Iudges of the Court discharged of part of the Processes which did
abound in all places where the King and Queene went, the which were turned ouer to
the Chancery at Valiodolit, where Don Alphonso de Fonseca Archbishop of Saint Iames
was made President, with eight Doctors for his Councell.
During all these warres and businesse Don Ramir Nugnes de Guzman, of whom wee
haue often spoken heretofore, had remained in Portugall, greatly honoured by King
Iohn. Hee vnderstanding of the Admirall of Castils death, his ancient enemy, procured
his friends to obtaine his pardon of King Ferdinand and Queene Isabell, but beeing
aduertised that the matter was now harder to bee effected then before, by reason
that Don Frederick, sonne to the deceased Admirall, who had begunne the quarrell,
was made Admirall in his Fathers place, and highly fauoured, hee desperately resolued
to kill him: and to effect his purpose, hee departed with leaue from the Court of
Portugall, and came to Braganca. Don Frederick Henriques beeing aduertised by his
friends what his enemy did intend, hee thought, like a wise man, that it was not good
to hold him still in dispaire, and therefore hee sent to Mary Osorio, Don Ramir Nugnes
mother, to let her vnderstand, that if shee would come to Valiodolit to sue for her
sonnes restitution, hee would assist her therein, prouided that shee would take order
that Don Ramir should returne back from Braganca, to the Court of Portugall.
This Lady beeing desirous to haue her sonne restored to his lands and goods, did
not loose so fit and vnlookt for an occasion, but came to the Admirall, with whom after
long conference, she went to the court being at Alcala de Henares, where she obtained,
but not without difficulty, the goods of Don Ramir, as depositarie, and that hee might
returne into Spaine, vnder the keeping of the Earle of Feria. Don Ramir hauing notice
heereof,Senten^^ of the qua^rell betwixt Don Ramir Nugnes de Guzman, and Frederick Henriques. tooke his leaue of the King of Portugall, and came to the Earle of Ferias
house, where hee remained three yeares, vntill his businesse were brought to this conclusion;
that hee might enioy his goods, and marry with his promised wife, the
daughter to the Earle of Luna: but that hee might not goe to his owne lands, vntill
the King and Queene gaue him leaue. Afterward hee was permitted to come into his
owne houses, vpon condition, that during his life he should not come ouer the riuer of
Duero: such was the end of the quarrell caused by the Ladies of the Court, betwixt Don
Ramir Nugnes de Guzman, and Don Frederick Henriques.
Before the Court departed from Alcala de Henares, Don Inigo Lopes de Mendoza
Earle of Tendilla, and Doctor Iohn de Medina, both of them of the Kings Councell,
were sent Ambassadors into Italy, about the warre which was betwixt Ferdinand
King of Naples, and Pope Innocent; the which Ambassage they performed so wisely, as
they made peace betwixt those great Potentates. These Ambassadors did in open
Consistorie performe the obedience and submissions due to the Pope. King Ferdinand
and Queene Isabell did in the meane time cause diligent search and punishment to bee
made, vpon conuerted Iewes and Moores, which did returne to their old superstition.
In the beginning of the yeare one thousand, foure hundred, eighty and sixe, the Court
remooued to Medina del Campo, with intent to punish Don Rodrigo Osorio Earle of
Lemos, who did disquiet the countrey of Galicia, and had surprised the Castle of Ponferrada,
driuing thence the garrison which Captaine George Abendagno held for the
King, and had broken in all sorts the truce which the King had made betwixt him and
the Earle of Benauent. In regarde whereof hee was commanded to repaire in person
to the Court, but hee durst not, and adding crimes to crimes, hee committed sundry
excesses and robberies in Galicia.

The Queene being busied about the warres of Granado which she so much affected, and
not being able to goe in person into Galicia, gaue commission to the Earle of Benauent
his vtter enemy to represse this insolent Earle of Lemos.
The spring time drawing neere, the city of Cordoua began already to be filled with
souldiars sent for by the Kings out of all the Prouinces of Spaine for the Moorish wars:
wherefore the Kings parted from Medina, and passing along by Toledo came to Cordoua.
There, did hourely arriue many troupes, not onely of Spaniards, but of Frenchmen,
English and other forraine nations. Amongst the Lords of Castile, D. Inigo L^^es
de Mendoza Duke of Infantazgo made the brauest and gallantest shew. The army being
mustered amounted to the number of twelue thousand horse, and forty thousand able
fighting footmen, great number of Cannoniers and peeces of Ordinance of all
sorts, thirty thousand beasts of carriage, two thousand waggons with their equipage and
ment to driue them. With these forces Loxa was beseeged. Into this towne King
Mahumet the Little had shut him selfe, breaking his faith giuen to the Kings of Castile,
for to reconcile himselfe to his vncle: for the Moores perceiuing, though to late, that
their ordinary diuisions and strifes had plunged them into extreame ruine, they did so
handle the matter, as they made these two Priences friends, who diuided the soueraigne
autho^ity betwixt them, the citty of Granado remayning neuerthelesse to King Muley
Boabdellin el Zag^l: in such sort as communicating their counsels and forces together
to annoy the Christians,The King of Castiles army at the s^ege of Loxa. Mahumet the Little, did vndertake to defend Loxa, from
whence diuers sallies and hot skirmishes were made vpon the Kings vantgard, so as King
Mahumet receiuing two wounds there, the Moores were shut in, the place was beseeged,
and the battery furiously begunne. The Duke of Infantazgo being one day vpon
the guarde, did take certaine Moores of Granado who would haue entred into Loxa,
by whom he had notice that King Muley Boabdellin came with a great power to the aide
of the beseeged, wherevpon the guardes were doubled in all places of the campe, and
preparation was made for whatsoeuer might happen. The suburbes being opened
with the Canon, they were sharpely assailed and well defended, neuerthelesse they were
taken, with great effusion of Christian bloud, where the Lord Scales Generall of the
English was hurt. There was found in the suburbes a Moore that was a Weauer, who
was so obstinate, as seeing the place to bee taken, and that the other Moores with-drew
themselues into the towne, would not for all that leaue his owne house, saying, that hee
had rather die by iron then die in irons, seeing that Loxa which was wont to defend the
Moores and offend the Christians, was now the repaire of the enemies, and the graue
of her owne citizens, and in this obstinacy hee was slaine. The suburbes being wonne,
they beganne to batter the towne in such sort as in a short time, the walles, towers, and
defenses were ouerthrowne, so as the Moores which defended them, lay open and exposed
to the Cannons mouth, which did so terrifie and discourage them as they craued
parley and composition vpon these conditions: That King Mahumet the Little should
be pardoned for his disobedience passed: that hee should giue ouer the title of King of
Granado, and intitle himselfe thence forward Marquis of Guadix, if so bee that hee
could recouer the place within sixe monthes next ensuing, and that it might be lawfull
for him to goe into Affrica, or to liue in the country of Granado or else in Castile as
should seeme best vnto him, and that the Moores which were within Loxa might doe
the like.Loxa yeelded. These things agreed vpon, Loxa was yeelded, and the gouernment thereof
committed to Don Aluaro de Luna Lord of Fuente Duegna, processions and signes of
ioy were made at Cordoua and else-where for the taking of this towne. The Mesquites
being purged, the Queene prouided them of ornaments after the accustomed
manner.
From thence the King sent the Maister of Saint Iames and the Marquis of Cales, with
foure thousand horse, and twelue thousand foot to beginne the seege of Illora a very
strong place and well defended, distant three leagues from Granado: whither the rest
of the army being come, the quarters and lodgings appointed, and well fortified hauing
set watches, and sentinells in the fields, vpon towers and high eminent places, to discouer
from a farre off, (for being so nere Granado, they feared some sodaine and vnlooked

for assault of the Moores) the suburbes were beaten and assailed, where the Duke of Infantazgo
with his troupes, had the honour of the first assault: but he perceiuing his souldiars,
who at the muster made the gallantest shew in brauery of armor and apparell aboue
all others, to goe coldly to the fight, cried out vnto them,, How now my fellowes,
shall men say of you, that you are of the number of those braggarts which are of no other
worth then to make a shew in the streetes and in a muster, where men are out of
danger and farre from blowes; and that you are couragious in nothing but spending of
your money in brauery like vnto women, no, no, souldiars, your honor consisteth in being
valiant in fight, and therefore if you be men, preferre it before your liues, and doe
not endure, that being beaten backe from this place with double shame, other men
should carry away the glory from you: for mine owne part rather then I will blush at
your basenesse and cowardize, I am resolued not to suruiue such a shame, but forgetting
the place which I hold, I will cast my selfe into the breach amid the greatest throng of the
enemies; and whosoeuer loue their honour let them follow me.
The souldiars being ashamed, at this speech reiterated by the Earle of Cabra and others,
they tooke courage, beseeching their captaine to command them what they
should doe, and they marched with such fury against the enemies, as entring into the
suburbes, they made a pittifull slaughter of all those which could not soone enough get
into the city; against the which, the cannon beeing planted, the flankes and curtines
were soone ouerthrowne and infinite numbers of houses perced thorow: so as the
Moores fearing to bee sooner forced by the enemies, then succoured by their friends,
yeelded themselues and went forth of the towne with bagge and baggage,Illora yeeldeth to King Fernand. and without
their armes. The King gaue the garrison of Illora, to Don Goncalo Hernandes de Cordoua
brother to Don Alphonso d'Aguilar, who was afterward surnamed the great
captaine.
The army after that, marched to Moclin, whether Queene Isabella came to ioyne
with the campe at Loxa. The towne had beene newly fortified with towers and bulwarkes,
more then in former times, but the battery was made with such store of ordinance,
as nothing could resist it: the Christians besides did vse diuers kindes of artificiall
fiers, the which did great hurt to the beseeged, and burnt all their store of gunpoulder,
by meanes of a pot of this wild fire which flew in the ayre, and did stick fast in a tower
where the said poulder lay, which was blowne vp into the ayre; wherewith the Moores
being amazed,Moclin taken. they did compound to depart with their liues and goods saued. Moclin
being taken, part of the army was sent to beate Montefrio, they were the troupes of
Siuill, Xeres, and Carmona, whilest the King with the residew thereof made spoile vpon
the confines of Granado, not without diuers incounters and sharpe skirmishes with
the Moores, who came forth of the head city. The King being returned to Moclin, the
captaines of Montefrio and Colomera presented themselues vnto him demanding composition,
which was granted them, and the Moores went forth of those two places to
Granado with their goods, but they left their armor, weapons and victuals behind them.
All these places which were taken were rampired and fortified with good garrisons, victuals,
and other necessaries, and hauing left D. Frederike de Toledo, sonne to D. Garcy
Aluares of Toledo Duke of Alua, captaine generall of the who country newly conquered,
the King and Queene returned to Cordoua.
Not long after, they marched towards Leon, to order the affaires of Galicia, which
was greatly troubled, by the insolency of the Earle of Lemos, who neuerthelesse appearing
before the Kings, did humbly craue his pardon and obtained it, being fauoured by
diuers great Lords of the Court: Hee was notwithstanding enioyned not to enter into
Galicia for a certaine time, and the places of Ponferrada, Sarria and Castro-real
were taken from him and were applied to the crowne, the Kings neuerthelesse giuing
a certaine summe of money for the marriage of his aunts.The Hospitall of Saint Iame^* built by King Fernand and Queene Isabel for the releese of pilgrims.
These things thus ordered, the Kings went to visit Saint Iames his Church, in the
which city they builded a goodly Hospitall, for the releefe of the poore and of pilgrims,
from thence fetching a circuit round about the country of Galicia, they redressed diuers
tyranies which were there committed, restoring diuers monasteries and Churches, which

were by force dispossessed of their goods, lands, and reuenewes by certaine Knights and
Gentlemen. To containe whom and all others in their duties, they established a Iudgement
seate of foure Auditors, which was the beginning of the Royall Audience of Galicia,
and they confirmed Don Diego Lopes Earle of Haro in his dignity of Viceroy of
the country, as he had beene in time before. And the better to procure the peace of the
countrey,M^tinous and qua^re some (...) sent forth of the Country vnder co^tlar of other imployment. they caused diuerse strong houses to be ouer-throwne and razed to the ground
which serued for the repaire of theeues and robbers, and carried away with them out of
Galicia diuerse mutinous and quarrellous Gentlemen, to the end they should employ
their strength and courage in the warre against the Moores. The Court beeing returned
to Benauent, the Earle shewed himselfe very liberall and magnificent in the entertainment
of the Kings and the great Lords: from thence they came to Salamanca,
where they spent the remainder of this yeare 1486.
It hapned this yeare in the towne of Trugillo, that the Iudge or Corrigidor of the
place, hauing laide hands vpon a Priest for committing some notorious crime, and not
sending him so one enough to his ordinary Iudge,Mutiny vnder sh^w of religion. the prisoners kins folke hauing taken
a Crosse in their hands, ranne vp and downe the Citty crying out for helpe, and said
that the holy Catholicke faith was trodden vnder foote, the which did so stirre vp the
brutish multitude, as they ranne to take Armes, and came in tumultuous manner to the
Corrigidors lodging, who was glad to make hast to deliuer the prisoner, whereof the
King and Queene had notice, who were greatly displeased with such seditions, and sent
certaine Iudges and Commissioners to Trugillo with forces, who executed diuerse of
the mutiners according to lawe.
This yeare, Christopher Colombus borne at Cugurco vpon the riuer of Genoa, came
to the Court of Castile,The first comming of Christopher Colombus, to the King and Queene of Castile. who made offer to search the Occidentall Ocean, where hee
did vndertake to discouer a great land, riche and aboundant in gold and other commodities,
crauing ayde of the King and Queen of money and shippes, to furnish him out
on such a voyage. Colombus was a man very expert in Nauigation, and vntill that time
hee had gotten his liuing by making Sea Cardes. Hee beeing married, and dwelling in
the Isle of Madera; a shippe of Biscay, which had for many dayes beene driuen vp and
downe by tempests, and cast vpon the same coasts, whereof hee did then speake, did happen
to arriue in the Island, Colombus brought the Pilot thereof and three other Marriners
home to his house, who hauing endured much misery at sea, did there dye, and in recompence
of their kinde entertainment, they did amply informe their hoast, whereabout
these lands lay, and with what windes a man might saile thether. Colombus being
a man of a quick apprehension, and great courage, came to King Iohn of Portugall,
hoping to perswade him to vndertake that Nauigation, offering him his seruice therein,
and after that to King Henry the seauenth of England; in the end to Don Henriques de
Guzman Duke of Medina Sidonia, and to Don Lewis de la Cerde Duke of Medina
Celi, who held commodious Hauens in Castile, beseeching them to ayde him in so worthy
an enterprise: but all his trauaile was to no purpose, for they esteemed him as an Italian,
who by bragges and vaunts of matters which hee knew not, endeuoured to releeue
his pouerty. Now this yeare hee came to Court with letters from Frier Iohn
Peres de Marchena, one excellently learned in all humane learning, who dwelt at
Rauida, which gaue good testimony of Colombus skill, yet all this was to small purpose:
and without the assistance of Alphonso de Quintanilla, hee was at the point to
haue giuen ouer all: Quintanilla hauing brought him to his house, and well sounded
him, gaue him accesse to the Cardinall of Spaine, and after that, to diuerse of
the Kings speciall fauourites, by whose meanes hee was sundry times heard discourse,
in so much as his speech beganne to please, and the Kings promised him ayde and
employment for the discouerie of a new world, so soone as the warres of Granado
were ended: In this manner Colombus, full of hope and courage, did constantly
pursue, for the space of sixe whole yeares, the effects of the Kings promise, till at
last it was performed.Qualities of Christopher Colombus. Hee was a man firme and constant in what hee vndertooke,
strong and able in trauaile, seuere, and chollerick, bigge of limbes and stature,
redde faced and full of pimples.

The Court lying at Salamanca, the Kings caused the Court of Chancerie to remooue
from Vailliodolit into their owne pallace there, which was the Bishops house, to the end
they might be eye witnesses, after what manner they ended suites, and did administer iustice,
in regard many complaints were made of them. And beeing aduertised that the
Marshall Don Pero d' Ayala had caused a Scriueners head to be cut off,Princesse core full of iustice. who was one of
his tenants, for giuing his mother Donna Maria, with whom hee was at strife, a coppie
of his fathers will, they sent to take him prisoner, and to seize vpon his goods.
When he was brought to Court, the Constable, who was allyed vnto him, (for hee
had married a Neece of his, daughter to the Earle of Miranda) would haue departed, saying,
that he would not be present at the iudgement of one so neere vnto him: but the
Queene assuring the Constable, that the Marshall should not bee touched neither in life
nor member, stayed him there. The controuersie betwixt the mother and the sonne, was
referred to the Kings Councell, as also the difference betwixt the Duke of Medina Sidonia,
and the Earle of Alua de Lista, about the Earledome of Niebla, which the Earle said
did belong vnto him in right of his mother; which controuersie remaynes at this day vndecided.
The countrey of Biscay beeing at this time somewhat troubled, in regard the
Kings Officers did seeme to incroach vppon their priuiledges, the Licenciate Garcy Lopes
of Chincilla,Bishops banishea from Biscay. one of the Kings Councell, was sent thither, who did iustice, and reformed
many matters: but he could neuer obtaine of the people, that the Bishops should
come into the countrey to visit the Churches, who sayd, that it was against their priuiledges.
In regard of the warre against the Moores great leauies of souldiers were made
as well in Biscay, Alaua, Guipuscoa, Asturia's, as Gallicia, who marched into Andalusia
towards Cordoua.
The state of the Moores,Moores. which was the other day vnited, became on a sudden diuided,
it beeing an impossible matter for two Soueraignes to commaund in one country.
King Muley Boabdellin el Zagal, which possessed the cittie of Granado, with a great part
of the countrie, began a fresh to poursue his Nephew Mahomet the Little; putting all
those Moores to death which tooke his part, confiscating the goods of such as he could
catch: and he laboured by all meanes to procure King Mahomets death by poyson or otherwise,
who after the taking of Loxa, had withdrawne himselfe into the towne of Velez
the white. To that place there came to him a very dangerous Ambassage from his vnde
Muley, fayning to treate of peace and concord, with too great submissions, the better
to disguise his intent, which was to kill Mahomet, and the Ambassadours had expresse
charge so to do, who brought him some poysoned presents, to the end that if they fayled
in the execution of the one, yet the other might take effect. King Mahumet beeing
aduertised by his friends of the Ambassadours intents, would by no meanes heare or see
them, nor yet receiue their gifts, but sent them word to tell his Vncle Muley Boabdellin,
that he was sufficiently warned of his proceedings, and that he would accept of no other
conditions from him, but onely to throw him out of the royall throne of Granado,
which was his true inheritance, and did in no sort belong vnto him, who was a tyrant and
a murtherer of the Princes of his bloud, for the which he did hope shortly to chastise him,
and to cut off his head.
Now was King Mahomet ayded and assisted by the commandement of the kings of Castile,
by Iohn de Benauides, Gouernour of Lorcia, and by Don Frederick of Toledo, Gouernor
of the new-conquered countreys, and other Christian Captaines, who did often
enter into the lands and territories of Granado, and were sundrie times constrayned to
beate backe the enemies, and to defend their owne gouernements from their inuasions.
This assistance notwithstanding, King Mahomet the Little was euill intreated by the contrarie
partie,Rosh enterprise of K. Mahumet the Little. dispossessed almost of all, and brought into despayre, by which he was driuen
to a marueilous hazard, either to lose all, or winne all: for hee went secretly to Granado,
not hauing any intelligence there, and arriuing in the night at the gate of the Albaycin,
he called to the guards, by whom he was knowne and brought in, hauing but
foure or fiue men in his company: there he assembled diuers of the inhabitants of the Albaycin,
and did so well lay open the tyrannies and wrongs which King Muley his Vncle
had done to him, and did so perswade them by forcible reasons to fauour his right to the

Crowne of Granado, as euery one beeing mooued with pitty towards him, and rage
against the tyrant,Great sedition in Granado. did take armes in his behalfe, and raised a great tumult in the Citty,
crying out, that Mahomet was lawfull King. In the morning King Muley Boabdelin,
who lay in the Forte of Alhambra, vnderstanding that his Nephew had seazed on the
Albaycin, caused his people to arme themselues, and came forth into the Citty, where
hee likewise had many partakers, where this cursed nation made such hauock and spoile
one vpon an other, as imagining the streetes not to bee spacious enough for their furie,
they went forth into the fields, and fought a fierce combate, wherein dyed multitudes
of men, and then returning euery one into his owne Forte, they renewed the skirmishes
and assaults a fresh: but Mahomet the little, perceiuing his party to be the weaker, hee
sent to Don Frederick de Toledo, eldest sonne to the Duke of Alua, who was Generall
of the Christians in the next garrisons, to entreate ayde and succour from him. Don
Frederick who was wise and discreet, gathered together all the forces hee could, and
came neere to Granada, but would by no meanes enter into it, to meete whom King
Mahomet sent a Moore Captaine named Aben-Comix with certaine troopes of horse,
hee himselfe remaining in the Citty, fortifying himselfe in certaine places. King Muley
vnderstanding of Don Fredericks comming, sent to offer him battaile, but hee would
not accept thereof, saying, that the Moores feigned to haue quarrels among themselues,
by that meanes to entrappe him and his soldiours, and to enclose them: wherefore
keeping his forces in good order without stirring, hee placed the Moores horsemen
ledde by Aben-comix in the Front to sustaine the enemies skirmishes, which were furious
and bloudy. King Muley Boabdelin el Zagal, perceiuing that the Christians kept
themselues in order, and that by no meanes they would come to battaile, hee did reenter
the Citty, and began to assaile the Albaycin, which was couragiously defended,
in regarde that Don Frederick stayed more then an houre after, in order of battaile before
the Citty: but afterward hee returned into his Fort, leauing the Moores to murther
one another; and because hee knew that vpon Mahomet the littles victory, King Ferdinands
and Queene Isabels content and profit did depend, hee sent him certaine Harquebuziers
vnder the conduct of Ferdinand Aluares Gouernour of Colmera, by whose
valour the Albaycin held out, and the assaults and combates continued fifty dayes after,
King Boabdelins people beeing vexed within by King Mahomet, and abroad, by the Christians
of the next garrisons.
Whilest these troubles continued in Granado betwixt the two factions,Castile. King Ferdinand
hauing assembled and reuiewed the troopes, which from all parts were arriued
at Cordoua, hee went to field with an Armie of twenty thousand horse, as well men at
Armes, as Genets, and of fifty thousand foote: the chiefe Commanders were the Maisters
of Saint Iames and Alcantara, the Duke of Nagera, the Marquis of Cales, and
Villena, the Earles of Benauent, Vregna, Cabra, Oropesa, Feria, Cifuentes, Osorno,
Medellin, and Ribadeo. Don Alphonso d' Aguilar, the Treasurer of Calatraua, with the
Captaines generall of the Frontiers of Andaluzia and Murcia. Those which sent their
forces thether were the Cordinall of Spaine Archbishop of Toledo, the Archbishop of
Siuill, the Bishops of Burgos and Cuenca, the Dukes of Medina Sidonia, Alua, Playsance,
Medina Celi, and Albuquerque, the maister of Calatraua, the Marquis of Astorga,
and Agull^r the Earles of Castro, Cragna, Saint Steeuens, Miranda, Nieua, Priego,
Fuensailda, Alua de Lista, Montagu, the Constable, the great Commanders of Calatraua
and Leon, with other Lords and Knights of Castile. There came likewise from Arragon
diuers great Lords, among whom was Don Phillip of Nauarre, bastard sonne to the
late Prince Charles of Viana, whom King Ferdinand his Vncle had newly made maister
of the order of Montesa in the Realme of Valentia, hauing obtained it of the Pope, and
deposed Philip Boyll from the same dignity, who had beene elected maister thereof conuentually.
Don Lewis Borgia Duke of Gandia was likewise there, with many others of Arragon,1487.
Valentia, Sicill and Sardinia. With these great forces they vndertooke to goe and
beseege Malaga,Velez Malaga besieged. but first of all it was thought fit to remooue all letts and impediments
that Velez Malaga might do vnto them, the which place was beseeged in Aprill 1487.
And the king being desirous to lodge certaine companies of footmen vpon a rising hill,

which did greatly import the saftie of the armie, the Moores making a furious salley
foorth of the cittie, did beate them from thence, and the King was the same time armed
with a Cuirasse, his sword in his hand, exposing himselfe that day to the enemies arrowes
and shot, which fell round about him as thicke as haile, beeing in great danger of
his person: neuerthelesse his people by his presence were encouraged, and forced the
Moores to turne their backes, and to shut themselues into the towne.
Albeit, that this valour of the kings be prayse-worthie, and highly to bee extolled as a
singular example, yet notwithstanding it may be reproued, in regard of the conicquence
of a mischiefe which might haue happened, therefore they besought him, no more to hazard
his person in such dangerous attempts. The next day they assayled the suburbes,
where the Moores had barricadoed themselues, who defended it for the space of sixe
whole houres with such obstinacie, as the Christians could not get one foote of ground
from them, vntill that the Duke of Nagera, and the Earle of Benauent came with fresh
succours, who caused the enemies to leaue the place, but to the cost of diuers: for Nugno
d' Aquila, and Don Martin of Acugna were flayne there, Don Carlo of Gueuara, Garcy
Lazo de la Vega, Fernando de Vega, Iohn de Merlo, with diuers other men of note were
hurt. The Artillerie was not yet come to the campe, therefore King Fernand caused diuers
forts to be made against the citie, wherein he lodged diuers companies of souldiers,
and being well acquainted with the Mores pollicies, he placed in all the wayes that led to
the campe, in the mountaines and vallies, which might any way be an hinderance to the
armie, diuers watches and sentinels, with places for them to retire vnto, which were well
furnished and defended by valiant souldiers; vppon which occasions, sundrie profitable
things were ordained necessarie for martiall discipline, the Moores neuer ceasing from
comming downe from the Mountaines, and making many enterprises vppon the armie
which they kept in continuall alarme.
King Muley Boabdallin on the other side, beeing importuned by the Affricane Captaines,
and old Moores of Granado to succor Velez Malaga, he went to field with great
numbers of horse and foote, and passing thorough sharpe and narrow places, hee sent
part of his forces from Bentomnix against the Master of Alcantara, who conducted the
artillerie; but hauing intelligence, that king Fernand had sent the great Commaunder of
Leon for his conuoy, he called backe the Moores, and with all his forces he beganne the
very same night to come downe from the hilles, and presented himselfe in order of battell
in the view of the Christian armie, making shew as if they would succour the beseeged,
or else dye in fight. this sudden and vnlookt-for arriuall of the enemies, made diuers
at their wits end, and did in a manner terrifie them: wherefore it behooued king
Fernand to vse his best skill and discretion, so to order matters, as he might not receiue a
disgrace: but Don Diego Hurtado of Mendoza, brother to the Cardinall of Spaine, a
braue and resolute knight, beeing in the fore-ward with the Cardinals forces, did put
them out of feare: for he gallantly opposed himselfe against the front of the Mores battalions,Shamefull retreate of the Moores.
and made them to stand still. They perceiuing the Christians valour and boldnesse,
did dislodge by breake of day, like runawayes in such amazement, as many of them
flung away their weapons and armor, to be the lighter to run. This notwithstanding, the
king would not be ouer confident, but caused euery man to stand still in his order the
whole day long and the night following, vntill he had certaine notice that the Moores
flight was not fained but true.
King Muley Boabdellin by this shamefull retreate lost his reputation amongst his own
people,Moores. so as they beganne to detest him,Muley Boabdellin reiected, and Mahomet the Little receiued by the Granadins. and to incline to his aduersarie Mahomet the
Little. This Moorish armie did disperse it selfe into sundrie places, and Muley with-drew
himselfe to Alnumecar, and then to Almerie, from whence he went to Guadix. By this
disgrace of his, King Mahumet the Little found meanes to recouer the Alhambra, and
all the strong places of the Cittie, where hee cut off the heads of foure Moorish knights
of the noble family of Aben Carrax, because they had opposed themselues against him
at his returne from prison. By this meanes he remayned King of Granado alone, and making
vse of the king of Castiles friendship, hee obtained two truces for his vassals, and
sufferance to go and trafficke in their dominions, and to buy all kind of merchandizes,

armor, and victuals excepted: and hee did not not onely obtaine it for those Moores,
which were now obedient vnto him, but for all those that would submit themselues to
his Crowne hereafter, and besides that, souldiers, artillerie, and all other prouision to
poursue his Vncle, and to annoy those places which were vnder his subiection, publishing
declaratorie letters of his loue and good will towards all such as within sixe moneths
after would submit themselues to him, and threatning grieuous punishment to the obstinate
and rebelllous.
The Moores within Velez Malaga hauing seene the flight of their King Muley Boabdellin
el Zagal were out of all hope to receiue any succour from him,Castille. and fearing that as
soone as the artillerie was come, they should be enforced to yeeld, they compounded by
the meanes of the Earle of Cifuentes, and yeelded vp the place, their liues and goods
beeing saued, their victuals and armor excepted: and they had licence to depart into Affricke,
or else-where, or if it pleased them, they might remaine in Castile. The towne of
Bentomnix followed the example of Velez Malaga, and the gouernement thereof was
giuen to Pietro Nauarro, who from a poore youth, (although a gentleman) and from being
a marriner, as it is reported, attained to the degree of a Captaine, and afterward became
one of the most famous men of his time, as well in the warres of Spaine as Italy,
and was created Earle of Albeto. The towne of Comares, and diuers other Castles of
the Countrey called as Alpuxares, hearing of the Kings of Castiles good successe, did
at the first summons without any resistance submit themselues to their obedience, paying
the same tribute to them which they did vse to pay to the Moore kings; and vppon
other conditions which were imposed vppon them, to the end to be the better assured of
them, till such time as they did become Mudejares, whereby they might liue in their vain
superstion. The gouernement of Velez Malaga was giuen to the great Commaunder
Don Guttiere de Cardegna, Superintendent or high Treasurer to the Kings.
The neighbour Countries beeing thus cleansed of the enemies places of retreate,Malaga beseaged. the
armie marched to the seege of Malaga, a cittie, as hath beene sayd, exceeding strong,
and well prouided of men, victuals, and all other necessaries: within the which a valiant
Captaine called Hali Duax, had the commaund of diuers valiant Moores, as well of the
Realme of Granado, as of Affricane Gomeres, but vnderneath a Generall, or Alcayde
major, who was as Constable to the King el Zagal, whose name was Amet-zeli, who
was then at Guadix, from whence the King made warre vppon his Nephew, and from
thence, at the earnest entreatie of his subiects, hee intended to succour Malaga, if neede
were; which the Kings of Castile sent to summon, promising libertie to the Moores, and
assurance of their liues and goods: but they answered that their king had placed them
there, not to giue the towne to the Kings of Castile, but valiantly to defend it, whereof
they meant to shew sufficient proofes.
This answer beeing made, they consulted whether it were best to batter it, or else to
beseege it a farre off, cutting off their victuals, and annoying them by the neighbour garisons,
vntill they were enforced to yeeld: the king remained firme in his opinion, which
was to beseege it roundly neere hand, notwithstanding, that they prayed him to consider
the great strength thereof, as well by nature as by art: for the cittie of Malago stands
vpon a plaine on the sea side, which beates vppon the walles, wherewith it is well rounded:
and it was flanquered with strong towers according to those times, hauing two Castles
seated vppon a little hill, one of which is called Alcacaua, and the other Gibralfar,
which is the highest of the two, whereunto men go from the one to the other, by a way
about sixe foote broade, betwixt two great walles, wherewith it was couered, and these
two fortresses were likewise compassed with strong walls and high towers, furnished with
Artillerie, engines of defence, and great numbers of valiant souldiers, who were all of
them determined rather to dye then to yeeld.
Now for the more easie and commodious lodging of the armie, it was needfull to
winne a little hill, seated a stones cast from the fort of Gibralfar, betwixt the same and
an high hill: there the Moores made great resistance, notwithstanding it was wonne, and
foureteene thousand footmen, and fiue and twenty hundred horse were placed there, vnder
the commaund of the Marquis of Cales: the next day after, they disposed the quarters

round about the towne: the Marquis had the first, with whome were Don Gattiere
of Sottomajor, Don Aluaro Bacan, Fernand de Vega, and the Pourveyor of Villafranca,
Don Pedro Vaca, and Garcy Brauo Captaine of Atienca, with other Captaines and
Knights, namely, Charles Areillan, Hernand Carillo, Don Francisco of Bouadilla, Don
Diego Lopes d' Ayala, George de Veteta, Gouernour of Soria, and Michel d' Abassa. The
next quarter belonged to Don Diego Fernand of Cordoua, hauing charge of the forces
of the Dukes of Albuquerque, and of Medina Sidonia, and so consequently euery man
had his quarter disposed to him round about the cittie, the Earle of Cifuentes, Captaine
of the men of Siuill, Don Lorenzo Suares Figueroa, Earle of Feria, and Don Guttiere of
Padilla, Treasurer of Calatraua with the forces of Eccia, those of the Earle of Benauent,
those of Pero Carillo of Albornos, and of the Arch-bishop of Siuill, then the companies
of the Earle of Vregna, those of Don Alphonso of Aguilar, of the Duke of Nagera, of
Don Fredericke of Toledo, of Iohn Aluares, and of Alphonso Osorio: Don Diego Hurtado
of Mendoza followed after with the forces of the Cardinall his brother, the Earle of Cabra,
the great Commaunder of Leon, with the men of Cordoua, those of Don Garcy
Lopes of Padilla, Master of Calatraua, of Don Antonio of Fonseca, of Antonio d' Aguilar,
of Don Alphonso of Cardegna, Master of Saint Iames, those of Don Lewis Fernand Porto
Carrero Lord of Palma, and of Don Iohn of Estuniga Master of Alcantara.
Malaga beeing thus beseeged, the Kings tent was knowne by the Moores, who bestowed
many cannon shot vpon it from the citie, so as they were constrayned to remooue
it behind a little hil. The batterie planted to the most conuenient places was great
and furious from the Marquis of Cales quarter against the Castle of Gibralfar, the which
in many places was pierced and ouerthrowne in many places, and as soone repayred by
the Moores. The Marquis hauing taken away the towers which did offend him, aduanced
his lodging a stones cast nearer to the fort, but hee was constrained to returne to his
former quarter by the continuall sallies which the Moores made vpon him and his people,
fighting with such furie, as they came to the poynyard, and slue the Captaine of Atienca,
and Inigo Lopes of Medran, Lord of Cauagnillas, Gabriel of So^tomajor, and other
valiant men, besides diuers hurt, in the number of whome was the Marquis, who
was shot into the arme with an arrow, for the Moores fought from a place of great aduantage. At this seege, two great shippes of warre arriued on the coast of Malaga, commaunded
by Don Ladron de Gueuara sent from Flanders by Maximilian of Austria king
of the Romaines, husband to the heire of Bourgondie, and father to Philip which was
sonne-in-law to the Kings of Castile,The Emperor Maximillian sends Artillery and powder from Flanders to the king of Castile. who for the seruice of this warre did send these two
vessels laden with diuers peeces of brasse Ordonance, and ba^rels of powder, bels for the
use of the Churches of the places newly conquered, great store of mettall, with workmen
to worke it, with other instruments and things necessarie for the warre, beeing desirous
for his part to partake in some sort the honour of this great conquest which his posteritie
enioyeth at this day. A tower of the cittie beeing wonne with great toyle and effusion of
bloud, was quickly recouered againe by the Moores, who grew more obstinate in their
defence, by meanes of a false rumor raised by certaine cowards of the campe, which desired
to returne home againe, who sayd, that Queene Izabella did sollicite the King her
husband to rayse his seege, because the plague was within and about diuers places of the
Cittie, and in this hope the Barbarians did valiantly resist all assaults. The King to let them
vnderstand, that his intent was otherwise, sent for the Queene to come to the campe,
who was accompanied thither by great numbers of voluntarie Knights: and then hee
sent word to the beseeged, that if they would yeeld, he would vse them gently as hee had
done others, if not, he gaue them to vnderstand, that he would not depart thence, till the
cittie were taken, and that then they should expect nothing but rigor; to the which they
made no answer, but did streightly commaund that not any one amongst them should
dare, vpon paine of life, to talke of any agreement or composition with the kings of Castile:
and they did indeed kill diuers vppon the same occasion, being resolued to hold out
till their last breath, the which did greatly prolong the seege, where powder beginning to
fayle, the gallies were sent to Valencia, Barcelona, yea into Sicill, which brought thither
great quantitie.

The King of Portugall beeing entreated to send some thither likewise, did it willingly,
and with great speed. There was no part of the day almost, which was free from skirmisnes,
where many men of either side dyed daily: wherefore certaine Moores of the Cittie beeing
displeased with the losse of their friends, and fore-seeing the danger whereinto they
were likely to fall, yet not daring to speake of composition, did secretly send a messenger
to the campe, to tell king Fernand, that if he would promise to saue their liues and
goods, they would giue him entrance, whereunto the king consented, and as this Moore
returned, he was taken by certaine Gomeres of Affricke, who assayled him with their
swords in such sort, as he returning hurt to the campe, dyed there, and so the treaty ended.
As the land skirmishes were continuall, so were those at sea, where the armie of Castile
did hinder, as much as in them lay, any entrance of comming foorth of the cittie, and to
redresse the sallies by land, there were by the diligence of Garcy Lazo de la Vega, Iohn d' Estuniga,
and Diego of Tayde, diuers forts made, and great trenches drawne, where diuers
great Corps de gard were placed, so as the Moores in that manner shutte in, could not
do so much hurt, nor vexe the armie as before it had done, the Moores beeing neuerthelesse
constant in their resolution to hold out to the last man, nothwithstanding that
victuals did greatly decrease in the cittie: for they were aduertised by diuers traitors of
the campe of whatsoeuer was done there good or bad, and oftentimes they told them,
that which was false, in such sort as they were not discouraged, but did beleeue, that the
king and Queene would shortly bee constrained to depart thence, and there were some
that left the cittie, vnder color of yeelding themselues to the King, and to become Christians,
who falsely reported, that there was great and incredible aboundance of victuals,
and all other necessaries in the cittie, to the end thereby to cause the Christians to leaue
the seege, the which report did put the King and his Councell into a studie, whether they
should cease the batteries and assaults, and keepe the seege by sea with certaine gallies,
or else by land with certaine forts to starue them by little and little:The Arabians liue with a little. but weighing the nature
of that nation, who liue with so little meate, as it is to be wondered at, this counsell
was reiected as vnfruitfull, wherefore the batteries were renewed, and to that end diuers
artificiall engines were made of excellent inuention, and mynes were wrought in diuers
places, which beeing discouered by the industrious and vigilant Moores, were cause of
the death of a great number of braue souldiers. King Boabdellin el Zagal beeing daily sollicited
to succour Malaga, went foorth of Guadix, with certaine troupes of horse
and foote, but beeing met and encountred by the army of his nephew Mahomet, which
came foorth of Granado for the same purpose, hee was vanquished and put to flight,
whereof King Fernand had speedie intelligence, to his great contentment. Within the
beseeged cittie were certaine Moores that were esteemed holy men, who with mad and
idle prattle went about to encourage the souldiers, saying, that the dead did greatly desire
to rise againe, for to helpe them to driue the Christians thence, with other such like
words, which were of great force to animate that superstitious race. There arriued at the
campe fresh supplies of horse and foote from Arragon, Valencia, and Cattalognia,
which did much encourage the assaylants, who had this aduantage, not to want victuals.
The K. of Tremessen being aduertised by the Mores which daily past into Affricke vnder
the Kings safe-conduct of their great good successe in those warres of Granado, sent his
Ambassadours to them with rich presents, who did request their friendship and protection,
and permission for their Kings subiects to saile vpon the seas without hurt or feare
of the Spanish gallies, the which was graunted them, so as the King their maister did not
giue ayde and assistance to those of Malaga, and other Mores of Granado their enemies.
Matters standing at a stay, a certaine Moore borne at Tunis, leading a solitarie life neere
to Guadix, called Abraham Alguerri, a man of a low stature, and aged, began to preach
how that their Prophet Mahumet had reuealed to him, that if Malaga were this one time
releeued, it should neuer more be in danger to be taken: therefore vnder the conduct of
this Hermite, who was reputed a holy man, foure hundred horsemen did hazard to enter
the towne, who making way thorough the guards and trenches of the campe, two hundred
of them passed into the cittie, and the rest of them were cut in peeces.
The Hermite in the meane time had withdrawne himselfe aside, and looking as if hee

had beene rauished in spirit, was at his prayers in great deuotion: the Christian souldiors
which pursued the Moores did finde him, and brought him before the Marquis of
Cales, who askt him what he was, hee made answer that hee was an holy man, vnto
whom God reuealed his great secrets, which should happen in that seege, and end by
the taking of Malaga, whith the number of seauen; and what signifies seauen sayd the
Marquis, are they yeares or moneths? they are neither yeares nor monthes, quoth the
Hermit but weekes, daies, or howers, but enquire no farther of mee: for Alla (that is
God) hath commanded mee, to tell the rest in secret to the King and Queene, and to
none others. The Marquis although hee made a iest of that hee heard the Moore say,
did neuerthelesse send him to the King, by a reuolted Moore; for hee would not leaue
his owne quarter, especially so soone after the fight: when hee arriued, the King was a
sleepe, and the Queene taking no delight to behold such manner of foolish people, hee
was brought into a tent,A Mahom^tan Hermite^ murtherer. where Don Beatrix de Bouadilla was in talke with Don Aluaro
Son to the Duke of Braganca who was fled from Portugall, and Ruy Lopes de Toledo the
Queenes Treasorer. The Marchiones looking vpon this old Hermit, bad them giue him
some meate: hee seeing her to bee richly apparrelled, and they that were with her in like
manner, asked those that were next him, if it was the King, and Queene, they to mocke
him, told him it was they. Then the villaine, who of purpose came from his cell with an
intent to kill them, layd hand vpon a short Cimetar, that hee wore vnder his habit, and
therewith gaue Don Aluaro, such a stroake vpon the head, as he had well neere slaine him,
and being ready to doe as much to the Marquis, the Treasorer there present did hold
him backe, and the rest runne out of the tent, yet at the noyse diuers of the Marquis seruants,
came running in and hewed the wicked Hermit in peeces. The King beeing awake
and hearing what was done, did greatly wonder at his boldnesse, and was afterward
better guarded. The peeces of the Moores body, were with engines throwne into
the Citty, in reuenge whereof the Moors did kill a Christian prisoner, who was a man of
note, and setting him vpon an asse, they draue it towards the campe, where at the same
instant Don Henriques de Guzman, Duke of Medina Sidonia with his trayne did arriue,
who besides the supply of soldiours, which hee brought, did lend the King twenty thousand
golden doubles, and the very day of his comming, more then a hundred shippes loden
with victualls and munition did arriue in the roade neere to Malaga, where-with the
army was greatly refreshed, and the Duke highly honored and esteemed, for such a seruice:
Soone after, there arriued other succors from the Duke of Infantasgo. The Moores
being againe summoned to yeeld, and not to attend the miseries, which a victory gotten
by force doth bring with it, being still obstinate, and hauing notice of certaine diseases
in the campe, they would by no meanes harken there-vnto: wherefore they were assayled
a fresh, and did as valiantly defend them-selues, killing many Christians. The
citty beeing in great want of victualls, the Moores did already beginne to eate rosted
skins, and other such like things, but they had still some idle Prophet or other which confirmed
them in there obstinacy: yet notwithstanding, two of the cheefest Moores in the
citty,Superstitions Moores. whose names were Amet-Aben-Amar, and Ali Dudux, and with them an Alfaqui
called Abraham Alharis; with diuers Marchants, officers, and men of quality, being ioyned
together, came and besought the gouernour to take some order, for the people of
the Citty, which dyed for hunger, who without any hope of releefe, could not anoyd
the enemies rigor, and that hee needed not to thinke it a disgrace to him to yeeld the
citty of Malaga, seeing that other places as strong as it in the realme of Granado had
yeelded to the Christians: if hee thought to better their estate by a battayle, they wisht
him to march forth to the fight, for they were not able any longer to liue, in so great
necessity: but all this serued to no purpose. The King perceauinge the obstinacy of
this wretched people, caused certaine peeces of ordonance to bee bent against the towers
of the bridge, the first of which was wonne by assault, Francisco Ramiers of Madrid
Captaine of the artillery, hasting and increasing the battery to prepare entrance for the
soldiours was by the king made knight the same day for his good seruice. The beseeged
being brought to the last dispaire, a great troupe of horse and foote animated by one of
their Prophets, made a furious sally vpon the quarters of the masters of Saint Iames, and
Alcantara, where at the beginning they caused great disorder comming vnlook't for,

but at the last they were repulsed and beaten back with great slaughter, and the Moore
Prophet was the first man that was slaine. By this ouerthrow the Alcaide or Gouernor
beeing excused from making any more resistance, gaue the inhabitants leaue to capitulate
as well as they could with the Kings of Castile: wherefore they sent Amet-Aben-Amar,
and Ali Dudux, and three other principall Moores to the Campe, who besought
the Kings to receiue them for Mudejares or vassals, and to giue to them and the rest of
the Cittizens, the towne of Coin to dwell in, and to permit those that would, to passe into
Affrick with their goods: the King told them that the great Commander of Leon
should make them an answer, the which was, that for as much as the extremity of hunger
had constrained them to yeeld, and not any good will to the Kings, it behooued them to
yeeld to their mercy. Those of the towne hauing vnderstood the Kings resolution by
their deputies, did say, that in regarde they went about to take away the liberty of their
persons, they were resolued to hang fiue hundred Christian prisoners on the walls, and
then to come forth euery man with his sword in hand, and to dye fighting: the King sent
them word that if they did put one Christian to death, hee would without any mercy,
put them all to the edge of the sword. Those of Malaga once againe sent foureteene
Moores of euery quarter of their Citty to the Campe, who brought with them a writing
which they shewed for an example of the deceased Kings of Castiles clemencie vsed to
the subiugated Moores, and with great humillity they begged for mercy. Diuers of the
Lords and Captaines were of opinion to put all that raskally obstinate nation to death,
who were enemies to the name of a Christian: but the Queenes more iust and Christian-like
opinion was followed, which was to saue all their liues. Then the King wrote
back to them, that their liues were onely granted, and no more: whereat the Moores being
much astonied, were at strife amongst themselues, some beeing of opinion to make a
desperate sally vpon the Christians with their weapons, and to set fire on the Citty, and
all the wealth thereof, following the examples of certaine townes of Spaine in antient
times; but they who thought it better to become slaues, did preuaile. Thus was the Citty
of Malaga yeelded:The Citty of Malaga yeelded. the great Commander of Leon entring first into it with his
troopes in armes, by meanes of hostages, who seazed vpon the Citty, towers and Fortes
thereof, and hauing disarmed the Moores of all their weapons and munition, all people
of both sexes and of all ages were assembled in the two base Courts of the Castle of
Alcacauo, where most lamentable cryes of Morish men and women were heard, lamenting
their liberty, and goodly Citty lost, with their Fortes, Towers and Castles, which
could not defend her Cittizens liues, nor giue them buriall after their death. Among
the multitude, twelue renegades Christians were found, who serued as spyes for the
Moores, who were stricken thorow with Darts, and so slaine: the Christian prisoners
were deliuered and sent home to their houses, fauoured and rewarded by the Kings.
Two other Sea townes neere to Malaga, were likewise taken, and the Moores made
slaues, by Pedro de Vera whom the King had sent thither.
After that all things were surely possessed by the Christians in Malaga, the Bishops
and Clergie made their entrance, who performed the accustomed ceremonies, purifications,
dedications, with such other solemnities, as wee haue heretofore written: and the
Kings hauing at the same time receiued a Bull from Pope Innocent, by the which hee
granted them and their successors, authority to name and appoint Bishops and other
Ecclesiasticall d^gnities needfull in the Realme of Granado, it was thought fit to restore
the Bishops Sea to the Citty of Malaga,Don Pedro de Toleno Bishop of Malaga. as it had beene in times past, and Don Pedro
de Toledo was chosen Bishop of the same, who was a Channon of Siuill, a man of
great learning and merit, who was confirmed therein by the Pope, vnto whom the
Kings sent a hundred Moores Gomeres of Affrick for a present, and to Queene Ioane of
Naples the Kings sister, fifty Morish maides, and thirty to the Queene of Portugall: of
all the other slaues, the third part of them was diuided among the Lords, Knights,
Gentlemen, and Captaines of the Campe: an other third part was imployed for the redemption
and exchange of Christian Captines: and an other third part remained to
the Kings, towards their great costs and charges sustained in that siege, the which lasted
three moneths and one day, which was the eighteene of August this yeare 1487.

The order and gouernement of the Cittie beeing disposed, the commaund thereof
was giuen to Don Garcia Fernandes Manrique, who had beene Corrigidor of Cordoua.
The Iudges, Rectors, and Iurates, with other Officers of iustice, beeing established, the
goods were distributed to such as were receiued for new inhabitants, who were prouided
of good and wholesome lawes, though fit and necessarie for those times.
These matters with others beeing dispatched, the King and Queene returned victorious
and triumphant to Cordoua; where they were no sooner arriued, but they began to
thinke vppon necessarie prouisions for the next yeares warre: for, seeing they had had so
happie successe alreadie, they were very loth to giue it ouer by any interruption whatsoeuer.
In the interim of these great businesses, the strifes of diuers Arragonois did still trouble
the Kings eares, for that in regard of his long absence, all appeales comming before
the Magistrate, whom they call Iustice of Arragon, all euident wrongs, excesses, and outrages
committed by the great ones, were with partialitie drawne out in length. The
Kings left Cordoua and came to Sarragossa, where they assembled the Estates to redresse
those insolencies which were complayned of. The Estates beeing perswaded by the Vicechancellor
of the Kingdome, whom the King had appoynted to speake vnto them, did
relinquish diuers poynts of their pretended rights and liberties, and did suffer many
things to be reformed, and namely, they were content to establish the Courts of iustice
of the Hermandades or brotherhoods,Hermandades in Arragon. after the manner of Castile, a most profitable and
necessarie matter for the whole countrie, and did besides that obtaine great subsidies of
money for the King towards the wars of Granado.Inquisition in Arragon. And because the Inquisition brought
great profite to the Kings coffers in Castile, of the goods of the Iewes and Moores, which
were reuolted to their foolish superstitions: it was decreed, that like proceeding should
be vsed against them in Arragon, and Iudges appointed to make their definitiue sentence.
One of the sayd Commissioners had like to haue beene slayne, by those manner of
people, on a morning in the Church of Sarragossa, which gaue them occasion to enquire
more diligently of such as were faulty: wherein, choller, greedinesse of gaine, and
desire to fill the kings coffers, made them greatly to exceed, the which the practise of
their successours at this day can very well witnesse: the obstinate were burned, and those
which did reconcile themselues, or were in any fault at all, were fleeced to the very
quicke.
The Kings passing into the Realme of Valencia, which was troubled with the same diseases,
did call the Estates to Orihuela, where they made diuers goodly Edicts. Whilest
the Court lay at Valencia, there entred into Cattalonia an Ambassador from the French
king Charles the eighth, sent to King Fernand, who sent to meete him, and to let him vnderstand,
that vnlesse he brought with him the restitution of the Earledome of Rossillon,
he might returne from whence hee came,King Fernand refuseth to heare or see the French Ambassadour. and for ought that the Ambassadour could say
or do, he could not be suffered to come to Valencia, but was enforced to returne without
beeing heard or seene. King Charles at the same time was troubled with ciuill warres
against the Duke of Orleance, Duke Francis of Brittaine, and the Lord of Albret, who
was dispossessed of his lands, father to Iohn of Albret who was king of Nauarre, and with
others.



Iohn of Albret, and Katherine of Nauarre, Kings
of Nauarre, accounted for the 35. in the
order of the Kings.
IOHN of Albret,Nauarre. the sonne of Alain, of whom we haue made mention heretofore, was
married to Catherine the heire of Nauarre: but before we come to the declaration therof,
it shall be neeedfull to speake of the state wherein the late King Francis Phoebus left the
succession to his sister Katherine who raigned after him. Iohn, Vicount of Narbone, vnkle
to her,Iohn Vicount of Narbon quarrels for the Earledome of Foix, and Seigneury of Bearne. and to the deceased King, did foorth-with quarrell with the Lords of Foix and
Bearne, saying, that for those lands, lying vpon the limits of the Realme of France, where
women do not succeed, that Queene Catherine his Neece was incapable of enioying
them, and therefore shee ought to content her selfe with her inheritance of Nauarre,
which is gouerned by other lawes, and to leaue those two Lordships to him. Vppon this
strife great warre arose betwixt the parties the Vicount of Narbonne, beeing fauoured
by Iasper of Villemur, Seneshall of Foix, and the Lord of Calmont, Iohn of Castel Verdun,
and others; who the yeare 1484. leading with them forces of horse and foot, tooke,
through the trecherie of one called Romengas, the towne of Maceres, and then they seized
on Monthault, and in the end they came to assayle Pamiers, where the cittizens would
willingly haue receiued the Vicount, whom they acknowledged to be a son of the house
of Foix, but not his souldiers, whereat the Vicount being enraged, went to S. Antonies,
which is the Cathedral church, and the Bishops place of residence, from whence he draue
away Paschal, who was Bishop and possessor thereof, and enthronized Mathew Artigalu
therein, who pretended and pleaded the sayd Bishopricke against the other: the Vicount
moreouer, doing his best to enter into Pamiers, but the inhabitants persisting in their resistance,
he was constrayned to retire to Maseres, from which place he continued the war
against his Neece, and the princesse Magdalen her mother, who sent in the yeare 1485.
Iohn of Lautrec to keepe and defend the countrey of Foix with diuers troupes leauied in
Bearne, and in the Earledome of Bigorre, as also to recouer that which Iohn of Foix Vicount
had vsurped. Lautrec marching on to execute his commission, was preuented by
the way by Raymond Lordat, Lord of Rodel, who intreated him, from those of Sauardun,
who some few dayes before had yeelded to the Vicount, to pardon them, in regard they
did it to auoyd the present danger, and to appease the Vicounts furie, against whom they
were not strong enough to resist, they being desirous with all their hearts to serue queene
Catherine their naturall Princesse, and that if her pleasure were to receiue them, they wold
obey her, and most willingly would cast off the Vicounts yoake: therefore the Lord of
Rodell intreated him to make all the hast he could to Sauardun, assuring him that hee
should be kindly welcomed, and let into the towne. Lautrec accepting this offer marched
thither, and arriued at the bridge gate, at the same instant, when as the Vicount of Narbone,
who was aduertised of all their practises entred at another gate called Vlmet. These
two Lords being met together in this sort, did in stead of assayling one another, performe
offices of complement, and they fell into discourse of peace, which grew to this conclusion,
that Iohn of Foix should enioy Sauardun, Maseres, Monthault, and S. Espartio, with
the church of S. Anthony, the castle of Heremen and Montagu, with other places and
forts, the which agreement, as being vnlawfull, was not obserued: for within a few dayes
after, Odet Cardinall of Carcasson, recouered Montagu and S. Anthonies, and restored
them to Queene Catherine. Lautrec likewise on the other side took Montagu, S. Espartio,
with the castle of Heremen, which he ouerthrew. In those businesses was queen Catherine
entertayned in the beginning of her raigne, to the great contentment of the chief Lords
of the factions in Nauar, who in the meane time managed their owne affaires by the intelligences
which they had in Castile, notwithstanding any impediment that the Lord of
Aubenas was able to giue them, who was Viceroy in that Kingdome.
The yeare following, which was 1486. Iohn Vicount of Foix in recompence of the losses
he had sustained, did by intelligence with certaine of the Inhabitants surprize the

towne of Pamiers, and left the Lord of Lauellane with certaine companies of souldiers
there: but Captaine Peter Bunfiere, did, by the selfe same meanes, and by the helpe of a
Lock-smith who made false keyes to the gate of Conserans, beeing sent thither by
the Princesse Magdalen, and the Queene her daughter, recouer the sayd towne, slew diuers
of the Garrison with Lauellanet their Captaine, and carried thence whatsoeuer hee
found: yet for all this, the warre ended not, but continued to the great hinderance and
preiudice of the countries of Foix and Bearne: during which turmoyles, the Princesse
Magdalen reiecting the great and profitable match which was offered by the Prince of
Castile, married her daughter to Iohn of Albret, which caused many troubles in the
Realme of Nauarre:The factious of Nauarr hinder their Princesse marriage. For it was no easie matter to bring the factious to any reason. Those
which had any intelligences with Castile, were so farre off from desiring this marriage
with Prince Iohn of Castile, as they hindered it to their vttermost power, because they
would not be subiect to a Prince that was mightie, and had means to punish their crimes,
and yet neuerthelesse, they could make vse of the occasion, why that match was not accomplished,
by resisting their Princesse and Iohn of Albret her husband, and by that
meanes vpheld themselues in their tyrannies. The absence of the Cardinall of Foix, the
Queenes Vnkle, was a great hinderance to her affaires: For this yeare 1486. he was sent
for to Rome by Pope Innocent the eighth, to be employed for the pacification of Naples,
which was troubled with ciuill wars betwixt the Barons and their King Fernand, the
same king beeing at great strife with the Pope, who sent this Cardinall to Naples with
power as Legate ^a latere, where in some sort, he composed those differences: but he dyed
at Rome, and neuer returned more into Nauarre: the state of which Kingdome beeing
thus miserably distracted, Amand, Lord of Albret, father to the new king, did resolue to
enter into Nauarre, where hauing had conference with the Lord of Aubenas his brother,
who was Viceroy there, and then with Iohn de Ribera, who spoiling the countrie for
the King of Castile at the same time, vnder color of defending and vpholding the Constable
D. Lewis of Beaumont, Earle of Lerin, and who had taken certaine townes, he delt
in such sort,Castillans spoile the Realme of Nauarr. as he perswaded him to go with him to Valencia to king Fernand, where being
arriued, the Lord of Albret beeing welcomed and kindly entreated, did beseech the
King to accept of the desire he had to do him seruice, in stead of the effect, for so much
as he was a poore Knight, vniustly expelled from his countrie by the French King, who
was mooued against him,Amand of Albret, (...) the K of Castile to war vpon K. Charles the eight. and Iohn of Albret his sonne, whose person with his kingdome
of Nauarre, hee came to offer vnto him, requesting him to receiue them into his protection:
and also that he had commission to make the like request for the Dukes, Francis
of Brittaine, and Lewis of Orleance, poursued and afflicted by the same King Charles, each
of whom promised him seruice and ayde for the recouerie of his Earledome of Rossillon,
and in all other occasions.King Fernand sauoues Amand of Al^ret against King Charles. The Lord of Albrets speech was fauourably and attentiuely
heard by King Fernand, who graunted all that which hee demaunded in the behalf of the
king his son, commanding Iohn de Ribera to restore to him or his Lieutenants Viana, with
all the rest of the places, which he held in the Realme of Nauar. And did moreouer giue
order for the rigging forth of an army by sea in Guipuscoa and Biscay, against the French
King for the aide of the aboue-named Princes, who had likewise sollicited Henry the seuenth
King of England to take their part, who inclined thereunto, so as a great number
of Spanish shippes did lye vppon the coasts of Brittaine, whose Admirall was Monsieur
Gralla, with whom Alain of Albret returned, and an armie out of England was likewise
sent, conducted by the Lord Scales to the hurt of the French-men, who by meanes of a victorie
obtained by K. Charles or his Lieutenants,K. Charles his victorie at S. Aubin. at S. Aubin, did deliuer themselues from
all danger, the D. of Orleance, and Monsieur Gralla being taken prisoners: the Lord of Albret
escaped, and the D. of Brittaine died for griefe of mind, leauing two daughters, Anne
the eldest, albeit that she was promised to Maximilian King of the Romains, who was of
the D. of Orleance faction, was won by King Charles to be his wife, who was desirous by
such a marriage to vnite the Dutchie of Brittaine to his Crowne. And because he was betrothed
to Marguerit^ of Austria, daughter to the king of the Romaines, who beeing very
young, was brought vp in France, in hope of the future marriage, he sent her home againe,
and she was afterwards married to Prince Iohn of Castile.

The Bretons euer hating the French gouernment,The Britons oppose themselues against the French King. keeping their Princesse in the Castle
of Nantes, made new practises with the Kings of Castile and England, and obtained
great ayde from both of them, Don Diego Peres Sarmjento Earle of Salinas, beeing
Generall of the Spanish Armie on the coast of Brittaine, with Don Pero Carillo de
Albornos, and other renowned Captaines, hauing two hundred men at armes, and great
numbers of footmen, Crosbowes, Pikes, and Harquebuziers, who were called in those
dayes Espingardiers. King Charles in the meane time came with a mighty Armie, and besieged
Nantes, and by intelligence with some, hee obtained the Citty, Castle, and the
Dutchesse whom hee married in the yeare 1489. and made her French Queene, making
himselfe Maister of her inheritance, in despight of the Britons. This faire and gratious
Princesse Anne, was daughter to Dutchesse Marguerite, and grand-child to Queene Leonar
of Nauarre, as hath beene already said, and coosin germaine to Queene Catherine of
Nauarre, of whom we now treate.
Wee will now returne to the Kings of Castile.Castile. After the assembly of the states of
the Realme of Valencia at Orihuela, where diuerse ancient customes were reformed, and
many notable orders receiued and established, they came to Murcia, with an intent to
warre vpon the Moores from that part. There did Don Frederick de Toledo Captaine
of the Kings guards,Death of Don Garcy Aluares and of D Aluarode Estuniga. aske leaue to visit Don Garcy Aluares de Toledo his father, who lay
deadly sick; in wose dignities, to wit, the Dutchie of Alua, the Marquisat of Coria, and
Earledome of Barco, his sonne succeeded him. This yeare likewise dyed Don Aluaro d'
Estuniga Duke of Playsance, leauing his sonne of the same name successor in his Dutchie.
The Bishop of Astorga likewise dyed, in whose place Bernardin de Caruajall was
substituted, who was afterward Cardinall of the Sea of Rome, of the title of the holy
Crosse. The companies from all parts of the kingdome made their Rendez-vous at
Lorca, whether King Ferdinand marched, hauing in his company the Duke of Albuquerque,
the Marquis of Cales, the Earles of Lemos, Saint Steeuens, Castro, Cabra,
Montagu, Buendia, and Don Henry Henriques the great Maister, Don Pero Lopes de Padilla
Captaine of the frontiers of Castile, Don Iohn Chacon, Captaine of the frontier
of Murcia and others. The Army beeing ready to march, the Marquis of Cales, and
the Captaine of the frontier of Murcia leading the foreward, marched against the Cittie
of Vera, the inhabitants whereof, who were Moores, beeing assured that they came
towards them,Vera yeelded by composition. would not fall into the like mischiefe as those of Malaga, wherefore they
sent out before to the Marquis, offering to yeeld their Citty to King Ferdinand, if hee
were there in person: wherefore the King made hast, and the Citty submitted vnto him
on condition that their liues, liberties and goods might bee saued, with promise to liue
in their religion in the next townes, or else where they should thinke good. Garcy Laso
de la Vega Maister of the Kings Hall, was made Gouernor of Vera. Diuers others strong
townes and castles on those marches, beeing mooued by the reports of the Kings clemency,
and fearing likewise their great power, sent their Alfaquins or wise Councellors
and deputies,Places yeelded to the King and Queene of Castile. to offer them obedience and tribute, as they were accustomed to pay to the
Moore Kings, and namely the two Velez, the white and the redde, Muxicar, Cueuas, Telefique
Huescar, and Porchena, Tabara, Alborca, Serena, Torilla, Monjacar, Tabernas
and Benamaruel: the inhabitants of which places and diuers others, made themselues
Mudejares or vassals to king Ferdinand and Queene Isabell, keeping their ceremonies and
sect. The Armie after this marched towards Almerie, the which towne was then onely
lookt vpon by certaine light skirmishes with the Moores of the garrison: then part of the
army marched on forward within the view of Baca, where King Muley Boabdelin was then
in person, who came forth with certaine troopes of horse and foote, and made a great
skirmish, where D. Phillip of Nauarre and Arragon dyed, who was maister of Monteza,
nephew to the King, and sonne to Prince Don Charles of Viana, by vs oftentimes heretofore
mentioned, with other men of note, the which caused the Christians to make their
retreate, who were insolently pursued in the Rere by the Moores, who notwithstanding
were afterward beaten back by the Captaine of the frontier of Murcia. King Ferdinand
leauing for that time Almerie and Baca, two strong places, marched towards Huescar
which yeelded, and Don Rodrigo Manrique was made Gouernor thereof.

Whilest the warre continued in these quarters,Iniury done to one of the kings Receiuers of his money, and punishment of the offenders. the Captaine of Alua de Tormes, and
the gouernor of the Duke of Aluas lands, did Bastonado one of the Kings Collectors
of his rents, which the King hauing notice of, the Licentiate Lewis de Polanco Prouost of
the Court was sent thither to doe Iustice therevpon, who tooke the Captaine of Alua
in his owne Castle, and caused him to bee hanged in the same place where hee had done
the deed: As for the Gouernour of the Countrey, hee was brought to the Chancery
at Valiodolit, and there condemned to haue his hand stricken off, and to bee for euer
banished out of the Kings dominions. In the which place of Valiodolit the Court
came and wintered:Moneys. there was an Edict made concerning the moneys, that the siluer
coyne should bee thence-forth made of the same sterling as that of Paris.
It was enacted not long before in Portugall, to coyne certaine kindes of gold of 
two and twenty Carates,Portugal. of the golden mine of Guiney, and likewise certaine siluer
money, called, Twenties, of the worth of twenty Res, which were equiualent to the Marauedis
of Castile: for thirty six Res, were at that time worth a Real, as thirty sixe Marauedis
in Castile and Nauar: The affaires of which kingdome since the execution of the
Lords made by King Iohn were quiet and peaceable; for euery one seeing that hee had
not spared his owne bloud, kept himselfe still, and this King was not onely reuerenced
in Portugall, but likewise in Affricke, where hee possessed much land: in so much as the
Moores of Azamor, who had beene in times past vnder the subiection of Portugall, and
were now reuolted, did againe this yeare submit themselues vnto it: about which time
he built the Fountaine at Setuball. And hauing no businesses to hinder him, hee went
about to pursue new enterprises, no lesse profitable for mankinde, than honorable to the
house of Portugall: Hauing had the opinion and aduise of diuerse great personages
skilfull in Cosmographie, and all other Mathematicall sciences, and especially good
Marriners, hee sent away Bartholmew Dias, with a certaine religious Frier, named Anthony,
inioyning them to coast the shoares of Affrick of the Ocean sea,Nauiga^ions of the Portugals into the Ocean sea, pursued by the commandement of King Iohn. till they could bee
able to relate vnto him how farre that land stretched, and how the voyage which hee
conceiued in his owne vnderstanding, might bee made by the South into the East, to
the countreys and Islands where the spices growe: Bartholomew Dias and the Fryer arriued
at the Cape of Bonasperanza, or good hope, which is the farthest stretched out
point of Affricke beyond the Equinoctiall winter Tropick,Cape de bona Speranza. and doubling againe the
East,Riuer of the Infant. they came to the mouth of the Iland termed by them, of the Infant, which is a
hundred and fifty leagues farther then the Cape of good hope. There Fryer Anthonie
with the consent of Bartholmew Dias landed, and trauailed with such turnings vp
and downe this vnknowne world,Friev Anthonies long and dangerous iourney. as hee brought himselfe with great labour and danger,
as it is credible, into Palestine to the Citty of Ierusalem, taking a carefull note of
all things.
Bartholmew Dias returned by sea into Portugall, the same way hee came, and informed
the King of all that hee had seene or knowne of the shoares and sea coasts: as
Fryer Anthony did the like of his land voyage, beeing returned a good while after,
the which encreased King Iohns desire to execute his praise-worthy enterprise, esteeming,
and not without reason, that by the knowledge and practise of that Nauigation
great profit might redound to his kingdome. Now the better to vnderstand the costs
and charges of this trafficke for Spices brought from the Islands of the Moluccoes,
and to bee able to reckon what the commoditie thereof might come to, following
the passage of the Ocean sea: hee sent Pedro de Couanilla and Alphonso de Payua into
the East,King Iohns dilligence to learne the voyage to the East by the Ocean sea, and the Island of Moluccoes. who were wise and discreete persons, and very skilfull in the Arabian tongue,
to bring him word of the traffick of these countries: Hauing then furnished them
with money, credit, and other necessaries for so long a voyage, they went to Naples,
and from thence by Rhodes to Ierusalem, from whence they passed by Alexandria to
Caire, then they went to Aden, to Ormuz, and at last came to Calicut, and other
places of the Indies, carrying with them for their conduct, a Carde or Compasse
made by the licenciate Calsadilla Bishop of Viseo, the Doctor Rodrigue, Pero d' Alcacaba,
and Moyses a Iew, who had drawne it after the description of Martin of Boheme
the great Mathematician, taking information of all the parts of Ethiopia, Arabia,

Persia, and of the Indies where there is any trafficke, faires or assemblies of people.
Alphonso Payua died in this voyage: Pedro de Couanilla was deteined by Prester Iohn
Emperour of Ethiopia, so as the King could haue no relation from any of them concerning
their voyage: yet Couanilla found meanes to write a discourse of what hee
had learned, and sent it afterward to the King, by one Rabi Abraham, and Ioseph de Lamego,
who hauing beene already in Persia, were sent backe againe by King Iohn to
heere some newes of the said Pedro de Couanilla. This discourse did whet on the Kings
desire to effect this voyage, for the which purpose he did arme certaine Carauels
this yeere 1488. at the same time the marriage of his sonne Prince Alphonso, and the
Infanta Isabella eldest daughter to the King of Castile, whereof mention was made in
the treaty of peace betwixt Spaine and Portugall, was wholy agreed vpon, albeit the
Prince was then but thirteene yeeres of age: For the charges of which marriage the Estates
of the Kingdome gaue to King Iohn the sum of a hundred thousand golden crusadoes:
at which time the King being desirous to aduance to wealth and honor D. Pedro
de Meneses Earle of Villareal and Lord of Almeyda beeing at Beja, he created him Marquis
of Villareal, and Earle of Oren.
There came now into Castile a great Ambassage from Maximillian of Austria King
of the Romains,Castile. who in the city of Valiodolit propounded to King Fernand and
Queene Isabella, the desire which that Prince had to ally himselfe more streightly
with them by marriages, demaunding the Infanta Isabella for himselfe, and the Infanta
Ioane their daughters for his sonne Philip, setting downe diuers commodities which
such a coniunction might bring with it, namely in making warre vpon the French.
These Ambassadors beeing come by sea, their charges borne thorow the Kings countries,
and highly honoured, they did returne with an answere, conteyning very gracious
and pertinent excuses: to wit, that the Infanta Donna Isabella was promised to Prince
Alphonso of Portugall, but as for the Infanta D. Ioane, who was a young child, considering
that the long attendance for such a marriage might weary the Archduke Philip, they
could say nothing, but that as soone as she should be of age, if the occasion should serue,
they would esteeme the alliance and friendship of so great Princes as most honourable
and highly to bee desired, and that they beeing at that instant greatly busied in the
warres of Granado,Plaisance taken from D. Aluaro da Estuniga. could hardly thinke as yet vpon the French warres. Whilest
the Court staied at Valiodolit, Isabella caused the city of Playsance to bee surprized
and taken from Aluaro d' Estuniga who bare the title of Duke thereof, where shee established
officers of the crowne: and because the castle made some resistance, shee caused
it to be beseeged by those of Salamanca, Ciudad-Roderigo, and the men of Extremadura:
but the Duke knowing it to be to no purpose to make resistance did forth-with
commaund to yeeld it vp: so this city was reunited to the crowne this yeere 1488.
The Dukes of Playsance did then and afterwards intitle themselues Dukes of Bejar.
Those of the family of Caruajall did chiefely assist the Queene in this enterprise. The
same yeere died Donna Beatrice Pimentell, who was wife to Don Aluaro de Luna Constable
of Castile and Maister of Saint Iames, who was executed by order of law, shee
liued fiue and thirty yeeres in honest widdow-hood,Iewes and conuerted Moores oppressed by standerons reports. and lies buried in the Cathedrall
Church of Toledo in the Chappell of Saint Iames neere to her husband. The
Kings passed this yeere in the aboue named businesses about prouision of necessary
things for the future warre of Granado, doing iustice, and in persecuting the new conuerts
returned to Iudaisme, who were oftentimes ouerthrowne by false and slanderous
accusations, whereof inquiry was principally made at Toledo, where diuers false witnesses
were punished.
During this stay in old Castile farre from the Moores,Moores. they taking aduantage of the
occasion, did freely ouer-runne the country and surprized the city of Nixar, carelesly
kept by captaine Bernard Francisco, where they slew three score gentlemen, and
preuailed against the Christians in diuers other encounters, killing many, in number
of whom the Commaunder Ruy Diaz Maldonado, sonne to Doctor Roderic, Lord of
Aquila Fuente was one, who was a valiant knight, they tooke and burnt the towne of
Cuellar, constrayning the Christians that kept it to saue themselues within the castle,

the which they defended by the space of fiue daies against the enraged assaults of the
Moores by the discretion and valour of Iohn d' Aualos Lieutenant to captaine Charles
de Viedma who was absent.
In the spring of the yeere 1489. King Fernand and Queene Isabella, departed from 
Valiodolit,Castille. and came by Guadalupa not without great deuotion, to Iaen, with intent
to goe and beseege Baca: for this purpose they had leauied thirteene thousand horse,
and foure and twenty thousand foote, who hauing mustered at Sottogordo, the army
beganne to march, the Maister of Saint Iames conducted the vantgard, and had for
fore-runners, according to the antient custome, the captaine de los Donzelles, with
the Prouost Marshalls, whose charge was to prouide the lodgings of the campe: King
Fernand knowing that the seege would bee long and difficult, and that the Moores of
Guadix and Almery, which held King Boabdelins el Zagals part, would desturbe them as
much as in them lay, did place guards and watches in fit places, as well to withstand surprises,
as to secure the victuallers and other people which serued and followed the
campe. The first attempt which the army made, was at Cujar, a strong place, and furnished
with all manner of munition for the warres, by reason whereof being summoned,
they answered with armes, sallying forth to skirmish: but it was to their losse, for
beeing put to flight they lost their suburbes, which they had intrenched and fortified,
from whence they were afterward so pressed, and vexed, as abating their courage, they
would gladly haue yeelded vpon any reasonable conditions, the which the King refused,Despaire s^me times bringeth helpe.
being highly displeased that they had resisted his mighty army: whereat they became
so enraged and desperate, as in the next skirmish they made such slaughter of the
Christians, as the King resolued to grant them whatsoeuer they demaunded: so they
yeelded vp the towne, and retired themselues with all their baggage in safety to Baca:
soone after the fortresse of Bensalema yeelded it selfe, with others. The Earle of Tendilla
receiued Canillas by composition beeing a league destant from Baca.Seege of Basa. The takeing
of these forts prepared the accesse to Baca, within which place, King Zagall Boabdelin
had put tenne thousand souldiars as well horse as foote, with diuers expert captaines,
taking the greatest care he could for the well fortifing and keeping thereof, being the
place of most importance, and the chiefe Bulwarke of the small state that was left him:
for that being lost, hee was no more able almost to make any resistance. The Christian
army being re-enforced with new troupes diuided it selfe into two parts, which lodged
round about Baca a farre off, which gaue libertie to the Moores to goe out and in at
their pleasures without any difficulty or danger: wherevpon the King taking counsell,
he caused the campe to remooue, and to place the quarters neerer to the towne: The
Moores who thought it was not for their proffit, comming forth to fight, did maintaine
it for the space of twelue houres with a wonderfull resolution, and it may well bee
termed a battaile, for the whole forces almost of either side, came to ioyne, and a great
number of valiant men were there slaine: the conclusion was, that the Moores were
glad to retire, and were in despight of them shut in, and the Christian army lodged in
their gardens. Yet notwithstanding, this seat of the campe being not thought to bee
very commodious for diuers respects, the King caused the lodgings to be remoued where
they were at first: and in this retreat the beseeged failed not to anoy their enemies by all
meanes possible.
The difficulty being great to hinder the furious sallies of those barbarous people, the
opinions therevpon were sundry and vncertaine, so as the King was at the point to raise
the seege, and to cause great forts to bee raised round about it, furnished with strong
guardes, and to strengthen the neigbour garrisons, and by these slow meanes to tame
the enemies and make them yeeld: but because Queene Isabel did greatly desire to see an
end of this warre of Granado, to whose constancy the pursute thereof and the conquest
of that Kingdome,The conquest of Granado attributed to Queene Isabe^s constancy. so long time held by the Infidel is to bee attributed, the King craued
her opinion: who being wonderfully displeased that so dishonorable a resolution should
be taken, did entreate the King to thinke better thereon, and for modesties sake would not
vtter her opinion: but perceiuing that want of victuals and money was the greatest hinderance
they stood vpon, which in so long a seege might disaduantage the army, shee

said, that they needed not to doubt any such matter, for shee would prouide in such sort,
as there should be no want of either of them: The King knowing the Queenes dilligence
in such matters, and the desire shee had that Baca might bee taken, commaunded the
seege should bee continued with all vehemency, wherewith the whole army in generall
was well pleased; wherefore the two campes were disposed and placed, a miles distance
the one from the other and a great trench drawn from one to an other fortified with piles
a^d fifteene forts of timber and flags, where great numbers of souldiars were lodged,
and by this meanes the city was more streightly shut vp. An other trench was drawne
from the hils side of two miles long, so as the place was enuironed round about, in which
workes they spent two monthes, in all which time they neuer left skirmishing. And as
diuers Moores, distrusting the successe of the seege, fled to the Christians campe it was
knowne by their meanes how that the city was not well prouided with victualls, wherein
King Zagall had greatly failed, and besides, how that they had their water from a fountaine
at the foote of the hill called Alboahacen, which being taken from them they would
be in great want: wherefore the King hauing resolued vpon this intelligence to build a
fort vpon that hill: The Moores being aduertized thereof by some spies, did preuent him,
and they themselues made a fort there for the guarde of their fountaine. In the meane
space Don Antonio de la Cuena and others, ranne vp and downe the country, and spoiled
the townes and villages neere to Guadix, from whence bringing great numbers of
cattaile of all sorts, the Moores came forth to the reskew of them, and there the Christians
beganne to stand at a stay, and knew not whether it were best to leaue their booty
to betake themselues to flight, or else to tarry still and defend it valiantly. The valour
of Hernand Peres de Pulgar encouraged the rest, who hanging an hand-kercher vpon
the toppe of a pike, cried out aloud, let those that are no cowards follow this Enseigne,
and in this sort marching against the Moores, they beate them backe with great
slaughter, and returned victorious to the campe: in regarde whereof the King made
Hernand Peres Knight: and permitted him to beare a white hand-kercher in his armes
in token of his valor to his posterity.
King Muley did oftentimes attempt to victuall Baca but it was in vaine: and foreseeing
that the end of the Moores reigne in Spaine was at hand, his last refuge was,
by the counsell of his friends, to haue recourse to the Soldan of Egipt, who in a manner
commaunded ouer all the pettie Kings of Affrica, vnto whom hee complained
of the greedinesse of the Christian King, who did vniustly dispossesse him from the
Kingdome which his Ancestors had enioyed so long a time: whereat the Sultan beeing
mooued, sent two friers Ambassadors to Pope Innocent, of those that dwelt in the
Temple of Ierusalem which they call our Sauiours Sepulchre:The Soldan of Egipts dilligence in the behalfe of the Spanish Moores. to let him vnderstand
how that the Kings of Castile did deale vniustly in vexing the Moores that dwelt there
by warres, wherein if they persisted, hee would vse the Christians in the same manner
that liued in his countries and dominions: the Pope gaue notice thereof to King Fernand
and Queene Isabella, yet they for all that would not leaue of their deseigne, but
satisfied the Pope with reasons wherefore they pursued that warre:The King of Castile, gaue a thousand dueats yeerly rent to the friers at Ierusalem. and beeing deuout
and charitable Princes they gaue and assigned a yeerely stipend to the friars of a
thousand ducats, which they enioy and is the fairest reuenue they haue at these daies: Besides
that, the Queene sent a vaile wrought with her owne hand to hang ouer the Sepulchre
at Ierusalem.
 During the seege of Baca, this yeere 1489. Don Garcia Lopes de Padilla the last
Maister of the Knights of Calatraua died:The Mastership of Calatraua incorporated to Castile. for the Maistership was then incorporated
to the Royall crowne of Castile by the Popes authority, as not long after those
of Saint Iames and Alcantara were: remayning euer after in the Kings hands with title
of perpetuall administrators thereof: for in truth these masters did draw after them, by
reason of the authority which they had ouer so great a number of Knights, all gentlemen
of great houses, to great a power and to be suspected by the Kings as pernitious to a
state, where in conclusion they were heads of factions, by whom, Spaine was many times
torne in peeces.

The Knights of this order were permitted to marry the yeare one thousand, fiue hundred
and forty, by Pope Paul the third. From the first institution of this order, vntill this
time,
and the death of Don Garcy Lopes de Padilla, eight and thirty maisters of the same
order are reckoned.
The siege of Baca had already lasted foure whole moneths, without hope of winning
it, against which the Artillery wrought no great effect: for that men in those dayes
were not skilfull in the approaches and neere batteries, as they are now in these times:
Neuerthelesse King Ferdinand thinking it would bee a great blemish to his reputation,
if hee should raise the siege, would by no meanes giue it ouer, beeing assured that
continuance of time would bring the Moores to reason: the besieged on the contrary,
knowing that the losse of Baca would carry with it Almerie, and Guadix, and so consequently
the whole ruine of the Moores state in Spaine, did all of them resolue to dye
rather then to yeeld. And because the trench on the hills side was a great hinderance
to them, they went out vpon a day to breake and fill it vp, where they gaue a very furious
assault, wherein great numbers on both sides were slaine. Wherevpon the King
commanded that no man should goe forth to skirmish without leaue, and caused all
the Moores to depart out of the Campe, commanding that all those that should flye
forth of the Citty should bee made slaues, but they had rather vndergoe that condition
then to starue. Beeing besieged so farre of, the sallies were the easier and oftner;
but the Moores commonly had the worst: At one of these skirmishes Don Iohn de
Luna was slaine, a yong Knight, and heire to the noble house of Luna in Arragon.
Winter drawing on, gaue some hope to the besieged that their enemies would
shortly dislodge, and therefore they meant to hold out a little longer: but when they
saw that King Ferdinand caused Carpenters to build small houses and cabins for the
Souldiors, they then perceiued that the King meant not to leaue them so soone.
The season beeing wette and rainie, did greatly trouble the Armie before Baca, and
that which was worst of all, the wayes were so deepe and full of water, that no victuals
nor munition could bee brought to the Campe, but with incredible difficulty. But the
diligence of the noble and couragious Queene surmounted all these inconueniences;
for shee hired foureteene thousand ordinary beasts of carriage, besides those which
went vp and downe to the Campe for their priuate gaine, taking marueilous paines
and care to prouide all things necessary for the reliefe of the Armie, not sparing for
any cost. For to defray which charges, shee engaged part of the Royall patrimonie,
and assigned pentions: shee borrowed money of Citties, and of priuate men
and women, and pawned her owne Iewels; and for an argument of her great pietie
and charity,The Queenes Hospitall in the Campe. shee kept foure great tents in the Campe, which were termed the Queenes
Hospitall, for the reliefe of hurt and sicke Souldiours, feeing for that purpose, diuerse
Phisitions, Surgeons, and Apothecaries, and prouided for all other ^ecessities, with
such care,Queene Is^bels great diligence. iudgement and diligence, as the conquest of the kingdome of Granada,
and expulsion of the Mahometan Moores forth of Spaine, may more iustly bee attributed
to this Princesse then to any other.
It was thought fitte that the Ordinance which was in the Maister of Saint Iames
and the Duke of Nageraes quarter, should bee brought neerer to the enemies fortes
and defenses: the which was done with many bloudy incounters: the Moores continuing
still more obstinate, were diuerse times aduised to yeeld, and to enioy the fauour
and bountie of King Ferdinand, who promised them the liberty of their religion,
and not to take away their goods, lawes, and customes, notwithstanding that they
were in great want of victuals and money for the payment of the Souldiours, for
whose wages, the Captaines tooke away the Rings and Iewels from the women, to
the end to auoyde sedition and rebellion in the towne. The continuall miseries of
that siege did likewise trouble diuerse that were abroade, who cunningly did councell
the King, who was resolute not to rise from thence, to cause the Queene to come
to the Campe, saying, that it would cause the Moores vtterly to dispaire: but indeed
they thought that the Queene, seeing with her owne eyes the trauaile and miserie
which the Armie endured, would bee a meanes to dislodge, and that the reiected

opinion of besieging them by Fortes, would bee then renewed. The King wrote diuerse
letters to the Queene who lay at Iaen, to cause her to come to the Campe, the which
shee did, beeing accompanied with the Cardinall of Spaine, and other Prelates, leauing
the Prince her sonne at Vbeda with the Archbishop of Siuill, and some others of hir
Councell. Her comming caused most of the Souldiours to forget their misery and
trauaile, and brought forth an effect contrary to that which some of them, who had
beene the occasion thereof, did imagine; But the Moores were wholy confounded
thereby, and discouraged to make any longer resistance. Wherefore their chiefe Commander,
whose name was Mahomet Abenhazan, began to hearken to that which had
beene so often propounded by the King and Queene, and craued a parley. Don Guttiere
de Cardegna great Commander of Leon,The Moores of Baza begin to parley. had Commission to treate with him, hee
beeing an eloquent and discreete Gentleman, shewed him what fauour and good hee
might expect and hope for from these victorious Princes, and that there was nothing
more plaine, then that God had giuen an end to the Moores happinesse in Spaine:
The Moore apprehending sufficiently what the Commander told him, did with very
humble speeches desire to become their vassall, but hee sayd, that it behooued him to
conferre with the inhabitants of Baca, before hee could giue any resolute answer:
which beeing granted him; those people of iudgement which consented to the yeelding
of the towne, were of opinion to let King Muley vnderstand vpon what termes
they stood, to the end they might hee able to iustifie the yeelding thereof.
During this negotiation, a suspence from Armes was granted, and King Muley beeing
aduertised and perswaded by Mahomet Abenhazan, did not onely consent to the
yeelding of Baca, but compounded likewise for the rest which he held, and for his state
hereafter: Namely, that Almerie and Guadix should bee deliuered into the Kings
hands; the which was effected assoone as the Gouernour returned back. The Moores
of the garrison of Baca came forth with their Armor and baggage,Basa, Guadiz and Almery yeelded. and the inhabitants
were permitted to liue in the neighbour townes, or else-where in Spaine, where they
thought good, without any molestation in their beliefe and superstition: and the Gouernour
Mahomet Abenhazen with all his kindered, was receiued into the Kings fauour
as their subiect and vassaile.
The Christian Souldiers entred into Baca the fourth day of December, the seauenth
moneth of the siege. The yeelding of that place beeing diuulged all ouer the countrey,
the Captaines and Gouernours of the townes of Almunecar, Porchena, Tabernas,
and others of the countrey of Alpuxarras, from Almerie vnto Granado, came and presented
their keyes to the Kings, remaining their vassalls and Mudejares, the Captaine
of Porchena excepted, who reiecting all entreaties, guifts and offers, would needs passe
ouer into Affricke. King Ferdinand went from Baca to Almery, where King Muley
lay, who came and met him, hauing layde by the royall Diadem, and like a priuate
man, alighting from his horse, would in signe of homage haue kissed his hands: but
King Ferdinand,Muley Boabdelin submits himselfe to the Kings of Castile. considering the alterations wherevnto humaine affaires are subiect,
would not permit it, but caused him to remount his horse, and so receiued him neuerthelesse
for his vassaile. The Citty of Almerie beeing receiued, and the same conditions
granted to the Cittizens as was to others, namely, to liue free, and to enioy without any
molestation their goods, and the exercise of their religion, in paying the same tribute
which they were accustomed to giue to the Moore Kings, the Kings went to Guadix,
where the like was done. This was in the beginning of the yeare one thousand, foure
hundred and ninety. The gouernments of these places were giuen by the King, that of
Baca to Don Henry Henriques his Vnckle; Almerie to the great Commander of Leon,
and Guadix to Don Diego Hurtado de Mendoza,1490. the Cardinalls brother. The Gouernor
of Solobregna and other Moores,Moores. did likewise yeeld their Fortes and Castles to
the Kings, and did taste of their mildnesse and clemencie. The towne of Andaraz was
assigned to Muley Boabdelin for his residence, with a thousand Mudejares to his vassalls,
and foure millions of Marauedis for his pention, which hee enioyed but a yeare: for
disdaining to liue as a subiect, there where hee had reigned, hee went ouer into Affricke.
By meanes whereof Mahomet Boabdelin the little, remayned sole King of

Granado, who not long after, was brought to the same passe like his vncle, as shall
appeare. The Bishops and the Clergie did in these cities performe the accustomed
purifications and ceremonies: and Almery and Guadix were after that erected into Episcopall
Seas.
The power of the Moores after the taking of these places was in a manner brought 
to nothing: the city of Granado with a few other places remayning to Mahumet the
Little: but all that was done was to no purpose vnlesse Granado were taken, which had
beene the chiefe of that rich and mighty Kingdome for many yeeres: wherefore Mahumet
was entreated by the Kings to giue them the city of Granado, alleadging a certaine
agreement and promise which he had made vnto them, that vpon the conquest of
the cities of Baca, Guadix and Almerie, by the King and Queene, they should giue them
to Mahumet the Little, with certaine other places, vpon condition, that hee should liue
vnder them as their vassall, and that hee should enioy the rents and reuenues of those
places, and hee in regarde thereof should deliuer the city of Granado into their hands.
But the said Mahumet thought it an hard matter from a Master to become a seruant,
and from a King a subiect, therefore some times excusing himselfe, by the resistance of
the Moores of Granado, from performing his promise, and at other times demanding
more townes and reuenues, this last was graunted him, with promise to amplifie and
enlarge his dominion, and as for the rebellious Moores, hee was enioyned to disarme
them.
Some,King Mahumet the Little enforced to rebell. who saw that it must needes bee so, did yeeld vp their weapons, others
who could not endure such basenesse, did stirre vp King Mahomet in such sort as hee
rebelled openly with them: wherefore this yeere 1490. the Moore King beganne the
warre againe, and tooke diuers castles neere to the city, driuing away the Christians
from thence: by reason whereof the garrisons of Alhama, Loxa, the townes of Illora,
Moclin, Montefrio, Alhedin and Colomera were fortified by the Kings: who contenting
themselues for that time to haue secured the frontiers, and the new conquered cities,
they went to Cordoua, and from thence to Siuill: where receiuing newes how
the Moores spoiled the country, they appointed Don Inigo Lopes de Mendoza Earle
of Tendilla Generall,Sharpe resistance of Moores. who abiding at Alcala the real, did giue and take many defeats:
but it was not long after, before King Fernand came in his person, with an army of
fiue thousand horse and twenty thousand foote, and spoyled all the territory of Granado,
where hee left nothing for the Moores to liue on, or to yeeld them any ease or
commodity, not without sharpe resistances skirmishes and dangerous and deadly incounters
as well on the one side as the other: in the campes retreat the Marquis of Villenas
brother called Alphonso de Pacheco, Stefano de Luxon, and an other captaine of
the Marquis,The Marquis of Villena valiant and charitable. did amongst others loose their liues: the Marquis of Villena himselfe
was hurt in the arme, which hee felt euer after during his life, but at that time hee
purchased the fame of a braue, generous, and charitable Knight towards his seruants:
for perceiuing that a groome of his Chamber was hand to hand in fight with fiue
Moores who had the oddes of him, he not being able to endure to see his seruant in that
danger, did not feare to hazard his owne person in his rescue, but spurred his horse against
those Moores slue two of them with his owne hand, and put the other to flight:
and there he receiued that hurt.
After that King the had made his retreate and was gonne to Cordoua with the army,
sending them home to their houses (for they were all of Andaluzia and the neighbour
Prouinces) the Moores hauing gathered together some forces in the city and
out of the hill called Sierra Neuada, came and planted their seege before Alhedin, which
was kept by Mondo of Quesada, where they did assaile furiously seuen daies and seuen
nights, in such sort as the Christians, hauing no leisure to eate or sleepe, were constrained
to giue ouer the place, except a strong tower whereinto they shut themselues where
they made the best resistance they could.
The King hauing notice of the daunger they were in, did forthwith assemble
forces for their succour, but it could not come soone enough, for the beseeged
Christians, hauing done as much as men could doe in their owne defence, were at

the last constrained to yeeld to the enemies discretion, who carryed them all away for
slaues to Granado:Explo^ts of the Moores. when the King heard this, hee turned back againe: but the Moores
proud of their victory, proceeded on in taking of places, as Marchena and others: and
because there was nothing to bee had in the territory of Granado, they prouided their
victualls out of Affrick, hauing procured the Moores Mudeiares of Solobregna, a sea
towne, against their faith giuen and sworne to the Kings of Castile, to giue them safe
accesse in their harbor, with victuals, money, and other commodities, and they receiued
King Mahomet into their towne, who a great while besieged the Castle, which was
defended by Francisco Ramires of Madrid, till such time as hauing intelligence of the
comming of the Christian Armie, hee was constrained to abandon it, and to returne
to Granado: whether King Ferdinand came to make an end of his former spoile. And
because hee vnderstood that the Moores who remained in Baca, Guadix, and Almerie,
had intelligence with King Mahomet, hee went thither, and caused that
curssed race to bee expelled and dislodged out of all the walled townes and Castles,
permitting them to dwell in the Villages thereabout if they would, and then went
back to Siuill.
 In that Citty in the moneth of March this yeare one thousand, foure hundred, and
ninety, were celebrated the promises of marriage, betwixt the Infanta Isabell, and Prince
Iohn of Portugall, Don Fernand Siluera, and Doctor Iohn de Taxeda high Chancellor
of that kingdome, beeing sent thether Ambassadors for that purpose, the Cardinall of
Spaine performing the ceremonie. The feasts, costs, gifts and presents, were great and
magnificent, and the Kings beeing at Constantine, vpon their returne to Siuill, they
sent the betrothed Princesse into Portugall, who was attended on by the Cardinall of
Spaine, by Don Lewis Osorio Bishop of Iaen, Alphonso de Cardegna Maister of Saint
Iames, Iohn de Estuniga Maister of Alcantara, Don Rodrigo Alphonso Pimentell Earle of
Benauent, Don Lorenz^ Suares de Figueroa Earle of Feria, Don Pedro Porto ca^ero Lord
of Palma, Rodrigo de Vlloa who went as Ambassador, with other great numbers of nobilitie.
With this company the Princesse arriued at Badajos in the beginning of Nouember,(...) a small streame diuiding Castile from Portugal.
and passing on to the bridge of Caia, ouer a little streame which deuided Castile
from Portugall, shee was deliuered into the hands of Don Manuell Duke of Beja,
cousin germaine to the King, who beeing accompanied with the Bishops of Ebora
and Coimbra, with the Earles of Monsanto and Marialua, and diuerse other Knights,
they brought her to Estremos, where King Iohn and the Prince his sonne met her, and
in that place they were married by George d' Acosta, Archbishop of Braga: after that
they went to Ebora,Mariage of the Infants D. Alphonso of Portugall and Isabell of Castile where they feasted with great pompe and magnificence. Don
George, bastard sonne to the King, was present at the wedding, who was newly come
from the Monastery of Iesus d'Auero, where hee had till then beene brought vp, vnder
the gouernment of Don Ioane his Aunt the Kings sister, who dyed not long before. At
these feasts the King maintained the tilt against all knights that would runne, furnishing
them with horse and armor.
 This yeare one thousand, foure hundred, ninety and one, the kings of Castile beeing
at Siuill,Castille. they began to giue order for the siege of Granado, sending for the Knights and
men of warre from all places of the kingdome, as well on this side as beyond the hills,
commanding them to meete at Alcala the reall, to which place they went in the moneth
of Aprill, hauing in their company, the Prince and the Infantas their children, who with
the Queene remained at Alcala. The king passing on into the plaine countrey of Granado
with the Armie, consisting of ten thousand horse, and about forty thousand footemen,
in the which were in person, the Maister of Saint Iames, the Marquis of Villena,
hee of Cales, and his brother in lawe Don Rodrigo Ponce de Leon, who did begin
this warre, the Earles of Vregna, Cabro, Cifuentes, and Don Alphonso de Aguilar:
diuerse great Lords which came not themselues sent thither their forces. The Constable
remained Viceroy in Castile the old.
The Campe hauing marched as farre as the place called Los ojos de Huescar, stayed
there, and the Marquis of Vellena was sent with 3. thousand horse, and 5. thousand foot,
into the valley of Aletin and to other places and passages of the country called Alpuxarras

to spoile it, and because the King was aduertized that in the same country were a great
number of Moores able to make resistance, he followed the Marquis, and passing along
by Granado he maintained skirmish with diuers Moores which came forth for that purpose,
who with great losse were repulsed; the King went forward, and by the way met the
Marquis and his troupes as they returned, who had burned and destroied nine townes,
and slue more then fiue hundred Moores, whom they found carelesse and secure, thinking
themselues safe from any search in those sharpe and stony places: so their forces
beeing ioyned together they returned againe into Las Alpuxarras to make an end of
spoyling what was left. And King Fernand hauing notice that three captaines of the
Moores were come forth of Granado, and had made themselues masters of a passage, he
sent the Marquis thither, who fought with them and draue them thence, hee slue
aboue one hundred of them and tooke three score prisoners, and they destroied fifteene
townes more in the country, besides those nine aboue mentioned with great store of
spoile which they carried away with them: for the Moores did alwaies thinke that their
goods were safer in those places then in the city of Granado: After which exploit the army
was brought backe to Pradal and from thence marched to a place called Gosto: There
the king by the aduice of the Lords which were with him,Seege of Granada. caused the compasse of a city
to be measured out which was called Saint Foy, with an intent to build houses in that
place for the beginning of the army if it should be constrained to winter there, and if the
seege of Granado should bee drawne out in length,The city of Holy faith. as it was greatly feared: they gaue it
the title of Saint Foy, in regard that warre was vndertaken for the augmentation of the
Holy Christian faith. Round about the foresaid compasse, the campe was lodged, being
fortified and rampired with trenches and walls for feare of surprizes, in which workes the
Moores failed not to hinder them by comming forth of Granado with continual skirmishes.
The Queene with her children came from Alcala to the campe; the Maister of
Saint Iames and the Marquis of Cales went forth to meet them, and she with her Ladies
were lodged in the safest place of al the campe, and they did oftentimes ride about the
quarters, where for their disport they did many times behold the fights and skirmishes
which were almost euery houre made a farre off, and one especially among the rest where
as the Moores in great troupes being come forthwith two peeces of Artillery,A great skirmish wherein the Moores are defeated. did loose
them, with 600. of their men slaine vpon the place, and more then fourteene hundred
of them hurt, the Marquis of Cales leading the Christians, who attributed that victory to
the Queenes good hap, and she ascribed it to the Marquis his good fortune. Now those
of Granado were not long able to hold out: for the greater numbers of horsmen which
were wont to sally forth of the city,Great necessity in the city of Granado. were so diminished as they hardly had 300. horse of
seruice, the rest, were lost and consumed in the last wars: and besides this; the city which
conteined aboue 200. thousand persons was very ill prouided of victuals, so that diuers
caualiers and men of great note began to deuise means how to treat with the Christians
for their safty: to be short, al of them considering the state whereinto they were brought,
and that they had no hope or expectation of reliefe from any place, they were glad to
hearken vnto composition and agreement in yeelding vp the city to the Kings of Castile:
wherefore King Mahomet the Little resolued to giue place to necessity, and to receiue
this fattall wound, to fall from his crowne and regall dignity, and to become vassal and
subiect to his enemies, and to that purpose he sent to entreat the Kings to appoint commissioners
to treat and compound with him. This newes was pleasing to the Christians,
who did not thinke to haue gotten it so good cheape: therefore D. Goncall Hernandes de
Cordoua, and the Secretary Hernando de safra, were appointed to capitulate with him;
who after diuers goings and commings, did conclude with the Moores and their Prince
Mahomet the Little, vpon these conditions following.
1 That King Mahomet should no more terme himselfe King of Granado: vnto whom
the Kings of Castile should giue an honorable stipend for his entertainment, who might
liue in the cities, lands, and other reuenues, specified, which hee had held in the daies of
his father King Maley Albohacen; and the like to bee done to his mother Queene Aixa,
his wife, sisters, and children.
2. That their traine, stuffe, seruants and purueiors should be free from al tax and tribute.

3. That the Moores should bee iudged according to their owne lawes and customes,
which they call Xaira, and if any Christian were a party, by Iudges that were one halfe
Moores, and the rest Christians.
4 That their Armes should not be taken from them, (their Harquebuses excepted) the
which no Moore might keepe without speciall licence.
5 That all Moores should bee suffered to liue in Spaine, with free liberty of their ceremonies
and religion: and if they would goe ouer into Affricke, they might do so, and
carry with them their mooueables, money, marchandise, and all other commodities, excepting
Armor and munition for the warres, without paying any tribute for three
yeares together, and they should bee furnished with shipping for their passage: After
three yeares were expired, those that would depart should pay a Ducat for euery head.
6 That all Moores which possessed immoueable goods in Spaine, might enioy them,
albeit they themselues were in Affrick,^^^itulations ^etwixt Ferdinand and Mahomet the (...). and they might sell, let out, and accommodate
them, and for that purpose they might keepe factors and Atturneys in the King and
Queenes dominions.
7 That no Renegada Christian should bee constrained by force to returne to the
Christian faith.
8 That within certaine dayes after the conclusion of this treaty,Liberty of religion gran^^ to the Moores. King Mahomet the
little, or his Alcaydes, should deliuer vp the Fortresse of Alhambra, with all the towers
and other strong places of the citty into the Kings hands.
9 That those of Granado should giue foure hundred principall Moores for hostage.
As these matters were handling, the Queenes tents were set on fire by the negligence of
one of the Queenes women; so as the whole Armie was in an vprore, and fell into order
of battaile, thinking it to bee some Morish stratagem: but when the cause was knowne,
all was quieted. The like inconuenience of fire hapned at the same time at Medina del
Campo, by meanes whereof more then two hundred houses were burned. Now after
that the aboue-named articles were agreed vpon, a great sedition was raised in the citty
of Granado, by more then twenty thousand of the common people, who tooke armes,
gaine-saying the yeelding vp of the citty, in such sort as King Mahomet was glad to take
the Fortresse of Alhambre with a strong garde, looking euery houre when they would
haue assailed him: but their fury being appeased, he shewed them, that there was now no
more time to make resistance,VVizards stir vp the people. and gaue them many reasons for it: Neuerthelesse, hee
perceiuing that there was euer some frantick Prophet or other among that nation which
did put the people in those tumults; he wrote to the Kings, that without staying for the
day appointed for the deliuery of the Alhambra, they should send to take present possession
thereof, which King Ferdinand did forth-with, and marched with his forces against
that Fortresse:The Albambra of Granado yeelded the yeare 1492. from whence Mahomet the little, no more a King, went out to meete
him, who with a sorrowfull and deiected countenance, presented him the Keyes, saying,
that they were the Keyes of the Royall Pallace of Granado, the which, with himselfe, and
all the men that were in it, were at his seruice. He pronounced these words with a broken
and sorrowfull voyce, and would haue alighted from his horse to haue kissed the Kings
hand, who mooued with pitty and compassion, would not suffer him so to doe, but did very
gently and gratiously comfort him. King Ferdinand gaue the Keyes to the Queene,
shee to Prince Iohn her sonne,Granado yeelded vp. and he gaue them to Don Inigo Lopes de Mendoza Earle of
Tendilla, who with three thousand horse, and like number of footmen, entred into the
spacious and royall fortresse of the Alhambra, with the Marquis of Villena, and other
Knights: and Frier Hernando de Talauera Bishop of Auila (who was afterward Archbishop
of Granado) did forthwith goe vp into the highest Tower there, and set vp the Crosse,
which was the very same that the Cardinall of Spaine did vse to haue borne before him
as Archbishop of Toledo and Primat, and the which is at this day kept in the Vestrie at
Toledo: and then were the banners of Saint Iames and King Ferdinand and Queene Isabell
set vp, with performance of the accustomed ceremonies: and soone after, other forces
were sent to seaze vpon the gates and towers of the citty, where the people were disarmed,
and the armor carried into the Alhambra, sauing those which were hidden and
afterward found, which cost diuers their liues, who were executed by course of lawe.

The city was yeelded vp the first day of Ianuary 1492. the 675. yeere of the reigne
of the Arabians there:The end of the Arabians rule in Spaine. and thereby ended the warre of Granado, which lasted tenne
yeeres, and gaue end to the Arabians and Moores dominion in Spaine; but the most
part of the Knights would not tarry there but went ouer into Africke: the greedinesse,
inconstancy, infidelity, and desire to rule which that Nation had, brought them to this
misery. King Fernand aduertized Pope Innocent and other Christian Princes his
friends of this great victory, and hee staied a great while in the city of Granado, to giue
order for the gouernment thereof, as also of all that they had newly* conquered: wherein
Queene Isabells constancy and magnanimity deserues the first place, then King Fernands
valour, wisdome and good conduct, with other Lords and chiefe Knights of their
Kingdomes: the cities of Siuill, Cordoua, Iaen, Eccia, Xeres, Vbeda, Baeca, Murcia, Carthagena
and Lorca did not spare any of their publike and particular goods.
The same day that King Fernand and Queene Isabell made their entry into the city
of Granado, D. Pero Fernandes de Velasco Earle of Haro, Viceroy and Constable of
Castile died, whom D. Bernardin de Haro his sonne succeeded as well in the Earldome
as Constableship, who this yeere was made Earle of Frias and married to Donna Ioane
of Arragon the Kings daughter.
A little before the viceroys death,The President and Auditors of Valiodolit deposed and their names. the President and Auditors of the Kings Chancery
residing at Valiodolit, did greatly forget themselues, by receiuing an Appellation to
Rome, for a certaine cause depending before them, for which the King and Queene depriued
them of their offices, and placed others therein: they that were disposed, were
D. Alphonso de Valdiuiesso Bishop of Leon who was president, and Doctor Martin
^ Auila, the Licenciat Cinchilla, Doctor Cano, and Doctor Olmedilla Auditors: In their
roomes were placed Doctor Iohn Arias del Villar Bishop of O^iedo for President,Subsidy raised vpo^ the Iewes. the
Licenciat de Villena, Doctor de Palacios, the Licenciate Ville-Muriell, the Licenciate
Palacios Rubias, and Doctor de Villoucla Auditors. The Iewes did also grant a generall
subsidy to the Kings, which was the last subsidy raised vpon that sect: for soone after
they were all driuen forth of Spaine. The King and Queene hauing begunne to take
the best order they could for the gouernment of the new conquered Prouinces,1492. in
the month of March this yeere 1492. they came to Cordoua to intend the affaires of
the rest of the Kingdome: there they made a statute, whereby all gentlemen of the Kingdomes
and Lordships, subiect to the crowne of Castile and Arragon,Statute of Cordoua for the N^bility. were enioyned to
come and make proofe of their pedigrees and nobility: and because it was made at
Cordoua, it was called the statute or law of Cordoua.
Whilest the King and Queene were busied in the warres and seege of Granado, the 
ioy and feasts in Portugall were sodainely turned into teares and lamentations:Portugal. the marriage
betwixt Alphonso of Portugall and D. Isabella of Castile being celebrated with
great magnificence at Ebora, and the feasts and triumphes continuing at Saint Iren,
whether the new married couple were gonne to auoide the great heate: the Prince
on an Euening accompanying the King his father, and beeing mounted vpon a very
ready and swift horse, would needs runne a race against an other horse, whereon Don
Iohn de Menezes, Commander of Algezier, did ride, but the Commander excused the
matter by reason it was late and almost night, the Prince commanded a Mule to bee
brought vnto him, and in the getting vp the stirrop brake, wherefore hee tooke his
former horse, and continuing in his determination to runne, he tooke the Commander
by the hand,A pittiful accident hapned to Prince Alphonso of Portugal. and giuing spurres to his horse, hee constrained him to runne the race with
him: but the mishap was that the Princes horse stumbling at the races end, ouer-threw
his rider vnder him, and did so bruze him, as hee lay speechlesse and almost dead vpon
the ground. The King and all the standers by, being very sorrowfull, caused him
to bee carried to the next cottage which was a fisher-mans, where the Princesses,
the mother and the daughter in law, hauing vnderstood this pittifull accident did
come on foote, where finding this poore Prince in such state as for no speech nor any
thing else that cold be said or don, he did make any sign or shew of vnderstanding ought:
They did all melt into teares,Prince Alphonso di^s. vttering forth very strang cries and lamentations. Great
and sundry were the dilligences and remedies though superfluous, which the Physitions

and Surgions vsed for his recouery: the Physitions telling the King that his sonnes end
drew nere, he brought the Queene and the Princesse to the houses of Vasco Pallas, which
are vpon the riuer of Tayo, and the Prince died seuen and twenty houres after the accident,
who was lamented and bewailed by all men, for the great hope and expectation
which he gaue of himselfe in those young yeeres, hauing hardly attained to seuenteene
yeeres of age: and that which did more encrease the sorrow, was that he left the Princesse
Isabell a widdow euen almost as soone as shee had beene a wife: for they had not beene
married fully eight monthes.Princesse Isabels lamentation. The Princes body was laied in a herse and carried to the
Monastery of battaile. The Princesse in token of sorrow, did cut off her heire, and clothed
her selfe in garments befitting her griefe, and hauing remained fifteene daies in the
house of Vasco Pallos shee went to the Kings pallace one euening without any light,
where the King, Queene, and shee, kept themselues shut vp a long time, giuing themselues
to much ouer to griefe, and forgetting the health of their owne persons: and being
in this estate they were visited and comforted on the Kings of Castiles part. After
this manner King Iohns Court remained desolate, and it may bee, that God caused this
losse to fall vpon him, for ouer hastily destroying the great houses of his owne Kingdome,
especially that of his Aunt D. Beatrice Dutchesse of Viseo, whose sonne D. Dominigo
a Prince of his bloud, hee had slaine with his owne hand. The obsequies and funeralls
being ended, where the King and the great Lords and Ladies of the Realme were
present, Queene Elenor, and the Princesse Isabell excepted, shee being sorrowfull and a
widdow was brought backe into Castile the same time King Fernand and Queene Isabell
were about Granado in the New towne of Saint Foy which they builded. King Iohn
being in this anguish went backe to Lisbone, where this yeere 1492. the two Maisterships
of Saint Iames, and Auis, fell to his sonne D. George: for whose gouernor hee appointed
D Diego Almeyda sonne to the Earle of Abrantes.
The end of the three and twentith Booke.




SEMPER EADEMTHE FOVRE AND TVVENtith
Booke of the Generall History of Spaine.

The Contents.
1 CHristopher Columbus his first voyage to the Indies.
2. Arigorous Edict against the Iewes and Moores.
3. King Fernand is hurt at Barcelona: Polliticke affaires of Spayne.
4. Christopher Columbus returnes backe: Good and euill which the world hath receiued
by the discouerie of the Westerne Indies: The Pope giues those new lands to the Kings of
of Castile: Columbus his second voyage.
5. The Master-ship of S. Iames in the hands of King Fernand as perpetuall Administratour
thereof: Charles the eight of that name, the French King, restores the Earledome of Rossillon
to King Fernand, with other polliticke affaires.
6. Order concerning the Spaniards and Portugals nauigations.
7. The Master-ship of Alcantara in the hands of King Fernand as perpetuall Administrator
thereof: the Chancery of Granado, and of the country beyond Tejo.
8. Originall of the warres betwixt France and Spaine.
9. Don Pero Goncal of Mendoza, Cardinall of Spaine dyes. Friar Francis Ximenes of Cisneros
is promoted to the Archbishoppricke of Toledo.
10. Peace betwixt Castile and Nauarre: Coronation of King Iohn of Albret, and Queene
Catherine, which was the last in that Kingdome: pursuites against the Earle of Lerin.
11. VVarre of Naples, noble exploites of Goncalo Fernandes of Cordoua, surnamed the
great Captaine.
12. The Houses of Austria and Spaine, allyed together by marriage.
13. VVarre in the Earledome of Rossillon.
14. The third voyage of Christopher Columbus to the Indies. Enterprises vpon the Affricane
Moores.
15. Don Manuel first of that name, and 14. King of Portugal his qualities and vertues, etc.
Edict against the Iewes.
16. Vasco de Gama his nauigation to Calicut.
17. The Marriage of King Manuel with D. Isabell of Castile, and the birth of D. Michel
their sonne, heire to Castile, Arragon, and Portugal, if he had liued.
18. Christopher Columbus and his brother are brought backe as prisoners into Spaine: rebellion
in the Indies: voyages of diuers particular persons to the Indies, by the King of
Castiles permission.
19. Conuersion of the Moores Mudejares commanded by Edict in Castile.

20. King Iohn of Albret his iourney into Castile: King Fernands couetousnesse to get the
Kingdome of Nauarre.
21. The warre of Italy, which in processe of time subiected the State of Milan to Castile.
22. Death of Prince Don Michel, whereby D. Ioane, mother to Charles of Austria, was aduanced
to the successiue right of Castile and Arragon.
23. Persecution of the Moores Mudejares in Granado and else-where: M^hometans wholy banished
out of Spaine.
24. Duke Lewis Sforza is taken by the French-men: The Kingdome of Naples is parted betwixt
King Lewis the twelfth, and king Fernand, to the preiudice of king Fredericke.
25. Philip Arch-duke of Austria, and D. Ioane his wife, their iourney into Castile, where
they receiue the oath of the Castillians, as presumptiue heires to the same Crowne.
26. Peter Martyr of Angleria sent Ambassadour to Cayro by king Fernand.
27. Voyages of diuers particular persons to the Westerne Indies by king Fernand and Queene
Isabels permission.
28. Voyages of the Portugals into the East, and other places of the Ocean sea, to wit, of Pero
Aluares Gabralde, Iohn de la Nueua, Americus Vespucius, etc. Warres raised by the
Portugals among the small kings of the East.
29. Birth of the Infant D. Fernand, sonne to the Arch-duke Philip, and to D. Ioane: their
returne into Flanders. Treatie of peace betwixt France and Castile to no purpose.
30. Aduancement of Pope Iulius the second. The Duke of Valentine persecuted by him. Miserable
retreate of the French out of the kingdome of Naples. Death of Queene Isabell.


In this foure and twentith Booke followeth in
the Line of Portugall,

14. Don Manuel the first.
THE warre of Granado beeing happily ended, it was
followed with other great enterprises, partly profitable,
and partly preiudiciall: whereof, that of the discouerie
of the new world might haue beene worthie
of great prayse, if those vnto whome the great and
good God did the fauour to discouer those countries
and nations, vntill then vnknown to our Hemisphere,
and their posteritie, could haue rightly vsed, to his
honour and glorie, the wealth and riches which they
found there, as they were bound to haue done: but
there is no memorie of cruelty, auarice, and dishonestie,The Spaniard^ auarice and cruelty toward the Indians, makes Christian religion odious to the vnbeleeuing nations.
to bee compared to the actions of the Spanish
Christians in the conquest of the occidentall Indies: which their owne Histories beare
witnesse of, with terrour to those which reade it, and is a publike scandall to the vnbeleeuing
Nations which haue heard tell of their dealings, for the Christian Religion: the
which they thinke by reason thereof, to be a bloudie Religion, which seekes nothing but
gold and wealth with an insatiate desire of ru^e. But wee may easily beleeue, that the excesse
committed by the euill ministers in these searches of the Westerne Indies, was not
by their Kings consent, whose zeale herein is rather prayse-worthie, but their negligence
in redressing and punishing such mischiefes can hardly be excused. Of which voyages
and discoueries we intend not to poursue the Historie at large, as wee did protest in
the beginning of this Worke, but wee will content our selues with the declarations of
the decrees and ordonances made in the Courts and Councels of the Kings of Spaine,
for the regard of things executed and done in their names and authoritie in those farther
Regions, and to handle, by the way, that which hath followed thereuppon in generall:
for such matters require particular and distinct Treatises.
Wee haue heretofore declared,Christopher Columbus his first voyage to the Indies. how that Christopher Columbus hauing beene diuers
times heard to discourse of the nauigation which hee had conceiued in his mind to bee
made towards the West, with knowledge of new lands, whereof there was no memory
in precedent times, had hope and promises of Fernand and Queene Izabella, to giue him
meanes to effect it at a time conuenient; the which beeing offered vppon the time that
Granado was taken, hee obtained three Caruels rigged and furnished with sixe-score
men, souldiers and marriners: for the setting foorth of whome, the Councellor Lewis of
Saint Angell did lend the King sixteene thousand Duckets. Hee departed then from Palos
de Moguer in Andalusia,An. 1492. vppon a Friday the fourth of August, in the yeare 1492.
and hauing sayled two moneths and eight dayes, hee discouered the land which hee so
much desired, that is to say, vppon the eleuenth day of October of the same yeare.
The first man which cryed, Land, was one called Rodrigo de Triane, who descried the
Iland of Guanahami of Lucaios betwixt Florida and Cuba, where they first landed, and

tooke possession of that new world, in the name of King Fernand and Queene Isabella:
then they sayled to Barucoa, the port of the Isle of Cuba, where they tooke certaine Indians,
and afterward they turned towards the Isle of Hati, since then called Hispagniola,
and entred into the port by them named Royall.
There the Indians,The Indians gentle and tractable. at the beginning sterne and rough, at the view of such new people,
did in such manner become tractable, courteous, and gentle, as they came and
brought gold, with such victuals as they had to the Spaniards, exchanging them for bables
and toyes of small woorth. One of their Kings whom they call Cachiques, whose
name was Guacanagari, did shew himselfe so kind, tractable and obedient to these newcommers,
as they louingly receyued from him what commodities they would, so as it
was lawfull for them, beeing ayded by the Indians and their Cachique, to build a fort in
that countrey, wherein Columbus left eight and thirtie Spaniards with a Captain of Cordoua
named Roderigo d' Arana, and with his two Caruels which were left, (for he had lost
the third) he returned to Spaine from whence he came, carrying some Indians with him,
with gold of the Country, and other singularities, which he brought to the aforenamed
place of Palos de Moguer within the space of fiftie dayes: before Columbus departure,
King Fernand and Queene Izabella did graunt him the twelfth part of all the royall rights
of the lands which he should discouer, with this reseruation, that he should not in his discourie,
do any thing that might preiudice the King of Portugals nauigation.
 There was matter resolued vppon in the Kings Councell of Castile, as soone as they
found themselues to be Masters of Granado,E^i^t against the Iewes. faire in shew, but of a pernitious consequence:
For they made an Edict, wherby all Iewes, which inhabited in Castile and Leon,
were enioyned to turne to the Christian Religion, and to be baptized within three moneths,
on paine of hauing their goods confiscate, and perpetuall banishment. This decree
was receiued,Negligent Pastors stirre vp pers^cutions. published, and executed by an inconsiderate zeale, and without the
knowledge of the King and Queene, thinking thereby, as it is likely to augment Christian
Religion, and to confirme vnto themselues the name and title of Catholike Kings: wherunto
they were incited by the Prelates and slothfull Pastors, who contemned their
charge of teaching good and wholesome doctrine; and likewise by the Monkes and other
seditious Church-men, who desired rather to destroy, then to feed those miserable creatures,
vnto whom they were in perpetuall detestation and skandall, by meanes of their
wicked and corrupted liues, whereby it came to passe, that the name of God was prophaned
and blasphemed among the Iewes and Mahometans of those times, who would rather
haue retired a thousand leagues, then to draw neere to receiue any religious instruction,
from so irreligious people, whose pietie was but childish ceremonies, and external
seruices, their knowledge meere cunning and deceipt, to maintaine and increase their
riches, ease, and vnruly appetites, and their ayme and end, honours and worldly glorie,
with a popular opinion of wisedome in the affaires of this world: the which was playne
and euident to people of vnderstanding among the Infidels: therefore it behooued such
euill-affected persons, and no way disposed to amend, as were the Prelates of those daies
to set forward such councels, and to cause the Kings of Spaine to practise-courses fit and
pleasing to the Diuell, who is a murtherer from the beginning of the world, and author
of all ruine and desolation: the which hath beene since practised in all places of Christendome
with very bad successe: for torments, death, confiscations of goods, and such other
like violences, cannot beget a grayne of fayth in the heart of man, whose seed is the word
of God; the watering, the holy workes of vnfained charitie, by the example of the heauenly
Father, and the encrease thereof, the spirit of the Lord: but they may well bring
foorth Atheisme, Hypocrisie, and despaire in aboundance, which are the offerings which
the enemy of Christ Iesus doth demaund.
Now the poore Iewes,The (...) of those who p^rs^cuted the Iewes. at the publication of this Edict, were marueilously perplexed,
and afflicted with sundry passions, for their religion, liues, and goods which were very
great: whereunto perhaps, the Kings Councell had regard, thinking by their obstinacie,
which is a vice proper and peculiar to that nation, to find meanes to fill the treasurie emptied
in the last warres, by the confiscation of so great wealth as they possessed in Spain,
and to redeeme the altenated reuenues of the Crowne, and the Queenes ingaged Iewels.

Now the most religious Spanish Iewes, tooke counsell in these three moneths space
of delay before they were to leaue the countrey, and found meanes, to send away
their money and chiefe goods out of Spaine, wherein they were ayded and befriended
by many honest-minded Christians, who beeing mooued with pittie and humanitie,
did helpe to hide them, and to conuey them into Portugall, Affricke, Italy, and
else-where whether that nation went: great numbers of them did spred themselues ouer
Macedon,Humanity of Christians towards the banished Iewes. Greece, and other Regions possessed by the Turkes, whom they taught to
make Ordinance and Artillerie, and the art of making Gun-powder, Harguebuzes, and
such other engins, which they haue sufficiently vsed to the hurt of Christendome.
The rest of them who loued their ease, did value the countrie where they were borne,
and their goods,The Turks and Infidels make profit of the Iewes banishment. aboue all other matters, and were baptized, and profession, either
true or fained, of Christian Religion, such as they could learn and comprehend in so short
a time, the which did cause another inconuenience: for in processe of time the noble families
of Spaine, allying themselues by marriage to that race, did wholy contaminate and
pollute themselues both in bloud and beleefe.The Nobil^tie of Spayne contaminated by the allyances with the conuc^^ed Iewes. These are the effects which this violent
law of King Fernand and Queene Izabella did produce, by the which the Spaniards end
in the 2082. yeare of the Iewes habitation in Spayne, if so be they faile not in their account.
The same rigour was obserued against them in Arragon, Valencia, Cattalonia,
Sicill, and other places vnder the Kings obedience, who from Cordoua went into Arragon
to order the affaires of that kingdome.
Beeing in the Cittie of Barcelona, God sent them a small aduertisement: for as King 
Fernand on a morning came foorth of the towne-house,King Fernand hurt at Barcelona. where himselfe in person had
assisted at the pleas of iustice, and beeing come downe to the foot of the stayres towards
the kings house talking to his Treasurer, a certaine mad man borne at Remenca, whose
name was Iohn de Cagnamares, drew neere vnto him, and lifting up a short sword, hee
gaue him such a blow from the eare downe to the shoulders, as it was a wonder that hee
strake not off his head: Whereat the King beeing astonished, and thinking it to be some
conspiracie, he cryed out, Saint Marie helpe me, oh what treason, oh what treason; thinking
that some others would make an end of what that foolish fellow had begunne: but
when hee perceiued that no man stirred, but that euery one stepped before him, to the
end the other might not redouble his blow, and that a Gentleman that was his Caruer,
and one more had stept to the offendour, meaning to haue stabbed him to deathwith
poynards: hee commanded not to kill him; therefore they ledde him to prison; and dressed
his wounds: beeing afterward examined who had procured him to commit that treason,
they could neither then, nor after that hee was healed, by any torments whatsoeuer,
get any thing out of him, but that the diuell had assured him, if he would kill the king, to
be king himselfe.
The cittie of Barcelona beeing highly displeased, that this act had beene committed
in their iurisdiction, and beleeuing verily that there had beene some conspiracie, did put
themselues in armes, and the tumult could not be appeased, vntill the king, whose wound
was newly drest, and stitched vp with seuen stitches of a needle, did come and shew himselfe
out of his lodging windowes to the people, to assure them that hee was aliue: and
then euery man went home to his own house. The foole who had comitted the deed, was
by law condemned to haue his hands and feete cutte off, his eyes pulled foorth of his
head, to bee dismembred, with burning pincers, and to bee drawn on a cart to the common
dung hill, where his bodie was burned, hauing bene first strangled, by the Queens
clemencie.
In these businesses the yeare 1492. was spent, in which the Brotherhood of the Court
beganne, and the building the stately Colledge of the holy Crosse at Vailliodolit was ended,
and the same yeare dyed Don Pero Fernandes, Generall of the frontier of Andalusia,
Don Henrique de Guzman,Cales reunited to the Crowne of Castile. Duke of Medina Sidonia, Don Rodrigo Ponce of Leon, Marquis
of Cales, by whose decease without children, the cittie of Cales returned to the
Crowne: Don Pedro of Estuniga, Earle of Miranda of Duero, and Don Bertrand de la
Cueua, first Duke of Albuquerque.
Pope Innocent the eight dyed likewise at Rome, in whose stead was chosen Rodrigo

Borgia, Cardinall of Saint Nicholas in Carcere Tulliano, Bishop of Alba, Porto, and S.
Ruffine, Vice-chancellor and Deane of the Church of Rome, sonne to Don ^effrey Lancol,
Lord of Canales, and to a sister of Pope Calixtus the third, who was of the family of
Borgia, from whence this man did take his name, and he was called Alexander the sixt,
who soone after his assumption to the Papacie, made two Cardinals of his Bloud, the
one his Nephew, named Iohn Borgia, and the other his owne sonne called Caesar
Borgia, of whome we shall haue occasion to speake in this Historie.
The same yeare the sonne of Don Pero Goncales of Mendoza, Cardinall of Spaine,
whose name was Rodrigo, was by King Fernand and Queene Izabella, honoured with the
title of Marquis of Zenete, and they made an end of building the vaults of the Cathedrall
Church of Toledo, which were begunne in the dayes of King Fernand the third, and
of the Arch-bishop Don Rodrigo Ximenes: the Court remayning stil at Barcelona about
the beginning of the yeare 1493.An. 1493. Christopher Columbus arriued there,Christopher Columbus Admirall of the Iudies. being returned from
the West Indies, whose same, for the discouerie of those new lands, was spread abroade
ouer all Spayn: he presented the Kings with gold, beasts, and other things brought from
those Regions, making an ample relation of his voyage, the which did greatly content
them, who gaue him the title of Admirall of the Indies, with armes, wherein he vsed this
Motto: For Castile and Leon, Columbus hath gotten a new world. If the finding out of the
wealth brought from the Indies hath brought any commoditie to the couetous negociators
of our Regions, the euils which did accompanie them, did farre surmount and
exceed them:
For then first of all,The great Pockes, the d^sease of the Indies brought into Europe. was the abhominable Venerean disease known, which in France is
called the great pockes, brought by the Spaniards, which went with Columbus, who hauing
had to do with the Indian women, which were infected there-with, as with a disease
proper and peculiar to the Country, did communicate it to the women of Seuill, and of
the Court, who distributed it to others: running on with such contagion and horrible accidents
of knobbes and rotting soares, as in the beginning, when our Phisitions knew not
the remedie for such a disease, diuers did miserably perish, or remayned lame of their
members, with a villanous and strange change of their forme and fauour, the reward of
whoredom, ouer common then in Spaine and else-where, which neuerthelesse could not
chastise the world in such sort, but that this sinne is at this day more in vse then euer it
was, to the dishonour of God, contempt of his lawes, and confusion of all good order.
The Spaniards in recompence of this euill brought from the Indies, carried thither
the Kings euill and madnesse by the biting of dogges, which they brought thither
with them, of which diseases the Indians had no knowledge at all.
The right remedie of this contagious infirmitie, are Guaiacu^, Chinau^, and Salsaparilla,
which nature bringeth foorth in aboundance in that new world, where they haue daily
need thereof.The Indies haue dinerted the Spaniards from husbandrie and a^ts. Another euill hath the desire of gold, pearles, and other high prized things
found in those Islands, brought with it, namely, that the Spaniards haue giuen ouer all
honest and profitable exercises, the ground remayning vntilled in diuers places of
Spaine, and other arts contemned, the people of Spayne making none account of any
other matter, but onely of the voyage to the Indies: so that euer since, it hath had continuall
need of the commodities of the neighbour regions.
King Fernand and Queene Isabella did foorth-with send the desired newes of this discouerie
to Pope Alexander, betwixt whome diuers discourses did passe by their Ambassadours,
and letters to reduce the brutish and idolatrous people of that countrey, to the
knowledge of the true God, and the benefite of Iesus Christ, which would haue beene a
memorable worke. This Pope, in the Conhstorie of the Cardinals did approoue this
enterprize and conquest for the Kings of Castile,The Pope giues the w^st Indies to the Kings of Castile. granting and giuing to them and their
successours by Apostolicall authoritie, the Indies, Islands and firme land of the West,
and did charge and enioyne them to cause the Gospell to be preached: the which mooued
the kings to furnish foorth the number of eighteene shippes, vsing therein the diligence
of Iohn Rodrigo of Fonseca, Deane of Siuill, who was afterward Bishop of Burgos,
and superintendent of the Indian affaires: of which vessels, manned with fifteene
hundred men, they gaue the charge to the Admirall Columbus, and to a brother of his

named Bar tholomew, the dignitie of Gouernour of those new Countries, who departing
from Cales, did againe cut thorough the Ocean sea, and landed at the Iland called by
them the Desired, from whence without staying they pas^ed to the port of la Plata in the
Island Hispagniola, and came to the royall port, where they found their fort to be ouerthrowne,
and the eight and thirtie Spaniards with their Captaine, whom they had there
left, to be slaine by the Indians, who were enforced to fall vppon them for the spoiles and
robberies which they had committed.
There came in this second voyage with the Admirall Columbus,Friar Buyl the Popes Vicar in the Iudies. Friar Buyll, a Monke
of the Order of Saint Bennet, a Cattelan by nation, with authoritie of the Popes Vicar,
and twelue learned Clearkes of good and holy life, according to those times, diuers artificers,
beasts, as well horse as neate, with others, store of victuals, stuffes, and necessary
and profitable matters for the life of man: with these prouisions the better to be furnished
for future times, the Admirall Columbus caused a new towne to be measured out, which
he named Isabella, after the Queenes name, the which hee peopled, and poursuing his
search, hee discouered Cuba and Iamaica, and other smaller Ilands: wherin being busied,
the Spaniards, left with the Friar, beganne to enter into mutinie, and to commit many
disorders, the Gouernours authoritie, nor the Friars exhortations and interdictions not
beeing able to containe them within their bounds, whom the Admirall punishing according
to their deserts, at his returne it procured him enemies and hatred, who did vnworthily
vexe and poursue him, as shalbe hereafter declared.
Don Alphonso de Cardegnas, Master of Saint Iames, beeing dead this yeare, King Fernand
retayned the Mastershippe,The Mastership of S. Iames in be^ings hands in quality of administrator. not suffering any new election to be made, as hee had
done the like to that of Calatraua with the selfe same considerations and reasons, who
by the Popes authoritie, remayned Administrator of them. Don Alphonso was then the
Master of the same Order, and the three and fortieth in order and continuances the same
was done to the Order of Alcantara: the which three dignities were since that incorporated
to the Crowne by Pope Adrian the sixth, in the time of the Emperour Charles the
fifth, who was heire to the Kingdomes of Castile.
The same yeare the Kings of Castile were altogether rid of King Mahomet Boabdellin
the Little, who beeing impatient of the daily sollicitations which were made to him,
for to become a Christian, and to receiue the water of Baptisme, did sell all the lands
and right which had beene giuen him by the capitulations, at such time as hee deluered
vp the Cittie of Granado, for foure-score thousand Duckets, and with his family retired
himselfe into Affricke. There were new teares and lamentations renewed, when his
owne mother vpbrayding him, sayd, That it well became him to put finger in the eye and
weepe like a woman, for the losse of his dignitie and pallaces, seeing that hee could not
defend them like a man. He was kindly welcommed and receyued by the King of Fez,
but within a few yeares afterwards he was slaine in his fierce and intestine warres against
the Xerifs.
The Spanish Authours set downe for a memorable matter, that the Kingdome of
Granado beganne and ended, two kings of Castile of one selfe same name raigning,
namely Ferdinand, and the first and last King of Granado were called Mahomet. At the
same time the Earledome of Rossillon was restored to King Fernand by the French king,The Earledome of Rossillon restored to King Fernand.
Charles the eighth, who hauing vndertaken at the entreatie and request of Lewis S^orza,
named the Moore who did vsurpe the Dutchie of Milan, the Conquest of the Kingdome
of Naples, did feare least the King of Castile should in his absence enterprise vpon
France, in regard of the strife and contention about the sayd Earledome: Wherefore
to free and acquit himselfe from that feare and suspition, hee yeelded it vnto him, and
renewed the peace and allyances betwixt the Kingdomes of France, Castile and Arragon,
but it was euill and vnfaithfully kept: Wherein the Kings chiefe Councellours
did greatly stand him in stead, namely, Steephen Pet^de v^rs, and Friar Alphonso of Albi,
and namely, the holy man Friar Francis de Paule, who died at Plessis les Tours, certaine
of whose letters are yet extant, which he wrote therevppon, and to the same effect
to King Fernand.

It was concluded in this agreement, that King Ferdinand of Castile should not giue
ayde nor assistance to the King of Naples: whereby it appeareth that this Catholicke
King knew well how to vse the vncharitable rule, which sayes, that Charity begins by it
selfe.King Ferdinand vncha^itable. For he to recouer the Earledome of Rossillon, without restitution of the money
which King Iohn his Father had borrowed of King Lewis the eleuenth, did not greatly
care to leaue the honour, state, and life, of his coosin germaine, and brother in law Ferdinand
King of Naples for a prey to the French, or at the least hee promised it, and swore so
to the French King, notwithstanding that hee afterward changed his minde. King Ferdinand
and Queene Isabell hauing remained for a while in Cattalonia, and afterward at
Saragossa, they came to Valiodolit, where Don Roderigo d'Vlloa beeing deceased, who
was one of the superintendents of the treasure which they call Cantador major, they suppressed
that superintendencie, retaining no more but the two that remained, namely,
Don Guttiere de Cardenas great Commander of Leon, and Don Iohn Chacon gouernor
of the frontier of Murcia. Beeing departed from Valiodolit to Medina del Campo,
they receiued newes of the death of King Ferdinand of Naples, whom his sonne Don
Alphonso Duke of Calabria succeeded. The King at the same time had called in the
towne of Tordesillas, a Chapter of the order of Saint Iames, and reformed certaine
abuses, and there the differences were compounded, betwixt Castile and Portugall
about the Indian nauigation.
 Wee haue declared how that Pope Alexander had granted by his Bull, dated at Saint
Peters,Portugal. this present yeare one thousand, foure hundred, ninety and three, and the first of
his Popedome,1493. the west Indies to the Kings of Castile. Now for to limit the Streights,
betwixt Castile and Portugall,The Pope ^imits the Spaniards and Portugals nauigation. he did draw a line or a meridionall in the Globe from the
Poles of the North to the South, leauing a hundred leagues distance to the Portuguze
towards the West, from one of the Isles to Cape vert, to make their nauigation of Affrick,
and the East Indies: wherewith the King of Portugall was highly displeased, and
complained in such sort to the Pope, that the Kings of Castile entreated that the nauigation
might bee left free to him towards the west,The Portugals nauigation limited towards the VVest. of foure hundred leagues, and the
Isles and lands within the same reputed for his conquest, wherewith the King of Castile
was not onely contented, but added to it threescore and ten leagues more, so as the Portugalls
nauigation in all, did stretch from the Isles of Cape vert, towards the west, foure
hundred and seauenty leagues, passing the meridionall by that point round about the
globe:The Moluccos founa to bee within the nauigation of the Castillans. but time made it manifest, that the King of Portugall thereby did smally better
his condition: for the riche Islands of the Moluccos, from whence the spices come, are
found to bee within the streight of Castile: this Transaction was passed the seauenth
day of Iune in the yeare one thousand, foure hundred, ninety and foure.
Now King Iohn thinking that the Moluccos were his part, hee sent certaine Caruels
this yeare to seeke a passage by the Affrican sea towards the East, but they went
not farre beyond the Cape of Good hope: wherefore the King beeing very desirous,
that in his dayes this vnknowne nauigation might bee practised,The King of Monicongo receiues the Christian religion. could not haue that
good hap, for hee did not liue this yeare. In his time neuerthelesse the kingdome of
Manicongo in Guiney was discouered, the King whereof with the most part of his
nobility were Baptized. King Iohn beeing oppressed with continuall melancholy for
the death of his sonne Prince Alphonso, hee fell into a dropsie, which by little and little
brought him to his end, not without suspition that his disease was procured or augmented
by poyson: hee neuerthelesse made his abode in the Citty of Lisbone, and
attended the affaires of his kingdome: but his minde was, aboue all other matters, set
on this nauigation, the which hee did set downe according to the opinions which hee
had receiued from diuerse places, which did confirme and verifie the discourse which
Pedro de Cobanilla had sent him, who remained in Prester Iohns Countrey Emperour
of Aethiopia, from whence there arriued at Lisbone, a little before the Kings death, a
learned and discreete Monke, who informed the king more particularly of diuers matters,
which serued afterwards to great purpose.
Now king Iohn feeling himselfe neere his end, made his Will, and hauing no lawfull
children, hee knew that the kingdome was to fall to Don Manuell Duke of Beja:

Hee was therefore desirous to giue Don George his base sonne a portion, vnto whome
hee gaue the Cittie of Coimbra, with the title of Duke, and Montmajor the old, and the
lands of the Infantasgo, in the same forme, as his Grandfather the Infant Don Pedro, father
to Queen Izabella, his mother, had possessed them: hee gaue him moreouer, the Isle
of Madera, Beja, and Viseo, which was not performed afterward.
This will and Testament was signed by Don Manuel, and D. George, and by fiue other
personages of great place, who made vp the number of seuen witnesses. After this hee
went into Algarbe to the Bathes of Monchiz, in the moneth of October the season beeing
cold, and vnfit for his disease: and hunting the wild Bore vppon a wet rainie day, hee
got a fluxe: Wherefore as soone as he came to Albor, assured tokens of death beganne
to appeare vpon him, wherof he was admonished by D. Diego Ortiz Bishop of Tanger,
and Don Diego Almeyda, Prior of Saint Iohns, who was Gouernour to Don George.
then disposing himselfe to dye, hee appoynted certaine things, out of a little Booke, to be
read, and accomplished at such time as he was readie to giue vp the ghost. First, hee craued
pardon of the Dutchesse Donna Beatrix his mother-in-law, of Queene Leonora his
wife, and of the Cardinal Don George of Acosta, who then was at Rome, he likewise craued
pardon of the whole Estates of his Kingdome in generall. And to the end that his
sonne Don George should not grieue and trouble his mind, hee caused him to bee ledde
foorth of his chamber, and there stood round about his bed, Don George of Almeyda,
Bishop of Coimbra, and his brother Don Diego of Almeyda, Prior of Saint Iohns, Don
Iohn de Silua Bishop of Silues, Don Diego Ortiz Bishop of Tanger, and Don Iohn de
Vasconcellos, Earle of Penela, with certaine Chaplens, who exhorted him for his soules
health. In this manner this King died, hauing held the scepter of Portugall foureteene
yeares and two moneths in the yeare 1495. and in the sixe and fortieth of his age:Death of king Iohn of Portugal. his
bodie, by his owne appointment, was layd in the Cathedrall church of Silues, and was
afterwards transported by the commaundement of the King his successor to the Monasterie
of Battaile,1495. beeing the last king that was buried there, and it is reported that yet to
this day his bodie lyes whole and vnconsumed. He was an excellent King, and esteemed
to be so by the other Princes of Christendome.
Returning to the affaires of Castile, King Ferdinand and Queene Izabella departing 
from Tordesillas,Castile. went to Areualo to visite the old Queene Izabella, mother to Queene
Izabella then raigning, from whence they came to Segouia, and afterward to Madrid,
where by the aduice of their Councell it was decreed, that the king, should take the Master-ship
of Alcantara into his owne hands, as well as those of Saint Iames and Calatraua,
for to be perpetuall Administrator thereof, and to the end that there might bee no
more masters in Castile, then the King and Queene: the which was approued by authoritie
Apostolicall: Don Iohn of Estuniga beeing bereft of his Mastership, was otherwaies
recompenced. This yeare also, the new Chancerie and royall audience at Cite reall was
erected for pleas and causes depending beyond Tayo, this riuer separating the bounds of
the two Chanceries: namely, of this, and of that at Vailiodolit, from this Spring in the
mountaine of Cuenca, where it enters into the lands of Portugall, Don Alphonso Carillo
Bishop of Catania, and afterwards of Auilla, was the first President thereof. Now
the King and Queene had sent some few dayes before Antonio Fonseca Ambassadour to
the French king Charles the eight, to the end to diuer him from the warre of Naples, enterprized
against King Alphonso their Newphew, and to declare plainely to him (now
that they had gotten the Earledome of Rossillon) their meaning. And king Charles beeing
alreadie come into Italy with a mightie armie, the Ambassadour metre him at Vilitri
neere to Rome, where he deliuered his Ambassage, and did protest, notwithstanding the
agreement and promises made at the restitution of the Earledome of Rossillon, that if
he did persist to poursue by armes his pretended right to the kingdome of Naples, king
Fernand his master could do no lesse then shew himselfe his enemie, and take vpon him
his Nephewes defence, and therefore he entreated him to thinke of it, and to referre all
their differences to the Popes iudgement, who could very well iudge whither the kingdome
of Naples did belong to the French or to the Arragonois.
The Ambassador wold haue sayd more, but he was interrupted in his speech, by certain

 hotte and fierie French Lords, who made him hold his peace, and told him that he spake
too arrogantly and impertinently:Peace betwixt F^ance and Castile broken. therefore the Ambassador following his instruction,
tooke the Articles of the last agreement betwixt King Charles and King Ferdinand (which
he brought with him) and tare them in peeces in the presence of the King, Lords, and
Knights of his Armie: and hee warned at the same instant, Charles de Areillan, and Iohn
Petit Ceruillon, Spanish Captaines, who serued in King Charles his Armie: that as subiects
to King Ferdinand they should depart thence within three dayes, and giue ouer the
French Kings seruice, on paine of being held rebels to their Prince: From the same time
was the friendship betwixt those two Kings broken, and warre in a manner denounced.
King Charles pursued his destenie, and without any difficulty made himselfe maister of
the Realme of Naples, King Alphonso before hee had fully raigned a yeare, hauing giuen
ouer the kingdome to his sonne Ferdinand, went into Sicill, and there ledde a monastick
life: but not long after, the Kings of Castile beeing at Tortosa in Cattalonia, did
openly and by effect declare themselues enemies to the French, as well for feare least
they being already Maisters of Naples, should seaze vpon Sicill, where they pretended
like right, as also at the entreaty of Pope Alexander and other Potentates of Italy, being
in the same feare of their owne estates, and would not permit the power of the French
to grow so great in Italy: therefore they set forth a Nauie of Galleys and other ships,
with fiue thousand Spanish footmen, and sixe hundred horse, vnder the conduct of Goncalo
Hernandes of Cordoua: the which forces departing from Carthagena, arriued
safely in the Porte of Messina, this yeare one thousand, foure hundred, ninety and fiue,
making a shew as if they would haue succoured the new King Ferdinand driuen from
Naples. These troopes of Spaniards among other memorable matters, brought the
great Pockes into Italy,The Great Pocks in Italy. wherewith they of the countrey were soone possessed, and did
communicate it to the French men, which were scattered heere and there in the kingdome
of Naples, and they afterward brought it on this side the Mounts, and did distribute
it to their neighbour nations, so as this disease beeing indeed of India, was called
the Spanish, Neapolitan, and French disease, according to the next subiect where it was
discouered, and from whence the contagion was perceiued to come.
 About the same time in the Citty of Guadalajara, dyed Don Pero Goncales de Mendoza
Cardinall,Death of the Cardinall Don Pero Gonsall de Mendosa. and Primat of Spaine and Gotike France, Archbishop of Toledo, Patriarke
of Alexandria, and Bishop of Siguenca (such were his titles) who beeing visited
in his sicknesse by the Kings, and being demanded whom hee thought worthy to succeed
him in the Archbishoprick of Toledo, hee named Frier Francis Ximenes of Cisneros the
Queenes Confessor, Prouinciall of the order of Saint Francis in the Prouince of Toledo.
This Cardinall had a singular affection to holy Crosse, who besides that it was his
hap to haue the holy Crosse in Ierusalem for the title of his Cardinalship, hee builded
a Colledge at Valiodolit, and an hospitall at Toledo neere the place of Codebecer, called
Holy Crosse:Pilats original title set on the crosse of our Sauiour, kept for a relic^, in Rome. hee re-edified the Church of Santa Cruz at Rome, where they say the
originall title written by Pilate on our Sauiours Crosse in Greeke, Hebrew, and Latin,
was found in an vnfitte place, the which remaines as a famous relique in that Church.
Besides, it is reported, that beeing neere his end, a great white Crosse of more then forty
Cubits length appeared ouer the house where he lay sick, which beeing reported to him,
he did reioyce, and hauing caused a Masse of the Holy Crosse to be said, hee gaue vp the
ghost: these things are written for wonders by the Spaniards: his body lies buried in the
chiefe chappell of the Church of Toledo, in a sumptuous Marble monument. As concerning
Frier Francis Ximenes of Cisneros his successor in the Archbishoprick of Toledo,
hee was sonne to a solicitor of causes in the towne of Tordelaguna, called Alphonso
Ximenes: his first rising was to the Arch-priesthood of Vzeda, and hee was great Chaplaine
of Siguenca, and the lxxi. in the order of the Archbishops, and hee was afterward
created Cardinall by Pope Alexander the sixt, of the title of Saint Balbine: but D. Bernardin
de Caruajall Bishop of Carthagena, was preferred before him to the dignity of a
Cardinall by the title of Santa Cruz in Ierusalem, and was likewise admitted to the Bishoprick
of Siguenca vacant by the Cardinals death, and at the last obtained that of
Playsance. Frier Diego de Deca, of the order of Friers Preachers, Schoole-maister to

Prince Iohn of Castile, was likewise made Bishop of Salamanca.
The affaires betwixt Castile and Nauarre, since the time that Alain of Albret came to 
Valencia to King Fernand,The last Coronation at Nauarre. were peaceable: but the kingdome of Nauarre was still vexed
by the factions: those of Beaumont, had euer for their chief the Constable Lewis of Beaumont,
Earle of Lerin: those of Grammont ioyned themselues with the Lord of Abenas,
Viceroy and Gouernour of the Countrey, waiting with great desire for the comming of
King Iohn and Queene Catherine, vnto whom they protested all obedience. Now the
great affaires which these Princes had on this side the mountaines, detayned them a long
time there: for besides that they were in no sort fauoured by Charles the eight, the poursuites
of their vnkle Iohn Vicount of Narbonne had continually disquieted them, vntill
the yeare 1493. that they fell to agreement with him: and to secure the countries of Foix
and Bearne in their absence, from his surprizes and vsurpations, they had made ouer to
him the townes of Sauardun, Maseres, Monthault, and Gibel.
This Vicount was a widower, by the death of Donna Marie of Orleance, sister to Lewis
the French King, who left him two children, namely, Gaston, who was duke of Nemours,
and Germaine, which was afterward wife to King Fernand of Arragon after Queene Isabella's
death. Hauing then contented the Vicount, and king Charles busied in his iourney
to Naples, Iohn Lord of Albret, and Queene Catherine his wife, went into Nauarre, leading
with them great troupes of souldiers, for feare lest the Constable should rebell, who
held the cittie of Pampelona in such sort at his commaund, as he disposed of all matters
there, as if he had beene King: and when the Princes came to the gates thereof, their entrance
was denyed, and they were constrayned to lodge at Egues, where they remayned
certaine dayes, vntill the Constable and his Faction were pleased to giue them entrance.
In that Cittie were the Estates assembled, and the King and Queene were crowned with
the vsuall ceremonies, in the presence of diuers Prelats, Knights, and the Ambassadors of
diuers Princes. It was the last Coronation which was made in Nauarre in our time: for
this kingdome beeing soone after in the Kings of Castiles possession, they would no longer
continue such ceremonies, beeing content to receiue the oath of the Estates after
the manner of Spaine. The titles of King Iohn and Queene Catherine of Nauarre, were
Kings of Nauarre, Dukes of Nemours, Gandia, Momblanc and Pegnafiell, Earles of
Foix, and Lords of Bearne, Earles of Bigorre, Ribagorca, Pontieure and Petigort, Vicounts
of Limoges, Peeres of France, and Lords of the cittie of Balaguer.
The yeare 1494. Caesar Borgia,C^sar Borgia Cardinal Bishop of Pampelona. who was after Duke Valentinois, Cardinall and sonne
to Pope Alexander the sixt, did by his procurators take possession of the perpetuall administration
of the Church of Pampelona, by the decease of Don Alphonso Carillo the
Bishop, and by the grant of the Pope his father: and the yeare following 1495. Princesse
Magdalen of France dyed, who was mother to Queene Catherine, in the same cittie of
Pampelona, who accompanied her daughter to her coronation, and had euer vertuously
employed her selfe about the conseruation of her childrens estates for the space of fiue
and twentie yeares, all which time she had liued in holy widow hood: her bodie lies buried
in the great Chappell of the Cathedrall church of the same cittie. About that time
Queene Katherine visited the King and Queene of Castile at Alfaro, by whome she was
greatly honoured and welcommed, as befitted so great a Princesse: and we reade of none
other occasion of her comming thither, but onely for to see them.
Now after that the King and Queene had made themselues masters of the Cittie of
Pampelona, the chiefe of the Kingdome, and of many other places which they feared,
they were obeyed and reuerenced by the most part of their subiects, and strongly accompanied
with Knights and men at armes, they did call to remembrance many rash actions
committed by the Constable Lewis of Beaumont, as well against King Iohn of Arragon,
and Queene Leonora their Grandmother, as against king Francis Phoebus and themselues,
namely, that the Beaumontois had denyed to open them the gates of Pampelona, with
other such recent occasions, whereupon they began to persecute him very sharpely, so
as the Realme of Nauarre was againe in as great confusion as euer it had beene: the two
old Factions not forgetting to make vse of any occasions that might hurt one another:
the which stormes were in some sort quietly calmed by the mediation of King Fernand

of Castile and Arragon who procured this agreement, that the Constable Lewis of Beaumont
his brother in law should withdraw himselfe into Castile for a certaine limited
time, in which meane space either part should lay by their armes, and that the said Constables
goods and lands should be laied in deposito in King Fernands hands. And in this
sort the Constable left Nauarre,Lewis of Bea^mont made Marquis of Huescar. but he lost nothing thereby, for King Fernand gaue him
twice as much reuenue as he had before, and made him Marquis of Huescar in Granado.
The name of open warre ceassed in Nauarre, but they left not of committing of many
murthers and robberies without feare of law, for that nation had beene a long time accustomed
to such outrages in contempt of the law; the which waxed still worse thorow
King Iohn and Queene Catherines negligence, who by euill counsell, and particular affections,
vnworthy of soueraigne Princes, did at the last bandy themselues in leagues one
against the other, the King taking part with those of Beaumont, and the Queene with
the Grammontois whereof infinite miseries ensued.
 During these troubles Goncalo Fernandes de Cordoua, surnamed the Great captaine,
hauing ioyned the forces that hee brought from Spaine with those that King Fernand
had,Castile. who was driuen forth of Naples, and beeing accompained with D. Hugo Cardona
the Sicillian, did so handle the matter as after that King Charles was departed forth of
the Kingdome hee recouered Calabria from the French, and draue thence the Lord a'
Aubigni who was gouernor in those marches, notwithstanding that soone after hee receiued
an ouerthrow by him neere to Seminara, where King Fernand of Naples had
like to haue beene taken prisoner: after which Goncalo Fernandes hauing made his
retreate to Ri^oles, where he stood a certaine time on his defence, and beeing afterwards
re-enforced with new supplies out of Sicile, and a nauy of three score and tenne ships
brought from Meffina by King Fernand, hee had courage and meanes to beseege and
make himselfe Master of the city of Naples,Exploits of Gonsalo Hernandes of Cordoua surnamed the Great captaine. with her castles, and draue thence Lord
Guilbert of Montpensier, whom King Charles had left there for gouernour and Lieutenant
Generall, making such sharpe warre vpon the rest of the French that were left
there, as King Fernand in short time was restored to his Kingdome, by the valour prowesse,
and discretion of this great captaine: which when Don Alphonso vnderstood, who
of a King was become a Monke in Sicile,D. Alphonso from a King become a Monke, striueth in v^ine, from a Monke to become a King. hee laboured to recouer his former dignity:
but his sonne who was in possession thereof, and who had valiantly imployed himselfe in
the recouery of that which his father had carelesly lost, would not giue it ouer: wherefore
Don Alphonso did not liue long after in his monasticke state, for hee died this
yeere 1495.
The successfull exploits of the Spaniards in the Kingdome of Naples did greatly reioyce
King Fernand and Queene Isabella, who beeing at Tortosa, did agree vpon the
marriage of Prince Iohn their sonne and heire to the Kingdomes, with Marguerite of
Austria, daughter to Maximillian then Emperor, who was sent home, as hath beene
said,Al^i^nces betwixt the house of Austria and Cas^le. by Charles the French King: and by the same meanes the marriage was concluded
betwixt Philip of Austria sonne to the said Emperor and Donna Ioane, second daughter
to the King and Queene of Castile and Arragon. These Princes and Princesses
 which were married, brother and sister to the brother and sister, were very nere of kinne
by the line of Portugall: for Donna Isabella of Portugall, wife to Duke Philip of Burgondy,
was mother to Duke Charles father to Mary, who was mother to Philip and to
Marguerite of Austria.
And on the other side D. Leonora of Portugall the Empresse, wife to Frederike, mother
to Maximillian, father to Philip and Margnerite, was cosin germain to King Fernand
daughter to Donna Leonora of Arragon, sister to King Iohn his father, the which
Donna Leonora was wife to King Edward of Portugall. These treaties being made,
the King made some stay at Tortosa, and then returned into Castile: but they were
not long there,VVa^e betwixt the French and Spaniards in the Earldome of Ros^^llon. till the King was constrained to returne to Tortosa to take order
for the warre which the French had raised in the Earldome of Rossillon: for King
Charles beeing highly mooued that the King of Castile, contrary to the agreement
and promise which hee had made him, had sent aide to the King of Naples, fought
 against his armies and townes which hee had conquered, had sent a mighty army

to the Pirenean hills, the which did assaile Sausses, defended by Captaine Bernard Francis,
who was ouer-come and taken,Sanses taken by the French. and almost al the Spaniards were cut in peeces in the
sight of the Spanish Armies, commanded by Don Henry Henriques Earle of Alua de
Lista, and by the King himselfe, who was come as farre as Gyrone, thinking by vaine
shewes to cause the French to retire: the which they did, but it was because winter drew
on,1496. and for want of victualls, the enemies Armie being in the like necessity. Sausses beeing
forsaken, dismantled and burnt by the French, a truce was taken for foure moneths.
Among other men of name which dyed at the taking of Sausses were Don Diego de
Azeuedo, and Pedro de Solis: the same hapned the yeare one thousand, foure hundred,
ninety and sixe.
Queene Isabell remaining at Burgos, gaue order for the iourney of her second daughter
Don Ioane into Flanders to Phillip of Austria, vnto whom shee was promised, and
for the same purpose shee caused a great Nauie to bee rigged in the Porte of Laredo,Queene Isabell the Dowager sick both in body and mind^.
whether shee came in person, after shee had celebrated the obsequies of Queene Isabell
her Mother, who dyed at the same time at Areualo, hauing liued a widdow the space
of two and forty yeares, troubled with sicknesse both of body and minde, whose body
beeing then laide in the Monasterie of Saint Francis of Areualo, was afterward transported
to the Carthusians in the Citty of Burgos, called Mirefleur, where King Iohn
her husband was buried.Death of Don Iohn de Gamboa. The same yeare dyed in Guipuscoa Don Iohn de Gamboa, a
personage full of yeares and honour, who was Maister of the horse to the Kings of Castile,
and of their Councell, Captaine generall of the frontiers of France and Nauarre,
and gouernor of Fontaraby. This Knight left onely two daughters, one of which was
married in Guipuscoa in the family of Sarauz, and the other into Biscay into that of
Arteaga:The Infanta Don Ioanes voyage into F^anders. the Queene gaue the conduct of the Nauie, and of the Infanta Donna Ioane
her daughter, to Don Frederick Henriques high Admirall of Castile her Vnckle, beeing
accompanied by Donna Maria de Velasco the Admiralls Mother, with other Lords,
Ladyes and Gentlewomen, who beeing shipped, the Queene went back to Burgos, and
from thence into Cattalonia to ayde the King her husband.
In the meane space, the great Captaine continued the warre on the one side, and King
Ferdinand on the other in the kingdome of Naples, who were resisted in Calabria
by Eberard Stuard Lord of Aubigni, assisted by the faction of Aniow, and with a few
French forces which were left him, and in the territorie of Lauoro by the Lord Guilbert
of Montpensier Lieutenant generall to the French King, in the same kingdome, who
was besieged in the Citty of Auersa by King Ferdinand and the great Captaine both
together, and was brought to such extremitie, as hee promised, if within thirty dayes
hee were not succoured, to yeeld vp all that the French men held in the kingdome of
Naples, excepting Gaieta, Venosa and Tarentum, which were in the hands of strangers,
vpon condition that they would furnish him with shippes to carry him and his people
into France: there fell afterwards great sicknesse among the men of warre on either
side: and Lord Guilbert of Montpensier dyed at Pozzuolo with other French Lords,
and there dyed likewise on the enemies part diuerse men of note, as namely King Ferdinand,
who had for successour his Vnckle Don Frederick of Arragon, brother to Don
Alphonso. King Frederick stayed not long ere hee besieged Gaietta, during which siege
the Lord D Aubigni rendred the places which hee held in Calabria, by whose example
Gaietta, Venosa and Tarentum were yeelded, and King Frederick by that meanes
recouered all the realme of Naples.
In this warre all the Potentates of Italy shewed themselues enemies to the French,All the Potentates of Italy enemies to the French except the Florentines.
the Florentines excepted, who thought by the meanes of the Frenchmen who held Pisa,
to bring that Cittie into their subiection. And the warre beeing ended, Pope
Alexander did sharply persecute the Vrsins, friends and seruants to the house of France,
and the chiefe of that family Virginio Vrsino, an excellent Captaine, of all which
matters, King Ferdinand and Queene Isabell of Castile were aduertized to their great
contentment.
The beginning of the yeare one thousand, foure hundred, ninetie and seauen, the
Kings beeing in the Citty of Burgos,1467. they receiued aduertisement that the Armie of

Castile was returned, which had conducted the Infanta Donna Ioane, wife to Philip of
Austria, and brought Margueret, sister to the said Philip, betrothed to Prince Iohn, who
were married in the same Citty,Fryer Francis Ximenes Archbishop of Toledo. Frier Francis Ximenes of Cisneros Archbishop of Toledo
and Primat of Spaine dooing the ceremony: and they had for their God-father
Don Frederick the Admirall, and Donna Maria de Velasco his mother for their God-mother.
The feasts and magnificences were great and pompous, whereat dyed Don
Alphonso de Cardegna second sonne to Don (...) de Cardegna, great Commander
of Leon.
The wedding being ended, the Co^rt came to Medina del campo, where Christopher
Colombus arriued as a prisoner by the slanders and accusations of the Spaniards his enemies,
who were impatient of discipline, the most enuious of whom was Frier Buil, who
came back the same time into Spaine: neuerthelesse the Kings thinking it an vnseemly
matter that such a personage should yeeld account of his actions in quality of an offender,
they did absolue him of the grea^ rigor which hee had executed by iustice on the
Spaniards, with commandement thence-forward to vse those more gently, who did
crosse so many seas to doe them seruice, and they willed him to returne to the Iudges,
they being highly contented with the reports which hee made of the great riches and
wealth which those countries yeelded: whereof hee brought them proofes of golde,
Brazil, mother of Pearle, Amber, pretious Feathers, Indian tapstrie, and other strange
things: They did againe rigge forth eight ships for him, furnished with men and victuals,
two whereof hee sent away before laden with victualls and weapons to his brother
Bartholomew Colombus, who had begun to builde the Cittie of Saint Domingo, vpon
the riuer of Ocama in the Island of Hispagunola: hee with the other sixe parted from
Saint Lucar de Barameda, and beeing arriued at Madera, vnderstanding that there
were French Pirates at sea that watched for him, beeing drawne thither by the renowne
of the wealth of the Indies, hee sent onely three of his shippes directly to the
Island of Hispagnuola, and hee with the other three sayled towards the Isles of Cape
vert, tending to the Equinoctiall, and after great trauaile of heates, and calmes, hee arriued
at Paria the firme land of those West Indies: then coasting three hundred and
thirty leagues vnto Cape de Velas, hee discouered and tooke note of all that countrey,
where are Cabo Anegado, the point of Salinas, Cubagua, otherwise called the Isle of
Pearles, the point of Araja, Cumana, Chiriuichi, the Gulphe of Cariari, Curiana, Saint
Roman, Venecuela Coquibocoa, and other places, from whence hee passed to the new
Citty of Saint Domingo, and there was receiued for Gouernour, to the great griefe of
diuerse.
 This was the third voyage that Colombus made to the Indies, and then they had already
begun to trade and negociate with the Indians by force of armes:Colombus his third voyage to the Indies. for the violent
vsage of them had made them become strange, and enemies to the Spaniards, so as they
left off tilling of their grounds, and sowing of their Maiz, to the end to constraine
them by hunger to leaue the contrey, and at the same time as these shippes arriued,
great number of Indians beeing gathered together, did besiege the Spaniards of the
Forte of Saint Thomas du Ciabo, who were put to flight by Alphonso de Hoiedo. Hauing
then gotten the Cachique Coanabo into the Forte, keeping him prisoner for the death
of diuerse Christians, more then fiue thousand Indians assembled themselues, beeing
conducted by a brother of his, for to deliuer him, who were likewise defeated by Hoyeda,
hauing but a hundred Spaniards in his company, and some amongst them were
horsemen, the which made the Spaniards to bee greatly feared, and much more afterward
when Bartholomew Colombus by night defeated fifteene thousand Indians, tooke
fifteene Cachiques, and a Generall aboue all the rest named Guarionex, all which hee
set at libertie vppon their words and promises to continew subiects to the Kings of
Castile.
Besides these conquests in the Indies,Enterprises vpon the affrican Mooles. the Spanish Nobilitie, who seeing that there
was no more warres in Spaine against the Infidells, began to enterprize vppon the
neighbour shoare of Affrick, and this yeare the Citty of Melilla, neere the sea in the
kingdome of Tremessen, was taken by Don Iohn de Guzman, Duke of Medina Sidonia,

who led a sufficient army thither, at his owne coasts and charges. This was the first
place which the crowne of Castile did possesse in that country beyond the sea, which
gaue beginning to the warres of Afrike, which continued afterward, and whereof wee
will speake in his place. This exploite of the Duke of Medina was acknowledged and
rewarded by the King, who lying at Valencia of Alcantara did treat the marriage of their
daughter, the Infanta Isabell the widdow, with the new King D. Manuell of Portugall, of
whom we must discourse.


D. Manuel the fourthteenth King of
Portugall.
THis Prince succeeded King Iohn his cosin and brother in law in the crowne of Portugal 
the yeere 1465. being seuen and twenty yeeres of age:Portugal. hee was sonne to Don
Fernand Duke of Viseo, and of the Infanta Donna Beatrice, grand child to King Edward,
and great grand-child to King Iohn the first, whose aduancement to the royall crowne
had beene fore-told by certaine Soothsaiers and Astrologians: he obtained it by right of
lawfull succession, and by the testamentary appointment of King Iohn his predecessor:
in whose life time he did in no sort take vpon him the title of Prince and heire of Portugall,
but onely of Duke of Beja and Master of Christus. Hee was a iust King, and loued
honour, religious and zealous in the faith which had beene taught him, vsing the Nobility
kindely,Qualities of King Manuel. the which hee increased and aduanced in his dominions as much as hee
could: he was gentle, liberall and a great giuer of almes, especially to religious friers as
well of his owne Kingdome as to strangers, dilligent and carefull in the administration
of iustice, an enterprizer, lucky in voyages, nauigations and discoueries of countries,
whereby he greatly augmented and amplified his Kingdome and Siegnories: hee was
beloued and esteemed as well of his owne subiects as of strangers:Buildings of King Manuel. magnificent and
sumptuous in buildings, which the royall monastery of Belen or Bethlem, of the order
of Saint Ierosme doth beare witnesse of, edified for the buriall of the Kings: the castle
of Belen, which stands almost in the riuer of Tayo, for the guarde of the Port of Lisbone;
the Monastery of Saint Mary de la Pegna of the same order of Saint Ierosme
neere to Sintra, and that of Saint Clare the New in the towne of Estremos: all which
workes were by him built from the foundation; and hee did moreouer restore and augment
the couents of Saint Francis of Lisbone, Ebora and Saint Iren. The bridge of
Coimbra, and that of Oliuenca vpon Guadiana are likewise of his structure, with diuers
others publike buildings and reparations: all which vertues and magnificencies were
blemished by one vice, wherevpon Princes and great Lords doe often stumble, namely,
he was to light of beleefe. Whereby hee shewed himselfe inconstant and variable,
retracting on euery small occasion his decrees, orders, guifts and priuiledges by contrary
commandments.
This King Don Manuel was thrice married, and all his wiues were Infantaes of Castile,Genealogie of Portugal.
and the two first were sisters: his first wife was Donna Isabella, widdow to the Infant
Don Alphonso his Nephew his sisters sonne, on whom hee begat a sonne named D.
Michel, who was borne in Arragon in the city of Saragossa at such a time as shalbe
set downe hereafter, who if hee had liued, had beene heire to all Spaine: Donna Isabella
being dead, his second wife was her sister, called the Infanta Maria of Castile, third daughter
to King Fernand and Queene Isabella by whom hee had a great issue. First of all,
D. Iohn heire of Portugall borne at Lisbone in the pallace of the Riuer, the Infanta
Donna Isabella borne in the same city, who was Queene of Castile, Leon, Arragon and
Nauarre, and Empresse of Germany, married to Charles the fifth. Donna Beatrice who
was Dutchesse of Sauoy, wife to Charles the ninth, and mother to Duke Emanuel Philibert
of Sauoy, D. Lewis borne in Abrantes, father to D. Antonio who was at strife
for the kingdome of Portugall with Philip king of Spaine in our time; next D. Henry,
who in our time was a Cardinall, borne likewise in Abrantes on the riuer of Tayo, D.

Alphonso who was borne in the city of Ebora, and was likewise made Cardinall at seuen
yeeres of age by Pope Leo the tenth; Don Catherine who died young, then D. Fernand,
Don Edward and Don Antonio. His third and last wife was Donna Leonora daughter-to
Philip of Austria, Infanta of Castile, and sister to the Emperour Charles the fifth, by
whom he had a sonne named Charles who died young, he had moreouer by her a daughter,
borne after his death, named Donna Maria, who liued in great chastity in our daies:
So as this King had by his three married wiues thirteene children liuing, namely nine
sonnes and foure daughters:Ea^ldomes erected in Portugall by King Manuell. This Prince comming to the crowne hee erected diuerse
Earledomes for the ornament of the Nobility of Portugall, hee gaue that of Portalegre
to Diego de Silua his gouernor, who enioyed but, the title onely, for the Inhabitants
of Portalegre did defend themselues, by reason of their priuiledges: hee made Don Vasco
de Gama Admirall of Portugall Earle of Bediguera, Don Martin de Castel-blanc
Earle of Villanoua, Don Iohn de Meneses Earle of Taroco and prior of Saint Iohns,
Don Rodrigo de Merlo Earle of Tentugall, Don Pedro de Castro Earle of Montsancto,
Don Francisco de Sosa, sonne to the Bishop of Ebora Earle of Bemioso, and Don Antonio
of Portugall Earle of Lignare, honouring in that manner, by liberality and royall
bounty the Nobility of Portugal.
At the instant entreaties and requests of the widdow,D. Iames restored to the Duchy of Visco and to his fathers goods. Queene Leonora his sister,
and of the Dutchesse Donna Isabel, widdow of Braganca; hee restored to the honours
and goods of the deceased Duke, D. Iames, vntil then in exile in Castile, who was the
Dukes second sonne, for Don Philip the eldest died in Castile, because the Princes of his
bloud should not liue in such calamity, and that so noble a race might not faile in Portugall:
he shewed the like grace and bounty to diuerse other Lords, who were absent, for
offences committed against the crowne, albeit that the new Duke D. Iames had for his
owne part no way offended, but had run into his fathers disgrace who was executed by
law. For a notable and religious act, as he and his counsel thought, he gaue commandement
that all Iewes and Moores should voide forth of Portugal, vnlesse they would bee
baptized, confiscating their goods, and children of euery sex, excepted vnder thirteene
yeeres of age, whom by force he caused to be baptized, but beeing afterwards better aduised,Iewes constrained to be baptized.
hee retained onely the men and women of those sects by force, causing them to
receiue baptisme, and to confesse Iesus Christ with their mouthes, but, as it is to bee presumed,
without beleeuing it in their hearts, and people constrained, and not wel instructed,
the which did beget infinite apostacies, sects, and heresies in Portugal, as it could not
fall out otherwise.
 Following the steps of his predecessor King Iohn, hee sent men into the parts of
the East to make ample and certaine information of the trafficke of spices,D. Vasco de Gama a Portugal Captaine in Calicut. and hee
caused Don Vasco de Gama to pursue the nauigations and discouery of the shores of
Affrike, who departing from Lisbone this yeere 1497. with two ships, the one named
the Angel Gabriel, the other the Angel Raphael, manned with a hundred and
forty men, coasted about Affrike, and touching at the Isle of Saint Iames, and that of
Saint Helen, places by him so named, hee came into Macambuque a country of the
Moores, and from thence, by a long and tedious iourney passing hard by a rocke, which
hee called Saint George, and by the shelues and sands of Saint Raphaell hee arriued at
Mombaca a land fertil, pleasant, and of great trade and commerce, then going forward
he came to the city of Melinde, in the which hee had not only some rest and refreshing
from his paineful iourney, but did likewise contract peace and alliance betwixt the King
of Melinde, and King Manuel his Master: at the last sayling farther, he came to Calicut the
place so much desired which was the aime of his enterprize. He found Calicut to be a
great and wel peopled city, and of great trade for spices, he saw in the hauen more then a
thousand fiue hundred saile of marchants ships, great and smal, but ill built and vnseruiceable
for long voyages, without art in their sailes, anchors and tackling, not vsing the
compasse, and wholy vnfit for sea fights, not beeing able to saile vnlesse they had a fore
winde.
 Now King Manuel beeing such an one as wee haue described him, and in his florishing
age,Castile. the marriage betwixt him and the Princesse Isabella of Castile; who

was a widdow was concluded at Valencia of Alcantara, at the same time as Prince Iohn
of Castile newly married to Marguerite of Austria fell sicke of the disease whereos hee
died at Salamanca: the which caused king Manuell to hasten the effecting of this marriage:Death of Prince Iohn of Castile.
because that after Prince Iohn, the succession of the Realmes of Castile and Arragon
fell to Donna Isabella as to the eldest. Therefore hee vsed such dilligence as the
marriage was acco^plished before the Prince his death, who deceassed to the great griefe
of the kings his father and mother,General mourning. and of all their subiects, hauing not fully attained to
the twentith yeere of his age, and was buried in the Monastery of S. Thomas of the frier
preachers in the city of Auila. All the Gentlemen, Knights, Lawiers, and other men
of note in all parts of Spaine, did in signe of mourning for his death cloath themselues
in blacke frise, or such like course cloath of meane price. The Princesse Marguerite
his widdow, who was with child, was brought in bed soone after in the towne of Alcala
de Henares of a dead daughter. King Fernand beeing the first that receiued these
lamentable newes,A good means to comfort an extreame sorrow. fearing least the Queene his wife would fall into some great perplexity
for the losse of an onely sonne, heire to so great a state and of such young
yeeres, did determine to send her newes that he himselfe was dead, and then when shee
should enter into teares and lamentations, to come into her presence at the same instant
to comfort her, and then plainely to tell her the truth of their sonnes death, imagining
that a sodaine consolation betwixt two extreame griefes, would greatly moderate
both the one and the other: the which tooke good effect, by the good reasons and
examples which hee alleadged vnto her. By Prince Iohns decease, Donna Isabella his
sister was Princesse of the Asturia's, and eldest heire to the Kingdomes of Castile and
Arragon.
This yeere died Don Iohn Arias de Villar, who was Bishop of Ouiedo, the which
place was giuen to Don Garcia Ramires de Villa Escusa, last perpetuall prior of Saint
Markes of Leon, and euer afterward the Priors of that place were but from yeere to
yeere. There died also by a lamentable chance, the Court beeing at Alcala, Don Lewis
Pimentell Marquis of Villa-franca, eldest sonne to Don Roder^go Alphonso Pimentell
Earle of Benauent, who fell downe to the ground out of a gallery. Don Diego of Castile
great commander of Calatroua did likewise die, and his commandery was giuen
to Don Guttiere de Padilla Treasorer, and his place to Don Alphonso de Silua, brother
to the Earle of Cifuentes. Now the new Queene of Portugall, Infanta of Castile and
Arragon, hauing right to so great a succession by the death of Prince Iohn her brother:
it behoued the King her husband and her selfe to passe into Castile, to receiue, in quality
of future heires to those Kingdomes, the oth of the States: therefore leauing the
widdow Queene Leonora Regent in Portugall, they came to the city of Toledo the
yeere 1498. where Queene Isabella of Portugall was sworne,An. 1498. and acknowledged Princesse
of the Asturia's, heire to Castile and Leon: then going into Arragon, the like
was done for the succession in those Kingdomes. But this Princesse being with child,
shee was brought in bed and died in the city of Saragossa, leauing heire to all her fathers
and mothers dominions,D. Michel that n^w borne Infant sworne heire of Arragon. the child newly borne if he had liued, who was called D.
Michel, who in that infancy was sworne Prince of Girone and heire to Arragon and Sicile.
With this sorrow D. Manuel returned a widdower into Portugal, leauing his onely
sonne in Saragossa. The dead Queenes body was brought to Toledo and buried in
the Monastery of Saint Antolm, which is a parrish Church where were Religious Nuns,
which was builded by Don Agnes d' Ayala, wife to the Admiral of Castile, grand-mother
to King Fernand. And afterward because of this Princesse, which was there buried,
it was called the Monastery of Saint Elizabeth, and the parrish remooued to Saint Marks
which was of the number of the Musarabes.
About this time Lewis the twelfth of that name, before Duke of Orleance hauing succeeded
Charles the eight in the crowne of France, and hauing his thoughts wholy
bent to dispossesse Duke Lewis Sforza of the Duchy of Milan, which hee said was the
antient-maternall inheritance of the house of Orleance, peace was granted to King
Frederike of Naples, and in agreement procured betwixt France and Castile: therefore

Don Goncalo Hernandes surnamed the great captaine, returned out of Italy into
Spaine,Oth to the Infant D. Michel for the future succession of Castile. full of victory and honor. The Court being come to Ocagna, where Queene Isabella
found her selfe somewhat well at ease the yeere 1499. the Infant Don Michel was
sworne Prince of the Asturia's, and heire to Castile. There arose a great quarrel in Ocagna
amongst the courtiers, wherein Don Alphonso Pimentel, sonne to Don Iohn Pimentel
was slaine.
The Court comming to Madrid, the marriage was celebrated betwixt D. Rodrigo de
Mendoza the first Marquis of Zenete, a widdower by the death of his wife D. Leonora de
la Cerda Marquisse of Zenete,D. Mencia de Mendoza wife to Earle Henry of Nassau. onely daughter to the Duke of Medina Celi, and Donna
Maria de Fonseca, daughter to D. Alphonso de Fonseca, of which marriage was borne a
daughter and heire called Mencia de Mendoza, who was wife to Henry Earle of Nassau.
The affaires of the Indies grew worse and worse, the Spanish arrogancy not beeing
able to endure a bridle to restraine them in their disorders, for Rowland Ximenes from a
seruant being become great Prouost and President of iustice in the Indies, by the fauour
 of the Admiral Christopher Colombus, did openly mutiny against Bartolmew Colombus the
gouernour, and with threescore and tenne of his confederates, hee sequestred himselfe
and went into Xaragua, protesting that hee did not forsake the Kings seruice of Castile,
but onely his obedience to the Geneuois, whose pride he could not beare: the Admirall
endeuored by all meanes to appease this tumult, but he could not, wherefore they fell to
writing one against an other into Spaine, and to lay great offences to each others
charge, so as the Kings sent Francis de Bouadilla, a Knight of the order of Calatraua
with foure caruels, with ample power and authority to the Indies to make information
of these matters, who being arriued in the Island of Hispagnuola, found, after enquiry
made in the city of Saint Domingo, that the two brothers Colombs were in the fault, therfore
hee apprehended them, and sent each of them in a caruell prisoners in setters into
Spaine.
Being landed at Cales,The brothers Colombus brought backe againe prisosoners into Spaine. the Kings hauing notice of their arriuall, caused them to bee
set at liberty and to come to Granado where the Court then lay, where notwithstanding
their iustifications, the gouernment of the Indies was taken from them. And so the Admiral
remained three yeeres in Spaine, without returning to the countries by him discouered.
The Kings the same yeere gaue leaue to Pero Nugno borne at Palos de Moguer to
goe to the Indies with a ship and thirty marriners, on condition that he should not land,
nor come neere the lands discouered by Christopher Colombus by fifty leagues:Pero Nugnos voyage. who beeing
arriued at Parias, and hauing well noted the coast euen to Curiana, which is nere to
Venecuela, he landed in Curiana, where he found the people to be simple, with whom he
exchanged his pedlery ware of smal value, for very precious pearles. This Pero Nugno
being returned into Galicia was accused by his own fellowes, and had a long suite before
Hernando de Vega Lord of Grayales viceroy in that country. Other inhabitants of
Palos Moguer, who had beene in the voyages of Christopher Colombus, and had inriched
themselues were desirous to saile againe to the Indies, as namely, Vicont Iames Pins^n,
and Arias Pinson his nephew,The voyage of Vi^^ent and Arias Pinson. who at their owne charges hauing victualled and rig'd
foure caruels, they passed by Saint Iames his Isle, one of those of Cap-vert, and arriued at
the Cap of Saint Augustin, a country very thicke of trees, amongst the which they
found one that sixteene men could not fadom, where they wrote their names, and those
of their King and Queene in token of possession: then coasting along the shoares (not
without danger) where they thought to land, in regard they found there very fierce and
barbarous Indians, they came to the mouth of the great riuer Maragnon, in the gulph^
of Parias, and to that of the riuer Oreillana, which are the greatest in the world, and
doe runne almost euer vnder the Equinoctiall: the which riuer of Oreillana the Pinsons
hauing sailed, and spent tenne monthes in those nauigations; they returned into
Spaine with two caruels onely laden with brasill and drogues, but no gold notr
pearles.
Don Vas^o de Gama arriued likewise this yeere in Portugal from his voyage of Calicut
laden with spices,Portugal. which hee had bought at a cheape rate, from which place hee departed

in the month of September of the precedent yeere, captaine Nicholas Coello going
before from the Cap of good hope to bring the King of Portugall good newes
thereof, after whom the said Vasco arriued, who was most graciously welcomed, and
largely rewarded for his trauaile which lasted six and twenty monthes, and of all the men
which he carried out with him hee brought home fifty onely. The Portugalls from that
time, did ordinarily saile to the East Indies.
This yeere the Princesse Margueret of Austria widdow,Castile. parted from Spaine to returne
into Flanders, afterward shee shas married to Philibert Duke of Sauoy, by whom
hauing had no children, after his death she remained a widdow, and gouerned the country
of Flanders a long time: the Monastery called Bruns neere to Bourg in Bresse, was
builded by her. The Court beeing at Granado, Queene Ioane of Naples, widdow to
the late King Fernand the first came thither, shee was sister to King Fernand of Castile*
In her company was the Cardinall Lewis of Arragon, sonne to Don Roderigo of Arragon
bastard to the King her husband: and in Flanders the Infanta Donna Ioane wife
to Philip of Austria was brought in bed of a daughter named Leonor, who was Queene
of Portugall, married to the King Don Manuel and afterward to the great King Francis
of France.
King Fernand and Queene Isabella being come from Granado to Siuil, beeing mooued
with zeale to religion, and the better to obtaine the title of Catholike Kings, by the
counsell also of the Prelats, and namely of frier Francis Ximenes de Cisneros Archbishop
of Toledo, frier Thomas of Torquemada, the chiefe Inquisitor of Spaine being deceased
a while before, they vndertooke the voluntary and forced conuersion of the
Moores, contrary to the promises and capitulations made vnto those which yeelded during
the warres, whereof great troubles ensued.
The Archbishop Ximenes was at Granado to assist frier Hernand of Talauera a little 
before made Archbishop of Granado, who laboured to procure that conuersion to
bee voluntary,Moores Mudeiares enforced to cha^g their religion. without vsing constraint. But hee of Toledo imagining that the other
had proceeded ouer gently, did beginne to presse the Moores that were inhabitants
of the Albayzin after his owne humor; giuing hard speeches to such as would
dispute of religion with the Monkes and Curats, who thought to conuert them: and
then comming to deeds, he laid hands vpon a chiefe Moore of the familie of Zigri, who
was descended from the Kings of Granado, and kept him so long in prison as to recouer
his liberty, hee said that hee was contented to beleeue in Iesus Christ, and that hee
had had a vision which did assure him that it was the right way of saluation. Hee sent
after that, one of his household seruants named Sazedo, with a Prouost that was very ill
beloued to apprehend a woman dwelling in the same Albayzin, but both of them were
there slaine. Diuers Moores being gathered together at the womans cries, who after
the deed ranne to the Archbishop of Toledos lodging to haue done as much to
him: but he and his people did valiantly defend themselues vntill the Earle of Tendilla
the Gouernor came and freed him from them: the which Earle with the Archbishop
of Toledo delt in such sort as the mutinous people were appeased, and their Alguasils
were heard, who protested that they did not rise against the King, but onely
to hinder the breaking of the Articles agreed vpon, which were, not bee enforced to
change their religion.
This was the first attempt of the Moores conuersion, with no small daunger and
tumult, which lasted tenne daies. The King hauing notice of what was done, was
highly mooued against the Archbishop of Toledo; but hee contented him with
reasons wherewith hee was not vnfurnished, and caused him to allow and approoue
to haue them conuerted by force: for at the report of what the Moores of Albayzin
had done, those of the mountaines, and of the country called Alpuxarres did fall into
a mutiny, to chastice whom they were constrained to proceed by armes the yeere
following 1500. In the same yeere Pope Alexander the sixth, celebrated the
tenth Iubiley at Rome, whether people of sundry Nations went in great numbers:
and they beganne to conuert the Moores of Granado, this yeere where diuers of them

did mutiny: neuerthelesse more then fifty thousand of that sect receiued the water of
Baptisme, and their Mosquees were blessed and consecrated to ceremonies and vses accustomed
amongst the Christians of that age: those amongst them who would not
change their religion at the Kings command, were constrained to doe it by force of
armes, and because the townes of Huescar, Lanjaron, and Andarrax in the country of
Alpuxarras did make the greatest resistance, the inhabitants being enforced were made
slaues.Birth of Charls of Austria who was King of Spaine and Emperor. And the same yeere was borne in the city of Gaunt vnto Philip of Austria and
Donna Ioane of Castile vpon Saint Mathias day, a sonne named Charles, who was heire
to all the Kingdomes of King Fernand, and Queene Isabella his grand-father and
grand mother, and Emperour of Almaine, the fifth of that name, a great and an excellent
Prince. It is reported that when the newes of his birth was brought to Queene Isabella
his grand-mother, she in a propheticall spirit of his future vniuersal succession in the
great dominions of Spaine, spake these words, taken out of the Acts of the Apostles,
The lot is fallne vpon Mathias,Saint Math^^s day lucky to Emperor Charles. noting thereby, that Don Michel of Portugal then liuing
should not inherite, but that it should bee hee who was borne vpon Saint Mathias
day: the which in deed fell out to be happy for the Emperour Charles, it is the foure and
twentith day of February.
King Fernand beeing returned from the Catholike warre of the country of Alpuxarres
 in the Kingdome of Granado vnto Siuill,Nauarre. hee was visited by Iohn d' Albret King of
Nauarre, whom hee welcomed with great honour and curtesie,King Iohn of Nauar his ^ourney into Castile. for the space of seuenteene
daies that hee remained there. Diuers businesses mooued this Prince to come
into Castile, but there were two of greatest importance, for hee imagined to get againe
the townes of La Garde, Arcos, Saint Vincent, and Bermedo, the castles of Toro
and Herera, and other places of La Sosierra which the King of Castile possessed of the
antient patrimony of Nauarre; hee did moreouer, in the right of the late Queene
Blanch of Nauarre, first wife to King Iohn of Arragon, and great grand-mother to
Queene Catherine then reigning, and by grant made in the contract of her marriage,
demaund the Infantasgo of Castile, the Duchy of Pegnafiel and Lordship of Lara, with
many other lands, and therewith all the sonne of 420112. florins, sixe shillings eight
pence of the coine of Arragon: for which matters King Iohn d' Albret and Queene Catherine
of Nauarre being at Pau, had not long since sent two Franciscan friers in Ambassage
to the Kings of Castile, who were men of vnderstanding, namely frier Iohn de
Vadre Warden of Corella, and frier Iohn de Ro, warden of Tafalla, with ample instructions
to obtaine them: but they brought away nothing but pleasing words and dilatory
excuses. Besides this businesse, the suspition which they had of the Earle of Lerin
did greatly trouble them, who was newly come into Castile, and was much honoured
and aduanced there, and it was reported to them that King Fernand had often times solicited
him, to make ouer vnto him all the lands, goods, rights and actions which he had in
the Realme of Nauarre, promising him treble recompence for them in Castile; the
which the Earle had neuerthelesse refused, either for the naturall loue which he did beare
to his country, or else that hee did better esteeme the place which hee held, almost as
King of Nauarre, then to bee in Castile, where diuers others tooke place before him as it
was fit: These two chiefe occasions caused the King and Queene of Nauarre to depart
from Pau, whether they were goone as soone as they had newes of King Charles the
eight his death, and to returne into Nauarre, where the Queene remained gouernesse
assisted by frier Pedro Eraso Abbot of the Monastery of Oliua: King Iohn d' Albret went
to Siuill to bee resolued by King Fernand concerning these businesses, to preuent the
inconueniences which he feared, and to renue the peace, friendship and alliance betwixt
those two Kingdomes: Hee was highly honoured, as hath beene said, by the Kings of
Castile, and lodged with them in the fort of that magnificent city: and the more to
gratifie and reuerence him the Constable, the Earle of Lerin, was forbidden to come into
the castle.
It is reported that King FernandKing Fernand desirous to get the Kingdome of Nauarre. caused the King of Nauarre to bee sounded whether
he thought well of the exchange which hee desired to make with the Earle of Lerin

of the lands which he possessed in his Kingdome, for other recompence in Castile, and
that hee would giue King Iohn d' Albret a good summe of money,A man should neuer exchang lands for money. if hee would consent
that those lands should remaine to Castile: who notwithstanding the euill will that
he did beare to the Earle of Lerin, vttered his opinion concerning it, which was, that a
man should neuer exchange lands and reuenues for money. King Iohn d' Albret got
no other matter by this iourney but good cheere, and diuers presents of rich plate,
hangings, horse, iewels, and other such like things: wherefore hee returned into his
Realme of Nauarre, leauing the matters hee went for vn-effected. The Earle of Lerin
Constable of Nauarre beeing at that meeting reconciled to him did follow him and
staied in Nauarre, certaine monthes in good quiet. We haue made mention how that
Cardinall Caesar Borgia, sonne to Pope Alexander, had the Bishoprike of Pampelona in
nature of perpetuall administrator thereof, hee resigned the same to the Cardinall of
Saint Praxede:Caesar Borgia, made Duke Valentinois. he laide aside likewise his Cardinals hat, and followed the warres wherevnto
he was more inclined then to Church matters, and was made by his father Duke of
the country called in old time Flaminia, and Gonfaloner and captaine Generall of the
Church, this was the Duke Valentinois.
In these daies beganne the warre which in processe of time did subiect the state of 
Milan vnder the dominion of the Kings of Castile. King Lewis the twelfth,Castile. of the house
of Orleance, pretending that the right of that Duchy belonged vnto him as the proper
inheritance of the Duchesse Valentine his grand-mother, lawfull daughter to Duke Iohn
Galeas Viscont, and heire to her two brother Iohn Maria, and Philip, successiue Dukes
on after an other,VVars of the French against Lewis Sforza. who died without children, hee gaue ouer all thought of the conquest
of Naples, the right of the house of Aniou, and turned his forces against the Duke
then raigning, Lewis Sforza vsurper of that state, whereat not onely the Potentates of
Italy, hating the French dominion, were discontented, but they drew the Spanish forces
to the defense of Prince Sforza, wherein chiefely King Frederike of Naples imployed
himselfe, soliciting King Fernand, and Queene Isabella by continuall messengers and
letters to oppose themselues by all meanes against the greatnesse of the French in Italy,
who if they should obtaine the Duchy of Milan, hee did assure them that they would
passe on to Naples, and after that into Sicile which was their antient right: Therefore
it was concluded in the counsell of Castile, to send backe Don Goncal Hernandes the
great captaine; who tooke shipping at Malaga the eight of Iuly, this yeere 1500. and
led into Italy, eight thousand foot, and twelue hundred horse, where beeing arriued,
to auoide idlenesse, hee went ouer with his army into the Isle of Zante in old time Zacinthium,
in the Illiri an sea, to the end to aide the Venetians oppressed by the Turkes
army, which had taken from them Modon, Coron, Crisse, and Pila in Morea, and the
Island of Cephalonia, in which the Spanish army ioyned to the Venetian, commanded
by Benedetto Pezaro, did land, and there behaued themselues so valiantly, as they
brought againe that Island vnder the Venetians power, the army of the Turke Bajazet
then reigning, being gonne to Constantinople. The Venetians in acknowledgement
of which seruice did honour the great captaine with the title and priuiledge, of a Gentleman
of their commonwealth, a thing rarely granted by them vnto strangers, who
brought backe his army victorious to Messina, wayting for an occasion to employ it to
the preiudice of the French.
During these stirres, the Court being at Granado, there died the Prince Don Michel
heire to these Kingdomes,Portugal. to the great griefe of the Kings of Castile his grand-father
and grand-mother, and of King Manuell his father, hauing not exceeded the
age of two yeeres, who lies buried in the chappell of the Kings, since then builded
in the same City: By his decea^e the Infanta Donna Ioane, wife to the Archduke
Philip had right to the succession of these great Estates, and so consequently
the lotte fell vpon her sonne Charles borne on Saint Mathias daie,D. Ioane wife to the Archduke Philip, presumptiue heire of Castile and Arragon. as Queene Isabella
had fore-told, the Archduke and Donna Ioane his wife beeing called vpon
that occasion, prepared themselues for their iourney into Spaine. The same yeere died
Don Inigo Lopes de Mendoza, second Duke of Infantasgo, who was buried in the

Conuent of Saint Francis at Guadalajara, King Manuel being a widdower and without
children, contracted marriage with the other sister of his deceased Queene named
Donna Marie, third daughter to the King and Queene of Castile, by whom he had many
children, as hath beene heretofore declared. The new Queene of Portugal departed
from Granado in the monthes of September this yeere 1500. and was conducted to
the King her husband by D. Diego Hurtado de Mendoza Archbishop of Siuill and Patriarke
of Alexandria, who was afterward Cardinall, with diuers other Lords and
Knights.
The conuersion of the Moores of the Kingdome of Granado,Castile. begunne by King Fernand
 and Queene Isabel, was so greatly by them desired as they would not depart out
of that country till they had brought it to such passe as they intended:The Moores persecuted in Spaine, to cause them to turne to Christian religion. the Moores on
the other side not being instructed, and seeing diuers contempts of religion, and infinite
euill examples amongst the Prelats and in all the Ecclesiasticall Hierarchy of the Christians;
they thought it a strang matter to be enforced to change their religion the which
they thought to be holy, and that they should so perfidiously breake the agreements and
promises, vpon which they had yeelded themselues to the Kings of Castile: wherefore
they made all the resistance possible: Neuerthelesse the inhabitants of Las Alpuxarras,
those of the cities of Almerie, Guadix and Baca, did in some sort fashion themselues to
the Kings religion: but those of Benefique, Nixar, and Guijar, ranne to armes and resolued
rather to die then to bee so euill intreated: wherefore they were constrained to
send an army thither,Cruel execution of the Moores at Benifique, Nixar, etc. by which those townes were taken by force and cruell slaughter
made of the inhabitants: namely after the fury of the fight, the Kings caused all the male
children, which were of age to beare armes, to be executed by law, and as for the women
they were all sold for slaues, and this was done to quench the bloudy thirst of the prelats
and monkes, counsellors and solicitors of that ill vnderstood conuersion. Yet for
all that, after the fury was past, the King caused the children of either sex amongst those
miserable people vnder eleuen yeeres of age to bee separated and baptized, giuing them
their liberty as innocent of their fathers obstinacy. This rigour was so farre off from
fearing or abating the courage of the rest as they thereby became more stubborne:
their being no spurre in the world more sharpe, then religion, to make men giue ouer
and contemne life, and all other things to be beloued in this world, when they are constrained
to take armes for that respect: for diuers Moores dwelling vpon the coast of
Ronda, La Sierra Vermeille, and Villa longa: being brought to the last hope of beeing able
to liue in the freedome of their consciences, and to keepe their old religion, did
arme themselues, to the number of twelue thousand persons, which caused the Kings
to thinke that they were entred againe into a very difficult warre, and that the conquest
of the kingdome of Granado was not yet ended.
And because it behoued them to giue a present remedy to this fire which kindled,VVar renued by the persecuted Moores.
they dispatched away Don Alphonso d' Aguilar, and the Earle of Vregna, with as great
forces as the present necessity could furnish: but Don Alphonso who was old, and a
well experienced captaine, protested that with so small a number he could doe the King
no seruice, but should receiue losse and dishonour; for the Moores were foure to one
of his people: neuerthelesse being vrged to it, he marched against the enemies, who
keeping themselues closse togither, and in strong places, would not giue the least aduantage
to the Christians; for whom they laide waite in the valleies and streight places
of the country, well knowne to themselues, to the end to surprize and defeat them,
the which came to passe: for the Christians being lodged one night at the foote of Sierra
Vermeille, in such a place as Don Alphonso's troupes were separated from those
of the Earle of Vregna by a great botome which was betwixt them, the Moores at
the shutting in of day-light fell vpon Don Alphonso and his people with such fury, as
they cut them all in peeces, Don Alphonso himselfe lay dead vpon the place: his sonne
Don Pedro, hauing his teeth beaten out with the blow of a stone, and hurt with an
arrow, with great difficulty escaped at the beginning of the fight, the Earle of Vregna
beholding the slaughter of his friends, not being able to succour them by reason of

the botome that lay betwixt them,Particular (...) among captains of one setfe side, doe o^tentimes cause the publike cause to be forgotten. or else because hee would not, as diuers did thinke,
for euer among great Lords, and chiefe commanders vnder one Prince are enuy, iealozie,
and emulation found, which cause such effects to the losse of their Prince and
commonwealth.
King Fernand did greatly apprehend this losse, as also Don Alphonsos death, the
which could not bee imputed to rashnesse: for he had protested that such resolute men
as those Moores were, who were in their forts, ought not to haue beene assailed with
such weake forces: and that they knew very well, the common prouerbe, which saith,
that for to fetch a dead man out of his owne house, there must alway bee foure, how
much more then did it behooue them to goe strongly accompanied against those with
whom he had to do, who weare liuing men, souldiers, and well armed: It is reported
that as he was assailed, diuers Knights were of opinion to turne their backes and to
flee, but he would needs make head, saying, that neuer any of his race did turne their
backes to a Moore.Vnseasonable magnanimity of D. Alphonso de Aguilar. Wherefore being kept backe by shame and dishonour hee susteined
that conflict, whereas hee might haue made an excusable retreat. Now the King
being in a merueilous chollor, departed from Granado against these Moores, with an
intent to punish them rigorously: but perceiuing that it is euermore harder to execute
then to counsell; hee was content to permit them to passe ouer into Afrike, and
to leaue the country: by this meanes after sundry defeats and slaughters on either side,
he obtained his desire, and returned to Granado, where the marriage of D. Catherine his
fourth daughter with Arthur Prince of Wales, heire to the crowne of England, was treated
of. This Princesse tooke her iourney towards her husband the yere 1501. accompanied
by Don Alphonso de Fonseca, Archbishop of Saint Iames, Don Antonio de Rojas
Bishop of Majorque, who was afterward Archbishop of Granado and President of the
royall counsel, and D. Diego Fernandes de Cordoua Earle of Cabra: and at the same time
Queene Ioane, the widdow of Naples, sister of King Fernand, tooke her leaue of him and
withdrew herselfe to Valencia: The Archd^ke Philip of Austria making preparation
for his voyage into Spaine, was father of his third child, Donna Ioane his wife beeing
brought in bed of a daughter named Donna Isabella. This Princesse was wife to Christierne
King of Denmarke, hee who was deposed by his vncle Christierne King of Swethland,
taken by him, and kept in perpetuall prison: by which Christierne shee had two
daughters, that is to say, Dorothy, future wife to Frederike Earle Palatin, and Elector of
the Empire, and Christine, who was married to Francisco Maria Sforza, Duke of Milan
the yeere 1534. who died the yeere after; shee was secondly married to Francis Duke of
Lorraine, father to Duke Charles who liues in our time. After that King Christerne
was deposed from his owne Kingdome, for inuading that of Sweuia: this Princesse D.
Isabella, went into England, where her Aunt Donna Catherine was married, and then she
died being six and twenty yeeres of age.
Whilest these things passed on in Spaine, the French King Lewis the twelfth, did luckily 
end his enterprise of Milan,Sforza taken by the French. and did shut vp into close and perpetuall prison Duke
Lewis Sforza, surnamed the Moore, the Author of all the warres and ruines of Italy in
his time: the which King Frederick of Naples considering, hee was mooued partly by
feare, least he should againe haue to doe with the victorious French armies, partly not
to oblige himselfe ouer much to the Kings of Spaine, and not to giue occasion to the
Spanish insolency to grow ouer saucie in his Kingdome: and namely because King
Iohn of Arragon, and Don Fernand his sonne, had at one time called in question the
late King Alphonso his testamentary decree, whereby hee had left that Kingdome to
his bastard sonne, incapable thereby (as they said) of so great an inheritance: wherefore
hee beganne to haue secret intelligence with the French King, whereof King Fernand
was soone aduertized: who thought, that hee was very ingratefully delt withall
and ill requited for all his cost bestowed in the recouery of that kingdome out of
the French mens hands: and he imagned that hee should not transgresse either diuine
or humaine lawes, if he reputed that conquest to belong to him selfe; and if hee should
ioyne this action to that which his father and hee pretended in the said Kingdome by

reason of the illegitimate succession of Don Fernand bastard to Don Alphonso of Arragon:The King of France and Spaine, diuide the Realme of Naples, and depose King Frederike.
wherefore, he vsing the selfe same pollicy, did practize with King Lewis, in such
sort, as they parted the Kingdome of Naples betwixt themselues, and dispossessed King
Frederike thereof, whom they condemned for light and inconstant: vnto King Fernand
were assigned, Calabria, and Puglia, as countries neere to his Realme of Sicile: to the
French King, Abruzzo, and Terra di Lauor, where stands the city of Naples: on condition
that King Fernand should intitle himselfe, as hee was wont to doe, King of Sicile;
and the French King should adde to his titles, King of Naples and of Ierusalem,
for all rights pretended by the house of Aniou: That these diuisions should be conquered
from King Frederike, at the particular costs, and by the forces of either of these
great Kings; with condition that the one should not hinder the others conquest.
This agreement and diuision, made and concluded in great secret, was afterward allowed
and confirmed at Rome by Pope Alexander the sixth, the two Ambassadors of
France and Castile requiring it: and the French King did presently set his hand to the
worke, sending a mighty army vnder the conduct of Lewis of Armignac Duke of Nemours,
who enuaded the portion assigned to the King his Master, and tooke the cities
of Naples, Capua, and other strong places, being assisted by Caesar Borgia Lancol Duke
Valentinois, who from a Cardinall was become a souldier, and murtherer of his owne
brother Don Francisco Borgia Lan^col Duke of Gandia. The great captaine on the
other side, pressing King Frederike very hardly, who beeing amazed to see him selfe
shut in betwixt two such mighty enemies, beeing not prepared, nor strong enough to
resist, at the last giuing place to necessity, hee resolued to make an agreement with the
French King, making ouer to him all his right, and the forts which he held, on condition
that he might be Duke of Aniou, and receiue in France where hee would remaine thirty
thousand ducats of yeerely rent.
This agreement was concluded to Frederikes great losse; who contemned King Fernand
of Castile, or at the least did distrust his friendship, perceiuing that contrary to the
hope which he had to be aided by him at his need, and wherein hee had entertained Prospero
Colonna with great numbers of souldiers, he did shew himselfe to bee his enemy: It
may be that the feare which he had of his owne souldiers did hasten him to this conclusion,
hauing no meanes to pay them their entertainment, the fauour of Spaine failing him,
and fearing least they would haue plaide him the like trick, as the Switzers, defrauded of
their paies, had done to the Duke of Milan, whom they deliuered to the French King
his enemy. He went into France with his wife and children, his eldest excepted, and carried
with him his moueables and money,King Frederike of Naples, goes into France. receiuing of Duke Valentine a great sum of
glod for his Artillery and munition which he sold to him. This King Frederike was the
fifth of the house of Arragon, who had successiuely held the crowne of Naples, counting
from King Alphonso of Arragon, adopted by Queene Ioane, who deceassing at Naples
the yeere 1458. left it to his base sonne Fernand, hee to his sonne Alphonso: Alphonso, inforced
by Charles the eight, gaue it ouer to his sonne Fernand, by whose death the Kingdome
fell to Frederike his vncle,The great captaine makes none account of keeping his faith and promise. who hauing reigned foure yeeres, made it ouer to King
Lewis of France, and died in the city of Tours; leauing his eldest sonne D. Fernand of
Arragon, Duke of Calabria, heire to all that he possest, whom he had left fortified in the
inexpugnable city of Tarentum, with D. Iohn de Gueuara Earle of Potentia, and other
Knights, who neuerthelesse being beseeged and assailed by the great captaine, did yeeld,
vpon condition to bee set at liberty: the which was not performed; for the great captaine
to preuent the inconueniences which might happen, detained and sent them prisoners
into Spaine.
About the time of the agreement betwixt these two Kings, not long before. Claude
daughter to King Lewis was borne, shee was presumptiue heire to the Duchy of Britan:
There was motion made of marrying her, when she should come to age with Charls
of Austria, sonne to the Archduke Philip, and to the Infanta D. Ioane his wife, who pursuing
there voyage into Spaine, went thorow France, and were by King Lewis his command
greatly honored in all places, and namely in the city of Paris.

Among other poynts and articles of this Treatie of marriage, it was concluded (as
the Spaniards write) betwixt the Emperour Maximillian, pretending right to the Dutchie
of Milan, and King Lewis, who then possessed it; that hee, by whose fault this marriage
was not accomplished,Homage for Flanders and Artois refused to the French King. should forfeit all his right in the sayd Dutchie. The Arch-duke
and the Infanta his wife beeing at Paris, were required by the King to do him homage,
as to their Soueraigne, for the Earledome of Flanders, and other lands belonging
to the Crowne: whereat the Infanta Donna Ioane was so displeased, as albeit shee were
in the Kings dominions, shee did obstinatly contradict it, and would neuer consent therunto.
These two houses by the iust iudgement of God were appoynted to vexe one another
by long warre in time to come, for to scourge the world. It is an hard matter to
entertaine the friendship of great men, or when it is disioyned, to set it firmely together
againe.
The houses of Spayne and France, in former times vnited by holy concord, and most
profitable friendship, did first of all disagree about the Earledome of Rossillon, pawned
to King Lewis the eleuenth by King Iohn of Arragon for 3. hundred thousand crownes,
about the restitution whereof, pernitious warres ensued, the which in some sort beeing
composed, they were afterward renewed concerning the Kingdome of Naples, and either
part did not let to search, and take all occasions lawful, or faigned, to hurt one another,
and to violate and breake all agreements procured betwixt them: in such sort as
there is no Region on the earth, which hath not beene troubled with their quarrels, or
felt the miseries and calamities of their warres.
The agreement made betwixt the two Kings, diuiding another mans Kingdome, did
not last long: for before the yeare was ended, there arose a great quarrell betwixt the two
Kings Gouernours and Lieutenants in the Kingdome of Naples about a bitte of ground
lying betwixt Puglia and Abruzzo, called the Capitanato, the which each of them pretended
for his owne, and maintained it for his part, because that otherwise they should
be depriued of a taxe raysed vppon cattell in that countrey, the which in lesse then a moneths
space affoorded more then fourescore thousand Duckets: and the French men did
particularly challenge it, because this Capitanato did abound in corne, wherewith the
countrey of Abruzzo and Terra di Lauor was furnished, thinking it to bee a very great
losse, if they should leaue it to the Spaniards. Howsoeuer it was, their claime was ambiguous,
each others limits beeing not plainely specified in the diuision, so as they fell to
armes more fiercely then before, wherein for that time the French-men preuayled, and
made themselues masters, not onely of the ground that was in strife, but likewise of many
places of Calabria and Puglia for which there had beene no contention at all.
In the meane space, the Arch-duke Philip and Donna Ioane his wife arriued at Guipuscoa,
where Don Bernard de Rojas and Sandouall,Arriuall of the Arch-duke and D. Ioane his wife in Castile. who was afterward Marquis of Denia,
with great numbers of Lords and Knights of name, waited for them at Fontarabie, by
whome they were conducted, and these Princes passing by Saint Adrians mount, did
christen Philip de Lascan, sonne and heire to the house of Lascan. From thence by Alaua,
Bureua, Burgos, Vailliodolit, Medina del campo, Segobia, and Madrid, in all which places
they had sumptuous and magnificent entertainement, they came at last to the cittie
of Toledo, where the three Estates of the Realmes of Castile and Leon were assembled.
King Fernand and Queene Izabella departing from Seuile,Ceremonies at the swearing to the Princes Philip and Ioane came likewise to Toledo,
where after they had beene feasted, and entertayned with disports for the space of fifteen
dayes, Philip of Austria and Donna Ioane were sworne and acknowledged Princes of the
Asturia's, and eldest heires to the Kingdomes of Castile and Leon, in the right of Donna
Ioane: This was done in the presence of King Fernand and Queene Izabella, the Primate
Friar Francis Ximenes, Arch-bishoppe of the same cittie, Don Diego Hurtado of Mendoza,
Arch-bishoppe of Seuile, Cardinall of Saint Sabine, and Patriarke of Alexandria,
the Bishops of Calaorra, Palence, Osma, Cordoua, Salamanca, Iaen, Cite Rodrigo,
Malaga, Mondognedo, and other Prelates: of Bernardin de Velasco Constable of Castile,
the Dukes of Infantasgo, Alua, Bejar, Albuquerque, and the Marquis of Villena, the

Earles of Oropesa, Miranda, and Benalcacar, Crugna, Siruella, Ribadeo, Fuencalida,
Ajamonte, and others, with the Procurators, and Commissioners of all the citties and
prouinces of Spaine, which haue place in such assemblies. This oath beeing made for
Castile, King Fernand was desirous to haue the like done for the Kingdome of Arragon
and dependancies thereof: and so he iourneyed towards Sarragossa, leauing the Queene
with the Princes at Toledo, who went to passe away the hotte time of Iuly and August
at Ocagna, recreating themselues in the pleasant forrest of Aranjues neere to the riuer
Tayo: and from thence they departed to Sarragossa, where by the Estates they were likewise
declared and sworne Princes of Girone, heires to Arragon, Valence, Cattalognia,
Sicill, and other Countries belonging to that Crowne. The Queene in the meane time
staying at Toledo, remooued to Madrid, where she beganne to be euill disposed of her
person, which caused king Fernand to hasten his returne to her, the Princes desiring to
follow him, did separat themselues, because the Princesse was with child, wherefore shee
remayned at Sarragossa, and the Prince went to Madrid. These matters fell out, the yere
1502. wherein dyed the Cardinall Diego Hurtado of Mendoza in the same cittie of Madrid.
Don Iohn of Estuniga, who had beene Master of Alcantara, and afterward was Cardinall
succeeded him in the Arch-bishoppricke of Siuill. The Marquis of Denja dyed likewise.
The precedent yeare, about the time that the Princesse Catherine departed into England,
Don Iohn d' Arias del Villar dyed, who was President of Vailliodolit, and Bishop
of Segobia, in whose place succeeded Doctor Iohn de Medina, Bishop of Carthagena.
There dyed also D. Lewis de la Cerde, first Duke of Medina Celi, sonne to Earle Gaston.
The Prince of Wales, husband to the Infanta Catherine, died likewise this yeare; and the
Cittie of Gibraltar was re-united to the Crowne, and another persecution was raised against
the Moores.
 Before the Kings of Castile departed from Siuill to come to Toledo, they had sent an
Ambassadour to the Souldan of Egipt,The king of Castile sends an Ambassade to the grand Cairo. who was as Emperour of Arabia, acknowledged
then for Soueraigne, ouer all the Kings of Affricke, who had beene informed by the
Kings of Tremessen, Fez, Bugie, Tunis and others, of diuers rigors and inhumanities exercised
vppon the Moores and Iewes dwelling in Spaine, which that Prince did greatly
recent.Peter Martyr of Angleria Ambassador. The Ambassadour sent thither was called Peter Martyr Angleria of Milan, Deane
of Granado, a learned and well-experienced person, vnto whome were letters of credite
and instructions giuen, how to appease the Souldan, and to perswade him otherwise,
then he had beene before informed: Wherefore he went by Venice, where the Seigneurie
prouided him of a shippe to carrie him to Alexandria: there he found diuers Christian
Merchants, with a Consul, who was a Cattelan by nation, by whom hee was well entertayned.
The Warden of the Monasterie of mount Sion beeing aduertized, some few
dayes before of his comming, sent him word, that he would meete him at Cairo: therefore
Peter Martyr sent certaine Friars before to Cairo, whom he had brought with him,
for to receiue that Friar Warden: and to obtaine a safe-conduct for his owne person and
trayne from the Souldan, to the end to declare his Ambasie vnto him. The father Warden
and his Friars beeing arriued at Cayro found a Truch-man or Interpreter there who
was a Spaniard borne at Momblanc in the Realme of Valencia, vnto whom hauing giuen
notice of the Ambassadors arriuall at Alexandria, and demaunded the safe-conduct,
the Souldan granted it, and sent word to the Gouernor of Alexandria, whom the cal Admirall,
to cause him to be conducted in safetie. But the Monkes hauing vnderstood by
their conferences with the Truchman, how sinisterly the Souldan was possessed against
the Kings of Castil, by the reports of the Moores of Granado, and the Iewes which were
expulsed out of Spaine, they did aduertize him to be well aduised what he did, and to foresee
the danger he had put himselfe in, by comming to the presence of that angry Prince,
whose answer, perhaps might be death: but the Ambassador was no whit amazed thereat:
but sayd, that it would be a great happinesse for him to die in so honourable a cause: so
he tooke his iourney, going against the stream of the riuer Nilus, accompanied by diuers
Mameluke souldiers,Mamelues in Egypt. which were Christians renied, or children of bought Christians, in
whose hands lay the gouernment of al the affairs of Egypt, and namely, out of their bands
was the Souldan chosen.

Being come to Caire* he was longed in the sayd Truchmans house, and then the day
following, he was ledde to the Castle to the Souldans pallace, and passing thorough diuers
galleries full of Mameluques, he was brought into an hall where the Souldan taried
for his comming: Hee found him sitting vppon a bed of State, like vnto women, made in
fashion of an altar, clothed in a gowne of skarlet with large sleeues furred with Martins,
and vpon his head a rich Turbant, with two hornes after a strange fashion, and a sword
neere vnto him, being compassed about with diuers Gouernours of Prouinces, which
they called Admirals.Admirals Gouernors of Prouinces. Before this Emperor, the Ambassadour presented himselfe, apparelled
in a coate of blacke sattin, and a gowne of purple veluet, kneeling vpon one knee,
the Monkes and other Christians which followed him, kneeled on both their knees and
hands, as though they would haue kissed the earth, then rising vp, and going on neerer
by two and two paces, they made three such reuerences: then standing vpon their feete,
the Ambassadour went a little forwarder neere to the Prince, and hauing made a fourth
reuerence, he stood vp, and presented the Kings of Castils letters of credit to the Truchman,
the which beeing opened and read with diuers ceremonies, the Souldan told him,
that hee was welcome. Then the Ambassadour making a great reuerence, told him, the
Kings his Lords and Masters had sent him thither to salute and visit him in their name,
and to offer him whatsoeuer was in their power, excepting that which belonged to Christian
Religion, and that he had commandement and instruction to communicate diuers
businesses with him, Wherefore he besought him to be pleased to giue him audience in
a more priuate manner: the Souldan answered him, that he was contented to do so, and
told him, that if in the meane time he wanted any thing, he should speake, and that whatsoeuer
he demanded should be giuen: The Ambassadour hauing againe thanked him,
and sayd, that he could desire no more fauour and courtesie then hee had alreadie receiued,
then tooke his leaue and returned to his lodging; whether the Souldan sent him diuers
presents of meates.
Three dayes after, the Ambassadour accompanied by the Truch-man, was brought
againe to the Pallace early in the morning, before the Ambassadours of the Kings of Affricke
and the Moores were risen, and finding the Souldan at seysure, he gaue him secret
audience, where he answered very pertinently to all the Souldans demaunds, and did
highly content him, and this conference betwixt them lasted till two of the clocke in the
after-noone, all the contrarie Ambassadours beeing come to Court, in hope to see the
Spanish disgraced: but they were deceyued, for they beheld him returne to his house very
honourably accompanied. Afterward, the Moorish Ambassadours in two seuerall audiences,
pressing and accusing the Kings of Castile, Peter Martyr did so well disguise and
handle the matter, as he perswaded the Souldan, that whatsoeuer his aduersaries had said,
was but meere vntruths: Wherefore hee beeing sent backe againe the same time, the
Truchman procured a fourth audience, wherein the Ambassador of Castile being heard
almost an whole day, did in such manner content and satisfie the Souldan, as hee procured
his fauour and friendship for his King and Queene. And as hee was going foorth of
the Souldans presence, two Admirals cloathed him with a gowne of Damaske furred
with very rich Ermines, (it was in the moneth of Februarie) for which hauing giuen
thankes, and made his vsuall reuerences, hee returned with his trayne. In this manner are
the faults of great men excused by great men. Before Peter Martyrs departure, he feasted
and banqueted the Admirals and chiefest Mamelucs, so as they were highly contented
with him: and departing from Cayro, he went to visit the notable places of Egypt and
Syria: of which voyage and ambassage hee wrote a discourse at his returne. This is hee
which wrote an historie of the Indies by Decades in Latin, which he entitled, The Ocean,
vnto the yeare 1526. He returned into Spaine with honour, and gaue good account to
the Catholicke Kings of his Legation.
The nauigations to the Indies were this yeare very common, diuers particular 
persons,Voyages of diuers particular persons to the Indies. tickled with a desire of gaine, vndertaking those dangerous voyages at
their owne costs, by the Kings permission notwithstanding. Rodrigo de Bastidas was one
of those aduenturers, who set forth two Caruels at his owne costs, and Iohn de Ledesma's
and others, carrying with him Iohn de la Cosa, an excellent Marriner borne in Saint Mary

port, who departing from Cales, sayled neere to Cape de Vela, and ranne one hundred
three score and tenne leagues vppon the coast from that Cape to the Gulph of Vraba,
and Darian, in which are found Caribana, Zenu, Carthagena, Zamba, and S. Martha,
places inhabited by people called Caribes, who feed on mans flesh, without law or naturall
honestie, beeing armed with darts and poysoned arrowes. Rodrigo de Bastida beeing
afterwards come to the cittie of Domingo, did lose his Caruels there, and was committed
to prison by the Commander Francisco de Bouadilla, Gouernor of the Iland of Hispagniola,
laying to his charge, that he had trafficke with the Indians for gold, defrauding
the king of his right: wherefore he sent him prisoner into Spaine: but the kings set him at
libertie, knowing that this voyage was for the publike good, and gaue him 200. Duckets
of rent.Nicholas d' Ouando Gouernor of the Indies. Nicholas d' Ouando, Commander of Larez, of the Order of Alcantara, a valiant
Knight, did by the kings commandement, set sayle, with thirty shippes, and a great company
of souldiers, to succeed the Commander Bouadilla, taking along Rowland Ximenes
in his company, the enemy and accusers of the breethren Columbus, did embarke himselfe
in the same vessell, which had brought the new Gouernour, whereof Antonio de Torres
was Captaine, hauing with them more then an hundred thousand Duckets weight of
gold, and among others, a graine of pure gold to present vnto the Queene, weighing 3.
thousand, three hundred Castillans: but their hap was such, as both they and their wealth
perished by sea: the Admirall Columbus, and his brother beeing by that meanes reuenged
of the great rigour that Bouidilla had vsed towards them, by sending them from the Indies
in yrons into Spayne,The Gouernour Bouadilla drowned, with three hundred Spaniards. and of Rowland Ximenes ingratitude and rebellion, with whom
were drowned more then three hundred men, so as of those thirty ships, hardly sixe escaped.
Nicholas d' Ouando remained in his gouernement of the Island of Hispagniola, the
space of sixe yeares, all matters succeeding well and prosperously with him, by reason of
his humanity and gentlenes: he conquered the Prouinces of Higney, Zauana, Guaycarima,
he pacified that of Xaragua and vsing all his authoritie with such courtesie and modestie,
he got honour and wealth for himselfe and the Kings his masters, vnto whom hee
sent great treasures, in recompence whereof he was made great Commander of Alcantara.Columbus his fourth and last voyage to the Indies.
Then was the Admirall Columbus permitted to go to sea, who departed with foure
Caruels set foorth at the Kings cost, with an hundred, threescore and ten saylers: but beeing
come to the mouth of the riuer Ocman in the Island of Hispagniola, the Gouernour
Nicholas d' ^uanda would not suffer him to come into the city of S. Domingo: wherfore
he sayled to the port Escondido or hidden, and after came to the riuer and cape of Fig-trees:
from whence he ran more then three hundred and seuenty leagues alongst the Southerne
coast, desirous to find a passage beyond the Equinoctiall, he came to a place called
Nombre de Dios, and from thence returned to Cuba, and foorth-with passed to Iamaica
where he lost two Caruels.
In this Iland the Admirall had many crosses, for most of his people fell sicke there to
the death, then they mutined, and would haue slaine one another, Francisco de Porras,
Treasurer of his nauie being author of that sedition: and besides that, the Indians refused
to giue him victuals, which did greatly trouble him: for this he found a present remedie,
and beeing a good Astronomer, he knew that the day following, there would bee a
great Ecclipse of the Moone,Columbus foretels an Eclipse of the Moone to the Indians to feare them. he told the idolatrous Indians, that if they gaue him not victuals,
they should all of them die of the plague, and for a true token thereof, they should
the morrow after see the Moone appeare all bloudie; the which by reason of the Eclipse,
became duskie and spotted: the Indians were so greatly amazed thereat, as they besought
the Admirall to pardon them, and to reconcile them to the Moone, and brought him
more victuals then he had need of. Hauing remained a yeare in Iamayca, the Admirall
Columbus returned into Spayne, from whence he neuer afterwards did stirre: this was
his fourth and last voyage to the Indies.
 The same course held king Manuel in his nauigation to the East Indies, wherein hee
spared no cost:Portugal. for hauing had ample information of the whole voyage of Calicut by D.
Vasco de Gama: he had sent thither in the yeare 1500. a Nauie of twelue Carauels, vnder
the command of Captaine Pero Aluares Cabralde, a Gentleman of Portugal, followed
by other Gentlemen manned with fifteene hundred souldiers, carrying along with him

fiue Friars, and good store of merchandize, to exchange for spices, and other things
which the East produceth, all of it according to the order and appointment of Don Vasco
de Gama.
These Caruels hauing sayled in view of the Ilands of the Canaries, and arriued at S.
Iames, as they discouered the Isle of Bresill, there appeared to them a Comet with long
and fearefull beames towards the East: continuing their voyage, there arose so great and
strange a tempest, as by day the water of the sea seemed as blacke as pitch, and in the
night like to fire, which swallowed foure of those shippes, the rest of the Na^y sayling on
in great danger, came in sight of cape Double, and from thence arriued at Mosambique,
then sayling towards Melinde, and beyond that to Anjauina, they came at last within a
league of Calicut: from whence he beganne to contract with the King of the same countrie:
but afterwards they fell at oddes, which caused losse to either of them. Vppon this
occasion, Pero Aluares Cabralda, went into the land of Malabar, belonging to the King
of Cochin, with whome he agreed, and found meanes to lade his ships with spices: and
so returning homewards, he touched at the cape of Good hope, and from thence to Lisbone,
where he arriued in Iuly, in the yeare 1501.1501. with sixe Carauels of twelue, that hee
carried out with him, hauing beene in that voyage neere sixteene moneths.
Before his returne Iohn de la Nueua Gallego,Voyage of Iohn de la Nueua a Portugal. departed from Lisbon with three shippes
and a Caruell for the selfe same voyage of Calicut: but King Manuel conceyuing in his
mind to find a way to the Isles of Moluccos, and those countries where the spices grow,
he sent the same yeare 1501. a skilfull marriner called Americus Vespucius a Florentine,
with foure Carauels, who passed not much farther then Saint Augustines Cape, and
without taking notice of the great riuer of siluer, or Rio de Plata, he returned home.
The yeare 1502. Don Vasco de Gama,An. 1502. Admirall of Port^gall, was againe sent by the
King into the East,D Vasco de Gama his second voyage. with thirteene shippes, and three Carauels, manned with great numbers
of Gentlemen and souldiers, with Merchandizes, munitions and victuals, and all other
things necessarie for so long and painefull a voyage: and within few dayes after, hee
sent other fiue shippes to follow Don Vasco, commanded by Stephano Gamo. By these
were new lands discouered, to the great profit and commodity of the nations of Europe.
This same yeare King Manuel had by his wife Queene Mary,Birth of prince Iohn of Portugal. a sonne called Iohn, who
succeeded him in the Kingdome, the day of whose birth was rainy, and such thunder and
lightning on the day of his christening, as the Royall pallace was in danger of beeing
burned.
And the yeare following 1503. his daughter the Infanta Izabella was born,An. 1503. who came
to be Empresse of Germany,Birth of D. Isabella. and was mother to king Philip the second deceased. Don
Vasco beeing returned from his luckie and prosperous voyage, king Manuel gaue no intermission
to that most profitable and honorable nauigation: but the Portugals hauing
raised warre in the East betwixt the Kings of Calicut and Cochin, tooke the King of Cochins
part, beeing by him receyued and welcommed into his countrie and hauens: so as
he of Calicut did in short time know, that he had greatly erred in wronging his guests.
The yeare 1504. King Manuel hauing notice of this warre,An. 1504. was displeased therewith, and
set foorth a Nauy of twelue great shippes,Voyage of Lopes Suares de Meneses. Don Lopes Suares de Mereses beeing Admiral
of the same, who arriued in safetie at Cochin, by meanes whereof they did greatly encrease
the renowne of the Portugals, and established the trafficke, pourchasing their
King friends, not onely among those Easterne people, but also tributarie Princes for his
seruants. These conquests were pursued by Ferdinand of Almeyda, and Alphonso of Albuquerque,
and other vertuous and valiant Captaines, which haue continued those voyages
since, and by meanes thereof haue carried some knowledge of the name of Iesus
Christ to those barbarous and vnbeleeuing people.
The Court of Castile lying at Alcala de Henares, the yeare 1503. the Princesse D.
Ioane was there brought in bed of a sonne, who was named Don Ferdinand, who was
king of Hongarie and Bohemia, and at the last Emperour. In Alcala dyed Don Guttiere
de Cardegna, great Commander of Leon, a most faithfull seruant to the Kings, who
would haue giuen the great Commanderie to Iohn Lopes of Leacarraga their Treasurer,
but he refused it, saying, that he had alreadie too much wealth: hee likewise refused the

place of generall Superintendent of the Kings reuenues, and left behind him the report
of a loyall, faithfull, and iust man in all his affairs: he was borne in the towne of Ognate.
The affaires of Italy not succeeding prosperously for the Kings of Spaine, they began
to resolue vppon somewhat that might bee hurtfull to the French: The great Captaine
kept himselfe in Barletta, beeing constrayned to retire himselfe thither, and wanting all
necessarie things: so as the French forraged the countrey at their owne pleasure: but at
the last hauing new supplies, as well from Sicill, (from whence Hugo de Cardona entred
into Calabria, with certaine companies of Spaniards, which had serued the Duke Valentinois,
when hee warred vppon the Vrsins, with intent to haue made himselfe Lord of
Romagnia) as also from Spaine, from whence the King sent Don Manuel de Bonarides
with certaine numbers of horse and foote:Antonio de Leua his first passage into Italy. with which troupes Antonio de Leua did first
passe into Italy, who was a famous Captaine in the warres of Lombardy and Piedmont,
betwixt France and Spain, and likewise after that other Spanish companies arriued vnder
the conduct of Don Pedro Puerto Carrero, who dying in Italy, hee left his men vnder the
commaund of Ferdinand of Andrada, who hauing receyued by the gulph of Venice
some Germaines, which had beene leauied by him, hee employed these forces in such
sort, beeing sometimes diuided, and sometimes vnited, as hee soone restored all things,
and suppressed the enemie by the winning of many victories, Spayne hauing alwaies after
that time the aduantage. Yet they had treated an accord betwixt the two Kings, Lewis
and Ferdinand,Prince Philipp in Flanders. and had sent Ambassadours to that end, but without any effect: vntil that
the passage and the returne of the Arch-duke Philip Prince of Spayne, into Flanders,
gaue some greater hope of an agreement. This Prince passing thorough France in his
returne, as he had done going, was honorably receiued in all places, especially at Blois,
whereas King Lewis attended him, who, to vse the Arch-duke with greater courtesie, and
to assure him the more, had sent certaine French Noblemen into Flanders for hostages,
vntill he were arriued, the which the Arch-duke caused to returne, beeing loath to
yeeld vnto the King, in demonstrations of friendship and ceremonies. Beeing at Blois,
they treated an accord betwixt the French King and him of Spaine, the Arch-duke Philip
hauing an ample Commission, with this onely restraint, that hee should communicate
all things to the Ambassadours of Castile, which were sent expresly with him, and shold
gouerne himselfe by their counsell.
Matters beeing debated,Treaty of peace betwixt France and Spaine. in the end they were concluded, by the confirmation of a future
marriage betwixt the Ladie Claude of France, the Kings eldest daughter, and Don
Charles of Austria, sonne and heire to great Estates which fell to the house of Austria:
capitulating, that the Lands which were in question in the Realme of Naples, should be
left in deposito, in the Arch-dukes hands, and the future spouses should from that time intitle
themselues Kings of Naples, and Dukes of Calabria. That the French king should
enioy that portion which did belong vnto him in the sayd Realme, and appoint whome
he pleased, to gouerne it in the names of the Princes Charles and Claude, and that the mariage
beeing consummated, he should giue it in dowrie with his daughter.
This peace was sollemnely sworne in the Church at Blois, but yet it prooued of no
effect: for notwithstanding that the Arch-duke gaue speedie aduice vnto the Kings Don
Fernand and Donna Isabella, yet they did not forbeare to make warre in the Realme of
Naples, whence they had daily intelligence that their great Captaine prospered: wherefore
hee beeing required by the Duke of Nemours, Lieutenant for the French King, to
stay all acts of hostilitie, he answered, that hee had no such commaundement from the
King Don Fernand his master, but continuing to make warre, as well in Calabria, as in
other parts of the Realme, the French had alwaies the worst, hauing had two Armies defeated
in lesse then eight dayes, one in Calabria, led by the Lord of Aubigny, who was
then taken, with many other Noblemen: the other at Cirignole, whereas Lewis of Armaignac
Duke of Nemours, their Generall, was slaine with many French. By meanes of
which victories the great Captaine tooke Naples, Capua, Auerso and Melfi, by composition,
and in the end the two castles of Naples by mynes and other practises inuented
by Peter of Nauarre: so as the French had nothing but Gayette, and some other small
places remayning in the Realme of Naples.

The kings of Castille being aduertised of these things,1504. they little regarded the accord
made by the Archduke their some in law,Excuses of the Catholike kings for not maintaining of the peace. alledging for excuse, that he had exceeded his
charge, and had not gouerned himselfe by the aduice of the embassadors which went in
his companie: Yet they sent embassadours into Fraunce, to treat a new peace, in a more
honest forme than before, propounding, that the realme should be restored to king Frederic:
But king Lewis holding them but mockeries, and that the kings of Spaine had no
wills to dispossesse themselues, seeing that all things succeeded wishfully for them, he sent
backe their embassadors without any other answer.
30 Before that the Court of Castille parted from Alcala, D. Iohn Chacon, gouernor of
the frontire of Murcia,Death of Pope Alexander the sixt. died. From Alcala the queene came to Madrid, and from thence
to Segobia, where she had news of the death of Pope Alexander, by poison which had bin
prepared for certaine cardinals, by the duke of Valentinois, his sonne, the which he also
drunke, through the negligence of the cup-bearer, or butler, who tooke one bottle for another.
Cardinall Francisco Thedeschin Picolonimi of Siena, succeeded him, who was called
Pius the third; but hauing held the See but six and twentie dayes, there was chosen
Pope Iulian of Roue^e, bishop of Alba, and then of Ostia, cardinall of S. Peter ad Vincula,
whom they named Iulio the second. In these elections of Popes, which are made through
the fauour of the princes and great monarches of Christendome, for the interest of their
temporall estates, the citie of Rome was in great feare and jelousie, that the great captaine
would approach with his victorious armie on the one side, and on the other the lord
of Tremouille being sent into Italie, by the French king, with great forces, and assisted by
Florentines, Siennois, the duke of Ferrara, and the marquesse of Mantoua, either of them
to fauour the cardinals of their faction, and to make a Pope by force, to the prejudice of
the citie, and of the whole territorie. This yeare there were sixteene foists of Moores
scoured the coasts of Valencia, who landing neere vnto the riuer Xucar, assailed the
towne of Cullera, carried away seuentie prisoners, and committed other spoyls. The duke
of Valentinois, at his fathers death, was so ill with this drinke which he had taken, as he
was constrained to be a neuter, as he had carried himselfe in the warres betwixt Fraunce
and Spaine, yet adhering more to the great captaine, for the designe which they both had
to inuade Tuscanie, when as the warres of Naples should be ended. Hauing entertained
himselfe in fauour with Pope Iulio,Quarels betwixt Pope Iulio and the duke of Valentinois. at his aduancement, they fell afterwards to quarell, for
certaine places in Romania, held by the duke of Valentinois, which the Pope would haue,
so as the duke was staied at Ostia, meaning to imbarke, and to go to Specie, and from thence
by Ferrara to Imola. Afterwards hauing in some sort satisfied the Popes desire, and being
set at libertie, he retired to Naples, hauing a pasport from the great captaine, thinking to
be verie safe there: whereas propounding many great enterprises, euen vpon Tuscanie,
and beginning to make preparation to put his designe in execution,Duke of Valentinois sent prisoner into Spaine by D. Gonsalo. the great captain staied
him prisoner, saying that it was by the commaundement of the king D. Ferdinand, to
whom he ought more reuerence than to the pasport he had giuen him, and so he sent him
into Spaine, where he was lodged in the castle of Medina del Campo, called la Mote. By
this meanes the great captaine kept this turbulent man from troubling the affaires of Italie
any more. The armie led by the lord of Tremouille, being come into the realme of
Naples, did nothing but increase the glorie and reputation of the great captaine, who by
a memorable victorie gotten at the riuer of Garillan, did there settle the Spaniards commaund:Retreat of the French out of the realme of Naples, verie miserable.
for soone Gajete, which was the onely hope of the French, yeelded, vpon condition,
that all prisoners should be deliuered, and that the French might retire safely into
France, who being naked, and vnprouided of all things, perished in a maner all by the way
of hunger, cold, and other extremities. At the same time king Lewis hauing appointed
two armies to inuade Spaine,Two armies of French in Spain one by Guipuscoa, the other by Cattelonia, that which
marcht towards Fontarrabie, wherof the lord of Albret had the charge, could neuer come
together; the other led by the marshall of Rieux, entred by the countrey of Rossillon,
and besieged Sausses, but not being able to take it, he was forced to retire, both for that he
fell sicke, as also for that D. Frederic of Toledo, duke of Alua, Generall of the Spanish
armie which was raised at Perpignan, began to march to raise the siege, king Ferdinand being
also come in person into Cattelonia, to giue order for the affaires of this warre, the

which afterwards had some intermission,1504 by a truce of fiue monethes, which was made at
the instance of king Frederic, who was not out of hope to returne into his realme: Which
conceit was grounded vpon the demonstrations of fauour were made him both by France
and Spaine; which was but a vaine content, and a comfort to him in his miserable estate.
This truce was afterwards continued for three yeares, both by sea and land, with free trafficke
for all their subiects, except the French in the realme of Naples. For the great seruices
which D. Gonsalo Fernandes, surnamed the Great Captaine, had done to the kings D.
Ferdinand,D. Gonsalo Fernandes made duke of Terra noua and Sessa. and D. Isabella, in this warre, he obtained the duchie of Terra noua, and of Sessa,
besides the duchie of S. Ange, which king Frideri^ had gi^en him, when as he fauoured
him, and the Constableship of the realme of Naples. Pedro Nauarro had also for his
good seruices,Pedro Nauarro made earle of Albeto: his beginning. and in recompence of his great industrie during the warre, the countrey of
Albeto, in the same realme of Naples, neere vnto Aquih. This man from a small condition
came to this greatnesse by his vertues for his beginning being scarce knowne, he first
of all went to sea, and was a mariner, after which he was a footman to the cardinall D.
Iohn of Arragon, then a souldier, and in the end a famous captaine, and an earle. After the
swearing of the said truce,Earthquake in Spaine. there was a great earthquake throughout all Spaine, to the
great terrour and amazement of all men, by the which many houses, churches, forts, and
other buildings, were shaken and ruined.
At that time, they say, the testament of the deceased king Henrie the fourth, was found
by the diligence of Hernando Gomes of Herrera of Madrid, who hauing notice from the
curat of S. Croix, of the same towne, that this testament was in the towne of Almeyda
in Portugal, whither he had transported it with other writings of importance, he aduertised
the queene, and by her commission went to Almeyda, with the curat, found these writings,
and brought them away: In recompence whereof, the king made the bachel^r
Hernand, Alcayde, or Prouost of the justice of his house and court. The queene did not see
this testament, as it is probable; for she fell extreamly sicke, and after foure monethes, languishing
died,Death of the Q. Isabella. at Medina del Campo, in the yeare 1504, being 53 yeares old, and seuen
monethes, and the thirtieth yeare of her raigne. A princesse adorned with great vertues,
which may couer some excesse of ambition, and her other imperfections: she was zealous
in religion, chast, liberall, and courteous. Her bodie was transported to the citie of Granado,Bodie of the Q. Isabella in a Friers weed.
and remained long there in the Alhambra, in the habit of a Franciscane Frier, as she
had ordained: And after the decease of her husband, which was twelue yeares after, it
was layed with his, in the royall chappell of that citie. That yere died D. Magdeleina, Infanta
of Nauarre, in the same towne of Medina del Campo, being daughter to the king
D. Iohn of Albret and Katherine, then raigning. D. Henrie Henriques, vncle to king Ferdinand,
and his lord steward, and D. Pedro of Estuniga, cardinall, and Archbishop of Seuille,
did also leaue this world: which Archbishopricke was giuen to Diego of Deca, borne at
Toro, being then bishop of Palence, a doctor in Diuinitie, and afterwards Inquisitor generall,
Confessor to the king, and founder of the colledge of S. Thomas of Aquin, at Seuille.





@THE 25 BOOKE OF THE
Historie of Spaine.

The Contents of the 25 Booke.
1 VOyage of Iohn Cosa, and of Fernando Cortez, to the Indies.
2 Expedition of Africke by the Castillans, and the taking of the great port of Mersalcabir.
3 Peace betwixt Castille and France, and treaties of mariage.
4 The Archduke Philip of Austria and D. Iaone his wife, part out of Flaunders, to returne into
Castille, and are stayed in England.
5 Death of Christofer Columbus. His posteritie.
6 D. Philip and D. Ioane his wife kings of Castille. Retreat of king Ferdinand into Arragon.
7 Voyage of king Ferdinand into Italie. Enteruiew of king Lewis and king Ferdinand at Sauonne.
8 The duke Valentin being a prisoner in Castille, escapes into Nauarre.
9 Affaires of Nauarre. Disposition of the king D. Iohn of Albret. Contentions betwixt him
and the queene his wife, for the factions of Nauarre.
10 Rashnesse of the earle of Lerin, Constable of Nauarre. Sentence and condemnation against
him. Warre betwixt the king and the earle. Death of duke Valentin.
11 Exploits of Pedro Nauarro in Africke, in fauour of the Portugals.
12 Rashnesse of the marquesse of Priego punished by the king D. Ferdinand, Regent in Castille.
13 Sedition at Lisbone for religion. The mutines punished.
14 Search of the firme land at the Indies, by Alphonso Hojeda, and others.
15 League betwixt the Pope, the Emperour Maximilian, king Ferdinand, and Lewis 12, the
French king, against the Venetians.
16 Discouerie of the firme land at the Indies. Forts built there.
17 Expedition of Cardinall Francis Ximenes into Africke. The taking of the citie of Oran.
18 Warre against the Venetians.
19 Practise of Pope Iulio against the French. Schisme in the Church of Rome. Counsell demanded
by the French king.
20 Taking of Bugia, and other exploits in Africke, by Pedro Nauarro. Death of D. Garcia
Aluares of Toledo.
21 Behauiour of the Spaniards at the West Indies. Seditions among them.
22 Progresse of the warre of Italie, made by the French against the Pope. Councell of Pisa, and a
counter Councell at Rome, at S. Iohn de Latran.
23 Warre betwixt France and Spaine. A league betwixt the Pope, king Ferdinand, and the Venetians.
24 Continuance of this warre by the Pope against the French. Exploits of Gaston earle of Foix,
duke of Nemours.

25 Pursuit of the king and queene of Nauarre in Castille, to be restored to much of their patrimonie
in that realme, but without any effect.
26 Meanes vsed by the Pope and king Ferdinand, to dispossesse the king D. Iohn of Albret, and
the queene D. Katherina his wife, of the realme of Nauarre.
27 Meanes vsed by the Emperor Maximilian, to abandon the French. Battell of Rauenna.
28 Censures against Lewis the twelfth the French king, and his realme. Retreat of king Iohn
of Albret into Fraunce. Inuasion of the realme by the Castillans. Pampelone taken by the
duke of Alua.
29 Exploits of Vasco Nugnes of Bilbao, and other Spaniards, at the Indies.


D. Philip 1. and D. Ioane, 21 Kings of Castille,
and 42 of Leon.
THe Castillans and Leonois,1504 for want of their Queene proprietarie,
D. Isabella, began to accustome themselues to the yoke of German
princes, hauing presently set vp in Castille the Armes of the Archduke
Philip of Austria, and of D. Ioane, heire of these realmes in her
mothers right; and D. Frederic of Toledo, duke of Alba, aduanced
these banners in their name: yet the king D. Ferdinand continued
lawfull gouernour vntill the comming of these princes, who had
aduertisement sent them presently into Flaunders of the Queenes death. The Archduke
Philip was then six and twentie yeares old, faire of face, well proportioned of his members,
of a good grace, mild and courteous in speech, of a great spirit, actiue, quicke, and
learned: by reason whereof being in him more then ordinarie, hee was surnamed the
Great. Whilest that he made preparation to come and take possession of this great inheritance,
king Ferdinand, after the royall and stately obsequies of the deceased Queene,
and the bodie transported to Granado with a great traine, he retired himselfe to the
monasterie of Mejorada, and from thence hee past to Toro, being accompanied by
D. Francis Ximenes, Archbishop of Toledo, Diego of Deca, Archbishop of Seuille, and
others of great qualitie and learning, to conferre about the execution of the deceased
Queenes will.
1 In the meane time Iohn de Cosa,Voiage of Iohn de Cosa. a good sea-man, rigged forth foure Carauels, out of
port S. Maria, at his owne charge, and by Iohn of Ledesma of Seuille, and others, desirous
to inrich themselues, vndertaking the conquest of that countrey at the Indies, which
was held by the Caribes: Whereupon setting sayle he came and toucht at a place
called Carthagena, there being joyned vnto him captaine Lewis Guerre; who beginning
to make warre together, they tooke sixe hundred of these Barbarians in the
island of Codego: then coasting along the shore, desirous to barter wares, and to buy
gold, they entred into Vraba, where they found some little gold in the sand; and from
thence they returned into the island of Hispaniola, and the citie of S. Domingo, laden
with men, but scanted of victuals, and of all other things, especially of gold, wherof they
were exceeding greedie.
The same yeare 1504,Fernando Cortez voyage to the Indies. there went vnto the Indies Fernand Cortez, borne at Medellin in
Estremadura, one of the most famous men that hath beene in these conquests vnto our
dayes. He arriued at S. Domingo in a ship belonging to Alphonso Quintero of Palos of
Moguer, where he was well entertained by the Secretarie Medine, the gouernour being
then absent, and afterwards by the gouernor Nicholas d' Ouando himselfe, being returned.
This was he which conquered Noua Hispania. Of the maners of the Indians, their idolatries,
and damnable superstitions, the curious may be more amply informed by the particular
histories of the Indies, written by Peter Martyr of Angleria, Gonsal Fernandes of Ouiedo,
Francisco Lopes of Gomara, and others.
During king Ferdinands gouernment in Castille, the Estate began to be trobled by some
noblemen, who thought that queen Isabel being dead, they might lawfully tyrannise: but
the king hauing called the Estates to Toro,1505 in the yeare 1505, he caused a new oath to be
taken to the queene D. Ioane his daughter, and to her husband, as kings of Castille, Leon,

Granado, etc. and by his wisedome pacified those tumults and disorders which were likely
to grow:Chauncerie transported fro^ Cite Royall to Granado. Which yeare, for many reasons, the Chauncerie which was at Cite Royall,
was transported to Granado, where since it hath remained. And by the persuasion of D.
Francisco Ximenes, Archbishop of Toledo, and Primate of Spaine, there was an expedition
attempted against the Moores of Africke, nothing concurring with the embassage
which had beene sent to Caire, whereof mention hath beene made.
2 The Primate had had sundrie discourses with a Venetian, called Ieronimo Vianello, an
industrious man, and knowing the countrey of Africke. His designe was vpon the citie of
Oran,Description of Oran. well peopled, free, hauing priuat lawes, rich, a common hauen for all nations trafficking
into Barbarie, who entertained an ordinarie garrison for the safetie of their marchandises,
and payed some tribute to the king of Tremessen, for protection; and they say,
that it contained aboue 6000 families. This citie is seated vpon the descent of a high hill,
enuironed about with wals and towers: the sea is within a stones cast on the one side, and
on the other side they haue pleasant gardens, and store of fountains. The countrey men call
this citie Madaura, Aera, Auran, Guhara, all names signifying a place hanging, and exposed
to the winds: but we call it Oran. The Archbishop Ximenes did easily conceiue by Vianelloes
discourse, that it were labor lost to assayle that citie, if they were not first masters of
the coast about it, wherof Vianello made him a model in wax, which represented vnto him
the hauens, ports, hills, vallies, townes, rockes, forts, and other particularities of that
countrey, namely, of the watch called the Lampe, which is set vpon the top of a high
mountaine, the which is inaccessible, but by one difficult passage, whereby they must necessarily
passe that will goe to Oran. This watch hath on the one side the citie of Oran,
and on the other the port called Mersalcabir,Mersalcabir a great port in Africke. or Marsael-quibir, great and famous, the
which they must first get, to make the expedition of Africke profitable and easie. Hauing
acquainted king Ferdinand with these designes, and seeing that there wanted money
to effect it, the treasure hauing beene wasted in the warres of Granado and Italie,
the Archbishop offered to lend money to pay the armie two monethes; whereupon
they began to make readie for the voyage, whereof the young courteors were verie desirous.
The charge of Generall was giuen to D. Diego Fernandes of Cordoua, who afterwards
was marquesse of Comares, who had for assistants D. Raymond of Cordoua,
Generall of the gallies, Diego Vera, master of the ordnance, Gonsal Ayora, captaine of
the gards, Ieronimo Vianello, conductor of the enterprise, Pero Lopes of Oresco, and other
old captaines and of great experience: Who parting from the port of Malaga came
within few dayes neere vnto Mercalcabir, whereas the Moores being aduertised of their
comming, had prepared to receiue them. Wherefore as soone as the armie was discouered,
they gaue signes in such sort as all Africke had soone notice thereof, and all the
countrey was full souldiers of that nation, which came to succour them. Notwithstanding
the Spaniards woon the port, and landing, had meanes to campe, and to fortifie
themselues from so great a multitude of enemies which came running from Oran and
other neighbour places. To gard the port there was a fort built vpon a rocke enuironed
by the sea but of one side where it joyned to a mount that did commaund the
fort; which the Spaniards seeking to win, and to plant their batterie thereon, they found
a sharpe and bloudie resistance made by the Moores: notwithstanding they planted their
ordnance there, and began to batter the fort furiously, both from thence, and from the
gallies, vntill the captaine, who imployed himselfe vertuously for the defence thereof,
was slaine with a bullet. In the meane time the king of Tremessen had sent an armie,
against the which the Christians had many skirmishes, sometimes with gaine, sometimes
with losse; yet the siege of Mersalcabir continued still, whereat the souldiers being
discouraged, by reason of the losse of their commaunder, and also for that they
saw the passages both by sea and land were stopt by the Spaniards, so as they could neither
be releeued with men nor victuals, they did capitulate, after some resistance, That
if within certaine dayes the king of Tremessen did not come and succour them, they
would yeeld the place to the Spaniards, the inhabitants and souldiers departing with
their wiues,Mersalcabir taken by the Castillans children, and baggage. No succours appearing, the fort was yeelded
the fiftieth day after they parted from Malaga. The Moores went forth, the Christian

armie being in battell, and proclamation being made, that no man should goe out of his
ranke, to offer them any violence vpon paine of death: the which a Spanish souldier tried,
who for that he had offered to spoile or rauish a Moorish woman, was by the commaundement
of D. Diego Fernandes slaine with darts. This conquest being made to the
great contentment of all men, the king D. Ferdinand, and the Archbishop Ximenes were
instantly aduertised, where attending the kings pleasure, the fort was rampared and furnished.
They say, that most of the men of qualitie and wealth, which dwelt at Oran, being
amazed at the taking of Mersalcabir, retired to Tremessen, thinking that the Christians
would not stay long to come and besiege that citie, as it fell out: But foure yeares being
past, and nothing attempted, they all returned to their losse, except one Moore, who was
verie rich, who was still constant to remaine at Tremessen, and foretold the ruine of the
rest. D. Diego Fernandes hauing well manned his conquest with good souldiers, he sent back
the rest of his armie into Spaine, which was full of joy for so important a victorie, whereby
not onely the coasts of Spaine were assured from the spoyles of pyrats, Moores, but
also there was a faire way made for the Spaniards to inuade Africke. D. Diego Fernandes
stayed still in Mersalcabir, vntill he had a new commaundement from the king. In the
meane time Diego de Vera, Gonsal Agora, and Pero Lopes Orosco, sumamed by the Arabians
Alzagal, past into Spaine; and there was presented vnto the Primate Ximenes, by Pero Lopes,
a staffe of Ebene, which the Cadis or high Priests of the Arabians were accustomed
to carrie, the which he carried many dayes for his sake, and then he sent it to his Academie
at Alcala of Henares, for a monument of this Africane victorie. The king sent D.
Roderigo Dias of Roia, a man of great worth and valour, for the gard of the fort and port
of Mersalcabir, with one hundred light horse, and foure hundred foot, and called home
D. Diego Fernandes, whom he honoured with the gouernment of his conquest, and other fauors,
D. Roderigo Dias being his lieutenant, who ouerran the countrey, and kept the Moors
still in alarme during his aboad there. There is one of the strangest blowes reported of
him, that euer was giuen of any; who with an Azagay, or Iauelin, pierced a man thorow
the pomell of the saddle and the horse necke. The fort of Mersalcabir hath since
beene much fortified by the kings of Spaine, especially of D. Philip the second, who made
it impregnable.
The same day that Mersalcabir, or Masalquiuir, was woon, which was the 13 of September,Birth of the Infanta Marie, who was queen of Hungarie.
Queene Ione was brought in bed in Flaunders, of a daughter called Marie, who was
Queene of Hungarie and Bohemia, maried to King Lewis, sonne to Ladislaus, after whose
decease, remaining a widow, she gouerned the Netherlands, and then came and died in
Spaine, in the towne of Cigales, neere to Vailledolit, in the yeare 1558, and lyes in the
monasterie of S. Benedict of Vailledolit.
3 Whilest that the Queen D. Isabella liued, they did still practise some meanes of peace
betwixt France and Spaine, and to this end the kings of Castille and Arragon had their
embassadors in the French kings Court, making shew that they would restore king Frederic
to his realme of Naples, or giue it to D. Ferdinand duke of Calabria, his eldest sonne,
who was resident if Spaine: but it was not credible, for that is not the custome in our
age, to giue away kingdomes which they doe quietly enjoy, especially hauing gotten it
with so great charge, neither did he any thing: But the yeare of her decease there was a
peace concluded betwixt the Emperor Maxmilian and his sonne Philip, and king Lewis,
by the which it was the third time agreed, That prince Charles of Austria should mari^
Claude of France, with the consent of the princes and noblemen of France, by the kings
commaundement, and namely of Francis duke of Angoulesme, who was next in degree
to the Crowne. It was also concluded, That the Emperor Maximilian should grant the
inuestiture of the duchie of Milan to king Lewis, for him and his heires and successors
males, and for want of males to his daughter, and to her future spouse prince Charles, who
dying before the consummation of the mariage, she should be giuen in mariage to the Infant
D. Ferdinand his brother, and they and their descendants should enjoy the said duchie
of Milan. For the expedition of which priuiledge and donation, king Lewis should pay
vnto the Emperor 70000. ducats vpon the deliuerie of the letters, and the like summe six
moneths after, and euery yere vpon new-yeares day a paire of gilt spurs, in signe of honor.

Betwixt the Pope, the Emperour, king Philip his Sonne, and the French king, there was
a league made against the Venetians,League made against the Venetians. to recouer the townes, and Lands which either of
these Princes pretended to belong vnto him, and had beene vsurped by this Commonweale,
into which league Ferdinand king of Arragon might enter if he pleased, and there
was not any mention made of the realme of Naples, in expectation whereof king Fredederic
ended his daies that yeare 1505. at Tours.Peace betwixt France and Spaine. That yeare the truce betwixt D. Ferdinand
king of Arragon and the French king, was conuerted to a peace, vpon condition
that king Ferdinand should marry Germaine the kings neece, daughter to his sister and to
Iohn of Foix and of Nauarre. Vicount of Narbone, which Lady was allyed to King Ferdinand
in the third degree, the Vicont of Narbone being borne of queene Leonora of
Nauarre his Sister: by reason of which consanguinity they had a dispensation from the
Pope,Treatie of marriage betwixt Ferdinand and the Lady Germaine of Foix. and in consideration of this marriage it was agreed, that the part which the
French king might pretend in the realme of Naples, should stand in stead of a dowrie for
his Neece, the future queene of Arragon; vpon condition that the king D. Ferdinand
should pay vnto the French king seuen hundred thousand ducats for the charges hee
had beene at in the warre of Naples, and moreouer should indowe his spouse with
three hundred thousand ducats: and in regard thereof a peace being concluded, the Noblemen
and Barons of the Realme that were prisoners in the Spaniards hands, should
be deliuered, and the banished men restored to their estates, all confiscations being void*
That queene Germaine dying without children before the king D. Ferdinand, her dowrie
should remaine to him, but if she suruiued and had no children, it should returne to
the crown of France: That king Ferdinand shold be bound to assist Gaston of Foix, brother
to his future spouse, to conquer the realme of Nauarre which he pretended to belong vnto
him, and not to queene Katherine his cousin: That the French King should giue
leaue to queene Elizabeth widowe to King Frederit, to retyre into Spaine with two
children which shee had in France, to whome the King D. Ferdinand should giue honest
meanes to liue: and if she should refuse to goe, that the French king should not giue any
entertainment to her nor her children, That for a stronger bond of peace and assurance
of the two realmes, the king of Spaine should be bound to aide him of France with two
thousand light Horse, three hundred men at armes, and sixe thousand foot, the French
king him of Spaine with a thousand ^ ances, and sixe thousand foot in their warres.
The king of England was caution for both of them for this peace, whereunto
and to the marriage king Ferdinand did easily incline to quiet his minde in regard of
the realme of Naples, being also aduertised that his sonne in law king Philip contemning
the will and testament of queene Isabell his mother in Lawe, did not meane that hee
should gouerne the realme of Castille.Isabel widow to Frederic of Naples chased out of France. The widow queene of Naples, being chased out
of France according to the accord, she desired rather to retyre to Ferara vnder the protection
of Duke Alfonso of Esse: then to go into Spaine, fearing, it may be, that king Ferdinand
would put her children to death, that there might not be any to pretend to the
realme of Naples. King Ferdinand hauing remained most part of the yeare at Segobia,
and hunting at Cerezuela, hee came to salamanca there to spend the remainder,
in which yeare there dyed many great men of Spaine:Death of many Gentlemen in Spaine. D. Alfonso of Fonseca Bishop of
Osma, to whome there succeedded an ignorant and visaious prelate, base Sonne to the
Admirall D. Frederic Henriques, called D. Alfonso Henriques, borne of a slaue, of which
promotion the king did often repent him, and was much blamed for it by other Prelates,
namely of frier Anthonie de la Pegna, who preached before him: There dyed
also D. Pero Aluares Osorio, Marquesse of Astorga, who left for successor his
Sonne D. Aluar Peres Osorio, D. Gomes Suarez of Figueroa, Earle of Feria, to
whome succeeded Don Laurence Suares of Figueroa his Sonne, who hauing marryed D.
Katherine of Cordoua, eldest Daughter to D. Pedro of Cordoua, and neece to the great
Captaine, came by her ^ight, to bee Marquesse of P^lego, D. Alfonso of Fonseca, Lord
of Coca and Alacxos, and D. Francisco of Velasco, Earle of Siruela, D. Hurtado of Mendosa
gouernour of Casorla, brother to the deceased Cardinall D. Pero Gonsales of Mend^ca,
did also end their daies this yeare. The plague did also carry away infinite numbers
of people in the citie of Burgos, so as it was in a manner left desolate.

4 In the yeare 1506,1506 vpon the controuersie growen betwixt the two kings father
in lawe and sonne,Difference betwixt D. Ferdina^d king of Arragon, and D. Philip, and D. Ioane king of Castille for the gouernment. touching the gouernement of Castille, Leon, Granado, and other
the hereditarie lands of the deceased queene D. Isabella, and for the which king
Philip had sent embassadors into Spaine, it was conculded that the kings, D. Ferdinand,
D. Philip, and D. Ioane should bee all three gouernours, and that all letters should bee
dispacht in their name, whereupon their armes and Ensignes were againe set vp, according
to the ancient custome; and this accord was proclaimed in the Citie of Salamanca,
on Twelfe day: and soone after the kings, D. Philip and D. Ioane parted from
Flanders with many Ships,D. Philip and D. Ioan driuen into England by a storme. who were suddenly dispersed by a violent storme, and many
of them driuen into diuers parts of England. That wherein the kings were and
two other ships came to Hampton, where they caused some alteration in the towne,
the inhabitants fearing they had beene enemies, but being knowne they did them
honour, as was fit for so great Princes. Many knights and men of experience of
their traine, persuaded them not to land, foreseeing that which did happen; but
king Philip hauing beene extreamely sicke, and seeing the queene and noblemen which
did accompany him in the same estate, would not beleeue them, but was the first
who leaping into a boate caused himselfe to bee carried to land. It being bruted abroad
that a storme had driuen the kings of Castille vpon that coast, a knight, whose
name was Thomas Trenchard, hauing his house there nere adioyning, came to doe him
reuerence, offring him his lodging, with other commodities, and entertained him
vntill that king Henry the seuenth then raigning, was aduertised by messengers, sent
in post: then many men drewe thither in armes, with a captaine called Iohn Carew,
who in the company of Thomas Trenchard besought king Philip not to depart out of
England, vntill that hee had seene their king, who was his friend. Then did king Philip
find that hee had erred, in not beleeuing the counsell of his followers, and the
queene more, who notwithstanding carryed this crosse couragiously: wherefore seeing
that this intreatie was a commandement, and that hee must obey it, hee staied, alleaging
in vaine that his voyage was verie hastie, with much other excuses. Soone after
there arriued many English noblemen, who conducted them with great honour
to the castle of Windsore, whereas king Henrie attended them. There king Philip
was required by the king of England,King of Engla^d forceth king Philip to deliuer him the duke of Suffolke. to deliuer vnto him Edmond de la Poole duke
of Suffolke his Competitor, who was then a prisoner in the castle of Namur: and
so great was his desire to haue this duke, as forgetting the lawes of hospitality
and the friendship which princes allyes should beare one vnto another, hee forced
the king of Castille, notwithstanding all excuses, to giue him the duke, vpon a promise
that hee should not put him to death: whereupon men were sent into Flanders
to fetch this poore duke. In the meane time king Henrie led his guests to London,
where hee entertained them with great and stately feasts, and royall sports;
and the prisoner being arriued, they had libertie to depart at their pleasures. So as
these kings hauing renewed the league with the king of England, they imbarked and
continued their voyage towards Spaine.
In the meane time Germaine the new queene of Arragon came to Duegnas,Marriage of the king of Arragon with Germaine of Foix. wheras
king Ferdinand came and married her. There passed many noblemen of the realm
of Naples of the Angeuin faction, with her out of France into Spaine, who soone
after did accompany the king D. Ferdinand to Naples. After the consummation of the
marriage, the king led the queene his wife to Vailledolit and there leauing her with
D. Ioane his sister, the old queene of Naples, and one of her daughters, hee went
to Burgos, to receiue the kings, D. Philip and D. Ioane, thinking that they had
landed at Laredo, or some other place of Biscaie, but it fell out otherwise: for they
tooke port at Corunna, or the Groine in Galicia, whereof king Ferdinand being aduertised,
hee tooke the way to Leon, and then to Torquemada, to goe and meete
his sonne in law and his daughter.
5 At that time there dyed in Vailledolit the admirall Christopher Columbus the discouerer
of the Indies,Death of Christopher Columbus. whose body was carryed to Seuile, and was buried in the monasterie
de las Cuenas of the Cartusiens. To him his sonne Diego Columbus succeeded

in the Admiraltie of the Indies, who marryed D. Maria of Toledo, daughter to D.
Ferdinand of Toledo great Commander of Leon: hee left another Sonne called D. Ferdinand
Colomibus who was neuer married. Among many deeds worthie of commendation,
of this Admirall D. Diego Colombus, hee gathered together in the citie of Seuile,Library gathered together by Diego Colombus
one of the greatest and goodlyest Libraries in Christendome, seeking out with
great care and charge, all good bookes, in what language soeuer: so as there were
aboue twel^e thousand volumes: for the keeping, maintenance and increase of which
liberarie, he left and assigned sufficient rents.
6 At the arriuall of the new kings of Castille, the king D. Ferdinand found by experience
that princes seruants doe most commonly follow then for profit,Princes serua^ts follow for profit and not for affection. and not
for loue and affection: for many of those that were with him in this voyage, left
him without leaue, and went before to offer their seruice, and to accompany their
new maister, the which discontented him very much. These princes met betwixt Puebla
of Sa^abria and Asturie, where hauing conferred together touching the manner
of gouernment, they did not agree: whereupon the king D. Ferdinand came to Tordesillas,
much distasted of the king his sonne in law, who with Queene D. Ioane past to
Benauent. The diligence and care of the Archbishop of Toledo, to reconcile king
Ferdinand and his children, was such, as they concluded that the king of Arragon
should inioy the three masterships of Castille,Order touching the gouernment of Castille. Saint Iaques, Calatraua and (...),
with the reuenues of the Indies, and eight millions of Ma^auidis of yearely
rent during his life, which queene D. Isabella had left him, in regard whereof hee
should bee contented to remaine in his countrie of Arragon: to confirme which accord,
the two kings had an enteruiew within a league of Vailledolit, in the vestrie of
Renedo, whereas the archbishop himself kept the doore: There they say king Ferdinand
gaue much counsel to his sonne in law, by whome hee was intreated, notwithstanding
their accord, to remaine in Castille, and to helpe him to gouerne, but he refused him, and
went away this yeare 1506, in Iuly,King Ferdina^d retires into Arragon. leading his wife Queene Germaine with him into Arragon.
The kings D. Philip and D. Ioane entred into Vailledolit, whether they had called
the estates of the realm, and there took a new oath, causing their eldest sonne D. Charles to
be sworn heire to the crown of Castille, Leon, and Granado. In these princes were vnited
vnto the realms of Castille and Leon, and there dependances, the great estates of the low
countries and Burgundy, and afterwards Arragon, Sicile, Sardynia and Napl^s. At
Vailledolit there were many noblemen honored with the order of the golden fleece.
The gard of the castle of Segobia was taken from the marquesse of Moya, and guien to D.
Iohn Manuell, who was much fauored by the kings, who being at Tudele of Duero, there
appeared a strange comet in the firmament, foreshewing (as they said afterwards) the approching
death of king Philip, which happened soon after in the city of Burgos, to the generall
griefe of all his subiects, the comet still raigning, whereunto he did attribute his
death,Death of Philip King of Castille. saying often in his paines and agonies, H^ comet^, h^ cometa: He died in the floure
of his age, in the constables house, this yere 1506, hauing raigned 1 yere and ten monthes:
his body was laied many yeres after by the commandement of the Emperour Charles his
sonne, in the royal chappel of Granado, hauing remained in diuers places. This summer
which was very drie, there died in Castille D. Guttiere of Toledo bishop of Plaisance, to
whome succeeded D. Gomes of Toledo, sonne to D. Guttiere de Solis earle of Coria.
7 At the time of the death of the king D. Philip,Voyage of king Ferdinand into Italy. king Ferdinand was at sea sayling towards
Italie: for after the enteruiew of these two princes, and the order taken for the gouernment
of Castille, he went to Cattelonia, where hauing caused a goodly fleet to bee made
readie at Barcelona, he imbarked to go and visit the realms of Naples, and of Sicile, hauing
conceiued a iealousie that the great captaine did fauor the designes of the king of Castille
his son in law: for hauing sent often for him to come into Spaine, hee had still delaied it
with excuses, as he thought. At his departure out of Castille, he was abandoned by all the
great men, except the duke of Alua, who did accompany him to the frontiers of Arragon.
He who shewed himselfe most faithfull of all the noblemen,A faithfull seruant. was D. Bernard of Rojas and
Sandoual marquesse of Denia, who neuer abandoned him, neither aliue nor dead: for hee
retired many of his officers and houshold seruants, which had no maintenance. It was concluded

by the last accord made betwixt him and king Philip, that the realme of Naples,
although it had been conquered by the means and forces of Castile, more then by those
of Arragon, should remain to the crown of Arragon. Being therefore ready to set saile towards
his realme of Naples,Sinceritie of the great Captaine he receiued letters from the great captaine, by the which hee
did assure him of his sincerity and seruice, and did aduertise him of the estate of the country,
wherewith he was so wel satisfied, as he did confirme all his former gifts vnto him and
added new, yea he was much more pleased with him, for that contrary to the opinion of
many he came and met him at the port of Genoua: for both the Pope and all the Potentates
of Italy, thought that he was gone from Naples, with an intent to retyre himselfe into
Castile, and not to see king Ferdinand, as if he feared to looke on him. The king being
staied there some daies by reason of co^trary winds, he had news of his son in laws death, for
the which he seemed verie sorrowful: and notwithstanding that he was prest by the widow
queen D. Ioane his daughter to returne into Spaine, yet he went on his voyage to Naples,
where he entred in great pompe,Entrie of king Ferdinand into Naples. vnder a canopie of cloth of gold, the city wall being beaten
down for the more state, hauing all the honors and ceremonies accustomed at the receptions
of new kings: he staied 7. months there to the great content of the whole realm,
and of all the Potentates of Italie, who possest with an opinion of his justice and equity,
sent to visit him by ambassadors, and made him arbitrator of many co^trouersies, that were
among them. The Neapolitanes offered him great summes of money and other commodities;
but he would not accept ^ny but 30000 ducats, for the charges of his voyage. Hee
would not at that time breake with the Venetia^s for the Popes pleasure or of any others,
and yet they detained certain places from him, referring that quarel to a more conuenient
time. He pacifed and ended many quarrels, and pretensions of Barons, yea, of the Angeuin
party, who were yet dispossest of their goods, which had been confiscated, and past into
priuate mens hands, to whome they had been giuen in recompence of their seruices: and
that which he could not end, he left in charge to the Viceroy D. Iohn of Arragon earle of
Ribagorsa, whom he left in the place of Gonsall Fernandes of Cordoua, the great Captain,
whome he caused to imbarke with him at his returne, and carried him into Spaine, being
iealous of the honor which he had gotten in the conquest of the realme. In regard of the
realm of Sicile, he made many good lawes, but he could not goe thither in person, being
prest by the queen D. Ioane his daughter, the councel, cities, and comminalties of Castille
to return into Spaine:D. Ioane queene of Castille toucht in her sen^es. for this poore princesse, besides her affliction for the death of her
husband, had other infirmities, which she did inherit from her grandmother by the mothers
side D. Isabella of Portugall, wherefore finding her selfe vnable to gouern so great a
state, she put all ouer into the hands of D. Franciso Ximenes Archbishop of Toledo and
primate of Spain,Councell of Castille. and of doctor D. Alfonso Suarez de la Fuente del Sauz bishop of Iaen president
of the kings councell, Garcia of Muxica licentiate in the laws, born in the prouince of
Guipuscoa, doctor Pedro of Orepesa, a most religious Baron, the licentiat Fernando Telles,
doctor Laurence Galindez of Carnail, and the licentiate Lewis of Polanco, with others of the
councel, who took charge of the affairs, in the absence of the king D. Ferdinand her father,
the Prince D. Charles, who was then bred vp in Flanders, being yet a childe of 7 yeres old.
Pope Iulie staied many daies in the castle of Ostia, thinking that K. Ferdinand would land
there to see him, but he excused himselfe by reason of the smal intelligence that was betwixt
them: for the king hauing demanded of him the confirmation and inuestiture of the
realm of Naples; he would not graunt it, but with heauier conditions then other kings of
Arragon his predecessors had held it. Queen Germain did acco^pany the king her husband
in al this voyage, who sailing towards Spaine, they toucht at Sauone, which place was assigned
for an enteruiew,Enteruiew betwixt the fre^ch king and him of Arragon. betwixt them and Lewis 12. the French king, who was already
ariued with a goodly train of his nobilitie. At the comming of the Spanish army king Lewis
shewed so great a confidence in the vertue and generosity of king Ferdinand, as he made
no difficulty to enter into his galley, without any gards, by a bridge of wood made to that
end, and there hauing conference awhile together, they entred all into the city; queene
Germaine going betwixt the two kings, the king her husband being on the right hand, and
the French king on the left, who were immediately followed by the Cardinall of Rouan,
and the great captain, and then by many noblemen, ladies and gentlewomen, richly attyred:

king Ferdinand made shew of as great confidence to the French king,1507 entering
into Sauone, a towne held by him, where hee was lodged in the Castle, and king
Lewis in the bishops Palace. For three daies space that these great Princes were
together, they treated of many matters of importance, in the which the Cardinall of
Praxeda, the Popes Legate, was a great dealer: king Lewis spake much concerning the
renewing and strengthning of their leagues, and the friendship which he desired to entertaine
with the emperour Maximilian, who was greatly discontented with him, for
many reasons, but especially for that the ladie Claude the eldest daughter of France, so
often promised to prince Charles, had beene lately made sure to Francis duke of Angoulesme:
the which king Lewis e^cused, saying, that he had done it at the instant request
of the estates of his realme. They did also treat of many things concerning Italy, and
yet neuer entred into any speech of the realme of Naples: but the French king shewed
great hatred ^o the Venetians, and little loue to the Pope, against whome hee propounded
to haue a generall Councell called,Councels are dangerous for the church of Rome. being animated thereunto by the Cardinall
of Ro^an, desirous to finde a meanes to attaine vnto the dignitie of Soueraigne bishop,
whereof he had some hope, when the seat was voide, by the death of Alexander the
sixt, wherein there were resolutions then taken, to the contentment of both kings: but as
for a Councell, king Ferdinand excused himselfe, saying that it was a dangero^s thing for
the common-weale of Christendome.Gonsal^ Ferna^des honored by Lewis the 12. The French king hauing often desired to see and
know Gonsalo Fernandes, called the great captaine, he imbraced him with much honour,
and could not be satisfied in looking on him, as admiring those great matters which hee
had heard of him, getting leaue of king Ferdinand that hee might eate at their table,
whereas Queene Germaine sayed (it may bee indiscreetly) that he which had vanquished
kings, should eat with kings: Some say, that at that time onely hee purchased
the sumame of Great, for that king Lewis did so call him, saying freely vnto king
Ferdinand, that hee did enuie him for so worthy a man, whome hee honoured with
praises and great titles in all his discourses, and taking a chaine of gold of great price
from off his owne neck, he put it about his. The fourth day of this enteruiew, the kings
parted one towards Fraunce, and the other continuing his course towards Spaine,
where the fleete arriued in mid-August 1507, at the port Valencia, from whence,
without stay, the king and queene went to Almasan, a towne of Castille, not
without discontentment of the Arragonois, who found his short aboade among
them verie strange, to busie himselfe with the affaires of a realme hee had found
so much ingratitude. The great Captaine was receiued in Spaine with great fauour
of all men,Bounty of the great Captaine. being held the honour and ornament of Castille, but hee neuer saw Naples
more, where he was exceedingly beloued, and desired. They say that at his departure
from Naples, hee gaue a great part of his meanes to such as had beene faithfull
companions vnto him in the warre, to performe the which he sold some of his
lands.
8 Whilst that the King D. Ferdinand was in Italie, the duke of Valentinois, who
was a prisoner in the Castle of Medina del Campo, being ill garded slipt downe by a
roape,Duke of Valentinois escapes out of prison. and escaped going towards Guipuscoa in a disguised habit, whereas he found
in the towne of Mondragon, one Lewis Lauregui, who had serued him in Italie, and
was then one of the chiefe of the place, who gaue him meanes to passe into Nauarre,
towards king Iohn of Albret, whose sister hee had married. D. Ioane queene
of Castille being with-childe at her Husbands death, had beene deliuered of a
Daughter in Torquemada, who was named D. Catherina, future wife to Iohn the
third of that name, king of Portugall. This yeare one thousand fiue hundred and
seuen, there was a chaunge of Bishops in Spaine from lesse to greater, after the accustomed
manner:Change of bishops in Castille. for by the death of D. Iohn of Medina Bishop of Segobia, D. Frederic
of Portugall was aduanced to that Bishopricke, and that of Calaorra, which
hee held, was giuen to D. Iohn of Velasco, who before was bishop of Carthagena,
the which was bestowed vpon doctor Martin of Angulo, Archdeacon of Talauera in the
church of Toledo: The archbishoprick of Granado in like maner being void, by the death
of frier Hernando of Talauera, there was preferred to that dignity D. Anthony of Rojas, Bishop

of Maiorca, and his Bishopricke was giuen vnto D. Diego of Riuera. By the decease
also of D. Garcia Ramires of Villa excusa Bishop of Ouiedo, who was the last Prior of S.
Marc of Leon, D. Valerio Alfonso of Villaquiran, was made Bishop in his place; and the
bishoprick of Villaquiran and citie Roderigo, which he held, was giuen to D. Francisco of
Bouadilla,Archbishop of Foledo made a Cardinall. son to the Marquesse of Moya* The same yere D. Francis Ximenes of Cisneros
Archbishop of Toledo, obtained a Cardinals hat, with the title of Sancta Balbina: and
for that he was primate of Spain, he was called Cardinall of Spaine: And D. Alfonso F^nseca,
was allowed to resigne the Archbishopricke of Saint Iaques to his sonne, carrying
the same name, for the which Cardinall Ximenes did greatly reproach king Ferdinand,
who had countenanced it, saying, that he made Archbishopricks hereditarie, and that hee
should see if women were excluded. King Ferdinand was then come to Sancta Maria del
Campo, with the queene his daughter, where they made the anniuersarie for the
deceased king Philip: from thence they went to Arcos, where the Queene staying,
the king came to Burgos, where during his long aboade, wee will returne to the affaires
 of Nauarre. The king D. Iohn of Albret, who is numbred for the fiue and thirtieth
king of Nauarre,Nauarre. and the third of that name, had by his wife Katherine of Foix,
a great issue, Iohn and Andrew Phoebus, who dyed both yong, Henrie who succeeded them
in the estates of Foix and Bearn, and in the title of Nauarre, and was born three daies after
the death of Andrew Phoebus his brother,Geneol^gie of Nauarre. in the town of Sanguessa, in the yere one thousand
fiue hundred and three, in the month of Aprill: the godfathers at the Christening
were two Germaine Pilgrimes, which past by chance at the time of his birth, to goe
to Saint Iaques, whereof the one was called Henrie, and the other Adam: the which
the king his father did by deuotion: but the Spaniards say that it was an aduertisement
and presage of his future condition, that he should liue a stranger and Pilgrim
out of his realme: Besides these, hee had Charles, named by some Francis, who dyed
in the Lord of Lautrees voyage to Naples; Katherine, Anne, Quiteri^, Magdeline,
Isabell, and fiue other children, whose names are not specified, for they dyed young.
Of the daughters, Anne was betrothed, but not marryed the earle of Candale, for
shee dyed at the assurance making: into which house the Queene of Nauarres
aunt, called Katherine also, had beene married; shee was mother to Queene Anne
of Hungarie, wife to king Ladislaus: Isabell married with the earle of Rohan in
Brittaine. This king D. Iohn of Albret was full of pompe and state in his court, and
house, the which was frequented by the nobility both of Spaine, France, and other
nations,Disposition of king Iohn of Nauarre. as much as any of the greatest monarchs. His studie and delights were diuers,
for he loued learning and books, whereof hee made a goodly Librarie; hee was curious
in the search of Genealogies of noble families, and would vnderstand their armes, and
blasons; yet sometimes he made some noble, that were of small merit: hee tooke great
delight to discourse priuately and familiarly with his vassals and others, as if hee had been
no king, but a priuate gentleman: hee daunced willingly, and did so little mainteine
his royall grauitie, as hee made no difficultie to come into publike assemblies, and to
dance in the streets with wiues and virgins after the countrie maner: he went familiarly
to dine and sup, and to make good cheare in his subiects houses, inuiting himselfe,
the which did winne him the loue of some, and made him to bee scorned of others,
as not knowing how to hold his ranke: the which hee held of the French humor,
whereas the princes doe sometimes make themselues too familiar with petty companions.
Hee was so giuen to his pleasures, as many times he referred matters of greatest
importance to others, the which did purchase him contempt and hatred with many:
for by this meanes against his oath and promise made at his coronation, many strangers
were admitted to estates, offices, and benefices within the realme of Nauarre,
wherof there were sundrie admonitions and protestations made vnto him in the assemblie
of the estates by the nobleme^ of the realm, but he did not regard it: for hee thought to
find a great support in the king of Castilles friendship: yet notwithstanding king Ferdina^d
did not forbeare to capitulat with Lewis 12 the Fre^ch king who should help to dispossesse
him of the realm of Nauar, to inuest Gaston of Foix duke of Nemours son to Iohn vicont
of Narbone, and brother to queene Germain, which D. Ferdinand did afterwards sease on

vpon another occasion,1597 as we will shew. About the end of the yeare one thousand fiue
hundred and sixe, the Duke of Valentinois hauing escaped from Medina del Campo, and being
come,Ihon of Albret king of Nauarre and the Queene his wife fall into factions. as we haue said, into Nauarre, he found that the King D. Iohn of Albret, and
the Queene his wife were growne into factions one against another; the King fauouring
them of Beamont, and the Queene the others of Gramont: wherefore the Duke shewing
therein both iudgement and affection, hee dealt so as hee reconciled them, making
the King his brother in law to fauor the faction of Gramont, wherewith the contrary partie
was much troubled: yet Lewis of Beamont the Constable, a man of a great courage,
maintained himselfe still proudly in his ranke, so as on a time a certaine Officer comming
to giue him notice of some commaundement from the King, he caused him to be beaten 
with cudgells,Rashnesse of the Earle of Lerin, which caused his ruine. and to be cast into prison in the castle of Larraga, making shew that he did
not much respect the King, nor his Aduersaries of Gramont which were fauored by him,
which was the cause of his ruine: for the King being iustly incensed at this audacious fact,
hauing by many messages sent for him to Court, and hee not obeying, hee resolued to
ruine him quite. He had to friend, although he were of the contrary faction, D. Alfonso
Carillo of Peralta Earle of Saint Stephen, sonne to Troilo Carillo, and grandchild to D. Alfonso
Carillo of Acugna Archbishop of Toledo, who did aduertise him of all that was practised
against him, aduising him by no meanes to come to the Court, vnlesse hee would
fall into their ambushes. By reason of this contumacie, the King hauing caused his processe
to be made,Sente^ce against the Earle of Lerin. he was condemned to loose both life and goods, as guiltie of high treason:
and hauing sent forth troupes for the execution of this Sentence, he gaue the charge
to the Duke of Valentinois his brother in law, to pursue him with all extremitie of warre,
the which the Duke beganne by the siege of the castle of Larraga the eleuenth of February
1507. But a Gentleman called Oger of Berastegui who commanded there, defended
it brauely, so as both the King, who was there in person, and the Duke, left it, and went
to Viana, whereas the towne made not any resistance, but the castle held good, although
they were scanted for victualls: whereof the Earle of Lerin the Constable being aduertised,
he resolued to relieue it;Castle of Viana besieged by the Duke of Valentino^. for the effecting whereof hauing gathered together about
two hundred horse and some foot, hee came to Mandauia to watch some opportunitie to
execute his designe, the which succeeded happily, for the same night there did rise a horrible
tempest, which made the Duke thinke that the enemy would not goe to field, and
that they would not aduenture to succour the besieged; wherefore he retired his gardes
and sentinells which he did vsually set vpon all the approches to the castle, wherein hee
was deceiued although he were held for a wise and discreet Comm^under: for through
fauour of the noyse of the winde, and the great raine, three score horses parted from
Mandauia,Viana vi^^ualled by the Earle of Lerin. euery one carrying a sacke of meale, and some baked bread, which prouision
they put into the castle by a posterne, and were not discouered: Morning being come,
in their retreit they discouered certain horsmen vpon the way of Logrogno, which made
them thinke that it was a supply of 300. Castillan horse which the Duke of Negera had
promised to send vnto the Constable, wherefore they beganne to crie, Beaumont, Beaumont,
which gaue an alarme vnto the Towne. The Duke of Valentinois hauing caused
himselfe to be richly armed by a groome of his called Ianicot, who had sometimes serued
the Constable; he went forth brauely mounted, and followed by a thousand horse, and
a great troupe of foot, and so hee went towards Mandauia, saying, Where is this pettie
Count? I vow to God I will this day kill him, or take him prisoner, I will not leaue him
vntill he be quite ruined, and will not pardon any one of his, all shalbe put to the sword,
euen the dogges and cattes. Being thrust on with this violent passion, he aduanced his
troup, folowing 60. horse which retired before him. The Constable had sent forth some,
aswell to receiue those (if need were) which were gone to victuall the castle of Viana, as
to discouer what the enemy did, who seeing the Duke whom they knew not come thus
alone, and with a great assurance, doubting that he was followed by some great troupes,
they retired to the place where the Constable remayned, who wondering what this
Knight should be, and at his hardinesse, What? (saies hee) is there no man here that
dares affront this gallant, which comes so neere vs? Then there disbanded three gentlemen
of his troupe, who went to incounter him in a hollow way like vnto a ditch, whereas

the duke could not well vse his force and dexteritie, nor mannage his horse, who hauing
charged their Lances against him, one of them tooke him vnder the right arme pit,
where hee was vnarmed,Death of the duke of Valentinois. as hee did lift vp his arme to charge his lance, and so ranne
him through, hee falling downe dead to the ground. They saie that hee that gaue the
blow was one of the Garceses of Agreda: The bodie was presently stript by these three
companions, and left naked in the way, hauing couered his priuie parts with a stone:
they carried these rich spoyles vnto the Constable who beganne to retire, not knowing*
any thing of him that was slaine, but that hee should be some great captaine, vntill that
the same morning Ianicot the groome of his chamber, who had followed his master, and
mist his way, was taken by some and led to the Constable, by whom it was knowne after
that he had seene his armes and habiliments, that it was Cesar Borgia duke of Valentinois
which had beene slaine, whose bodie was found by the army which followed after.
King Iohn himselfe being in person in the rereward, who lamented much for the
death of his brother in lawe, and couering him with a cloake of scarlet he caused him to
be carried to Viana, and to be buried in the great chappell of the parish church of Saint
Mary, where this epitaph is to be read.

A qui iaze en p^ca tierra
El que toda le temia,
El que lapas, y la guerra
Por todo el mondo hazia.
O tu que vas a buscar,
Dignas cosas de loar,
Se tu loas lo mas digno,
A qui pare tu camino
No cure de mas andar.

It is obserued in Spaine for a memorable thing, that the death of the duke of Valentinois
happened in Nauarre the like day that hee had in the same realme taken possession
of the perpetuall administration of the church of Pampelome, the chiefe of that realme,
which was the eleuenth day of March, on the which God would shew some testimonie
of his wrath against him, who in contempt of all religion had quit his Ecclesiasticall estate,
and the Ministerie, to follow the practise of armes: The Constable would
haue beene more ioyfull if hee had beene taken aliue, to haue presented him to king
Ferdinand. The king of Nauarre by reason of this death fell into such a rage against the
Constable, and all his house, as euen some of his kinsemen which followed the Kings
armie were forced to retire, not daring to present themselues before him: against
whom the castle of Viana did still make resistance, notwithstanding that his armie was
much increased by certaine troupes which had beene sent him out of Castille from D.
Bernadin of Velasco Constable and Duke of Frias, and the Earle of Nieua, with
whom and with the Earle of Aguilar, the king had alwayes entertayned a strict friendship:
but hee past into the Constables lands where hee committed all the spoyles that
an incensed enemy could deuise: hee tooke the towne of Lerin, where hee ouerthrew
and ruined the sepulchre or monument of the house of Lerin, and the Constables progenitours,Warre against the Constable of Lerin.
which was a sumptuous and stately building; hee rased his houses, cut vp
his vines and trees, then taking the rest of his places and castles, some by a voluntarie
yeelding, and some by force, where hee caused the captaynes which made resistance
to be hanged, hee reduced him to that extremitie, as hee was forced to retire himselfe
into Castille to D. Ferdinand king of Arragon his brother in lawe, being followed
by many other knights of the faction of Beaumont which was then vnderfoote, and
that of Oramont aduaunced, amongst whom was the Marshalles place; and moreouer
by the Constables retreat they obtayned that Office for D. Alphonso Carillo of Peralta
Earle of Saint Stephen: Then the castles of Viana and Larraga yeelded. And in this exile
the Constable beeing old and dispossest,Death of D. Lewis of Beaumo^t the constable. died some moneths after in Arragon, in
the towne of Aranda: His wife D. Leanora of Arragon dyed likewise at the same
time in the citie of Tortosa in Cattelonia. The Constables bodie hauing beene left for a
time in the monasterie of Veruela, was afterwards transported* to Lerin, where he lies:
his sonne D. Lewis of Beaumont succeeded him after the conquest of Nauarre, made by

D. Ferdinand king of Arragon,1508 in the office of Constable, and of high Chancellour of
the realme, and in all his other estate and lands being by his mothers side, nephew to
the king D. Ferdinand, and graundchilde to D. Iohn king of Arragon the second of that
name. There was a bruite, that the Constable and his sonne had treated with Lewis the
twelfth to dispossesse king Iohn of Albret of the realme of Nauarre, and to inuest Gaston
of Foix duke of Nemours his newphew, and that Lewis of Beaumont, the sonne of D. Francis
of Beaumont, and D. Pedro Menat of Beaumont went into France to sollicite
the king in this businesse, assuring him that all things should be easie for him, and fauourable,
but that the king being then busied in other affaires, especially to reduce the citie
of Genoua which was then rebelled, to his obedience, would not hearken to it:
wherefore D. Lewis of Beaumont, and D. Pedro Menat returned into Arragon, leauing
D. Francis in the French kings seruice, where hee continued vntill that hee was called
home by his father D. Iohn of Beaumont, who had a certaine quarrell with Amador of
Lascan, whose challenge hee could not answer by reason of his age, so as hee came and
presented himselfe to the combat against Amador, during the raigne of these kings; but
there growing a certayne question being ready to fight, vpon the qualitie of the armes,
they spent the whole day in disputes, and nothing was done. The cardinall D. Anthony
bishop of Pampelone being dead about the end of this yeare one thousand fiue hundred
and seuen, there was preferred in his place by pope Iulio the second, the cardinall of Sancta
Sabina, called Facio; but the chapter of the church of Pampelone, hauing already chosen
cardinall Amand of Albret of the title of Saint Nicholas in carcere Tulliano, the kings
brother, for their bishop, the cardinall of Sancta Sabina was reiected and kept from the
possession of that bishopricke: whereupon Pope Iulio did censure the whole realme of
Nauarre in the beginning of the yere one thousand fiue hundred and eight, and did continue
a whole yere, to free them from the which they were forced to accept of the cardinall
preferred by him for their bishop of Pampelone, whereof he tooke possession
by his deputy, and the election made by the chapter was declared voyd. This cardinall
Facio liued not long after, wherefore cardinall Amand of Albret the kings brother recouered
his right, and was receiued in the place of the deceased. The archdeaconship of
the table of that church, a chiefe dignitie, and of great reuenues, was giuen vnto D. Iohn
of Beaumont, for his sonne called also D. Iohn brother to D. Francis of Beaumont aboue
mentioned, who being returned out of France into Nauarre, was, notwithstanding
the hatred and factions of Beaumont and Gramont, much fauoured by the Marshall
D. Pedro, who was then in greatest esteeme and authoritie with the Kings D. Iohn and
D. Catherina.
11 This yeare one thousand fiue hundred and eight Muley Mahumet king of Fez,Costill^. of
the family of the Merins,Arzilla besieged by the (...) and the towne taken. besieged the citie of Arzilla, in the which the earle of Redondo
a Portugall was gouernour, and hauing taken the towne with his great power, being
aboue a hundred thousand fighting men, hee also tooke part of the castle, and forced
the Earle to retire into a tower with some souldiers: whereof king Ferdinand being
aduertised, hee sent to the Earle Pedro Nauarro an excellent captaine of his time, being
at Malaga, to goe and succour the Portugalls at Arzilla, appoynting him certaine old
souldiers which were come from Naples, who were then lodged in the Axarchia of Malaga.
The earle hauing receiued this charge, imbarqued with great speed in a shippe of
his owne, which was called Mariette, with other shippes which hee found readie, and
foure gallies, about two thousand and fiue hundred of these souldiers, and so sayled towards
Arzilla,Exploit of Pedro Nauarr^ at Arzilla in fauour of the Portugall^. where vpon his first approach hee so terrified the Moores, which besieged
the Tower where the Earle of Redondo was, with his great ordonance from the
shippes, as they suffered him to land his men, with the which hee entred the citie, and
fought so valiantly, as hee chased away the Moores, whom he found lodged, and fortified
there, striking such a terrour into the king of Fez his armie, as the same night it
retired about two leagues from the towne. D. Pedro Nauarro incouraged with this good
successe, going forth with certaine field peeces, and setting a countenance on it, hee
held the enemies in such doubt, as they retired to Fez, and Arzilla was freed, whereas
within few dayes after the armie of Portugall arriued, being sent to succour it by the king

D. Manuel, the which had come too late without the diligence and good office of King
Ferdinand, and the Earle D. Pedro Nauarro, who hauing sent backe part of his souldiers
in the Mariette, hee ranne along the coast of Barbarie with his foure gallies, vnto Belis
or Veles of Gomera, who discouering a rocke in the sea fit to build a fort on, for the defence
and safetie of the coast of Spaine, especially for the streit, and the rest of Andalusia
hee put thirtie souldiers in garrison there, in despight of the Moores: And being
returned to Malaga, hee aduertised the King of the commoditie of this seat, yeelding
him many reasons to induce him to build a sort there: whereupon the King sent a
gouernour thither,Pegnon de Veles fortified. whose name was Iohn of Villalobos, captaine of Trebeja, and rector
of Malaga, who entring into this place called Pegnon de Veles, with three score and
tenne souldiers, he spent his life there in garrison, and after him his sonne, who put in
his place an vncle of his called Francis of Villalobos, in whose time this fort was taken by
the Moores, eight yeres after it had beene first fortified by the earle D. Pedro Nauarre.
12 The king D. Ferdinand hauing this yeere sent one of the Prouosts of his Court called
the Bacheler Hernando Gomes of Herrera to Cordoua, for certaine executions of Iustice,Trouost of the court troubled in his charge, and the punishment the king inflicted.
hee had such a quarrell with D. Pero Fernandes of Cordoua, nephew to the great
captayne, as the marquesse caused him to be taken prisoner, and to be carried to Montillo,
wherewith the king found himselfe much wronged, and loath to imploy anie other,
hee went himselfe to punish this disobedience and contempt. Wherefore comming
to Toledo, and from thence by Cite royall, Syerra Morena, Pedroche, and Adamuz
hee entred into Cordoua, where he beganne to haue informations made against
the marquesse, for whom the great captaine and other noblemen were suiters, intreating
him to remember how D. Alphonso d' Aguilar the marquesses father died, and how
his vncle the great captaine had liued: yet the marquesse was condemned in a great fine,
his house of Aguilar rased, and himselfe banished for a certaine time.
13 In Portugall the king D. Manuel attending the gouernement of his realmes,Portugal. and
the nauigations to the East Indies, made his greatest residence in the citie of Ebora, whilest
that Lisbone was afflicted with cruell seditions, by reason of religion; an ordinarie
thing in this later age, whenas most Christians iealous of their owne glorie, worship
their opinions, and maintaine their ceremonies by tumults and effusion of bloud. It did
seeme vnto some women of the auncient families of Christians in that citie, that some
of the new conuerts or of their descendants, being in the Conuent of the friers of Saint
Dominike had mockt at the hoste,Sedition at Lisbone for religio^. which they are accustomed to keep in their churches:
wherewith being moued with a womanish choler, they beganne to cast their pattens
at them, saying, Goe you wicked dogges, God forbid that the plague and other miseries
should fall vpon vs for you. At this noyse there came two friers running, who moued
with a monkish zeale, tooke vp a Crosse, and running vp and downe the streetes,
cried, Kill, kill these wicked hereticall dogges, for both plague and famine will fall vpon
this countrey for their impieties: with which cries they stirred vp the people, so as falling
vpon these new Christians (as they call them) they slue aboue 4000, regarding the
innocent no more then the offender: and that which was the chiefe motiue, they spoiled
their goods, sackt their houses, and burnt many in the streetes, and publike place of the
citie: the which the officers of Iustice could not help. In the end, being tired rather then
glutted with killing and spoyling, the tumult ceased. King Manuel beeing aduertised of
this excesse, caused the two friers which were the authors to be apprehended, and to be
publikely burnt at Ebora, and informations being made against the mutines, and spoilers,
about 70 of them were most iustly hanged, wherein it is strange how often they were
then abused, who leauing Mahumets or the Iewish impietie, came into the bosome of
the Romish church, thinking to find a safe refuge, or some mildnes and humanitie there,
whereas they did often make triall of the smothered hatred, and crueltie, of these proud
and rauishing olde Christians, as they call them in Spaine; men truely vnfitte to
draw infidelles to the healthfull Doctrine of IESVS CHRIST: for this detestable
example could no wayes edifie the sonne of the King of Manicongo, who was sent
a while after into Portugall, to bee there instructed in the Romish Religion. This
King ruling vpon the westerne shoare of Afrike beyond the Equinoctiall, was vassall

and alied to the king D. Manuel, the infant his sonne was named Henry, and was bred
vp and instructed in the Latine tongue and the sciences for the space of twelue yeeres,Henry Infant of Manicongo baptized.
at Saint Eloy in Lisbone, after the which hee returned into his countrey, being accompanied
by many of the monkes of S. Eloy, carrying with him many ornaments seruing
for the ceremonies of the Romish religion, and many gifts from the King D. Manuel.
14 D. Ferdinand King of Arragon for his part,Castille. seeking the propagation of religion,
following the aduice of his councell and of the diuines of Spaine, gaue leaue this yeare
one thousand fiue hundred and eight, to some Spaniards dwelling at the Indies to search
into the maine land there, to conquer prouinces and people, and to conuert those infidelles
to the Christian religion,Alphonso of Hoieda first discouerer of the firme land as the Indies. by armes, if they did not willingly submit themselues;
sending ample instructions vnto them. The first that vndertooke that enterprise was Alphonso
of Hojeda or Fojeda, borne at Cuenea, hauing dwelt long at the Indies, who
parting from the port of Beate of Saint Dominike with foure shippes and three hundred
men, came vnto Carthagena, beeing followed by an other shippe, in the which there
should be certaine mares, swine, and other cattell to breed, being conducted by the bacheler
Martin Fernandes of Ensiso with an hundred and fiftie Spaniards. Hauing landed,
Alphonso of Hojeda caused the Caribes a cruell and barbarous nation, which inhabite that
countrie, to be summoned, to yeeld obedience to the King D. Ferdinand, and D. Ioane
of Castille, and to receiue the preaching of the gospel, offering them peace with great
priuiledges and exemptions: but they making no regard of all these things, Hoieda made
cruell wars against them, killing or making slaues all he could get, according to the instruction
of the diuines of Spaine. He marcht about fiue leagues into the land, and besieged
a little borough of some one hundred houses, where there might dwell some three
hundred persons of these Caribes,Caribes defend themselues couragiously. who defended themselues in such sort with poysoned
arrowes, and their other armes, as they slew three score and tenne Spaniards, and among
them Alphonso de la Cosa of Palos of Moguer in Adalusia, a man expert in nauigation,
and lieutenant at that time to Hoieda, which was a great losse; and had not
Diego of Nicuesa of Baesa arriued, they were in daunger to haue receiued a greater losse
and affront. Nicuesa parting from the same port of Beata of S. Domingo, had brought
foure score Spaniards in seuen shippes and two brigantines. Hoieda hauing ioyned
with 780. did easily force the borough, and burnt it with all the Indians, who had
no leasure nor meanes to flie, of the which they retayned seuen prisoners: and hauing
gathered vp some little gold in the ashes of this fire, these captaines diuided themselues,
Hoieda bending towards Vrabia, and Nicuesa to Beragua.
15 This was done at such time as the Christian princes made a league at Cambrie against
the Venetians, into the which D. Ferdinand King of Arragon and Gouernour of
Castille entred.Pretensions of Christian princes against the Venetians. The Venetians who alwayes knew how to make their profite by other
mens quarrels, held Padena, Vincence, Verona, Friuli and Treuiso which the emperour
pretended. The French king as duke of Millane demaunded of them Cremona, Ghiaradda,
Brest, Bergamo and Crema, for the pope there was exacted the towne of Faruse,
Rimini, Rauenna and Ceruia, the King Ferdinand desired to retire the places and
ports of the realme of Naples; which had beene engaged vnto them by the old King D.
Ferdinand of Naples: for these considerations all their embassadors met there together,
to conclude a warre against the Venetiance; but king Ferdinand had no great will to take
armes against that common weale, proiecting other meanes to recouer his right, but to
please the Emperour hee ioyned in this warre, and for that there was some discontentment
betwixt the king D. Ferdinand, the emperour and prince Charles, by reason of
the gouernement of Castille, it was said, that there should be no speach of it, vntill the
end of that war. There were many other particularities treated of and concluded there,
euery one of these princes seeking more his owne priuate interest then the good of the
league in generall. King Ferdinand was then at Tordesillas, whither hee had accompanied
his daughter the Queene. D. Ioane, who liued there, and hauing beene
a widow eight and fourty yeares, ended her dayes there. In May, in the yeare one
thousand fiue hundred and nine, queene Germanie wife to king Ferdinand was deliuered

of a son at Vailledolit,1509 who was named Iohn, but he liued not long, after which this princesse
had not any more children: but the king her husband before he maried her had D.
Alphonso of Arragon by the vicountesse of Eboli;Genealogie of Arragon. he was archbishop of Saragosse, a prince
of singuler vertue: he had also D. Ioane of Arragon who was wife to the Constable D. Bernardin
of Velasco: and moreouer by a gentlewoman of Bilbao called D. Tota, he had D.
Maria of Arragon, who was a nunne at Madrigal: and of a lady of Portugall of the family
of the Pereira^, an other daughter named also D. Maria of Arragon, who was in
like manner a nunne in Madrigal with her sister; this was the posteritie of king Ferdinand.
16 That yeare Alphonso of Hojeda or Fogeda,Fort built by the Spaniards in the firme land of the Indies. running ouer the countrey of Vraba,
tooke in the strong Iland two men and seuen women, and got about two hundred ounces
of gold: and hauing landed in Caribana, hee beganne a fort and towne, which was
the first the Spaniards made in the firme land of the Indies. The Spaniards being entred
foure leagues into the countrey, they affailed a little towne called Taripi, whereas the
Indians made great resistance,Policie of the Indians. and they had this policie, to draw their enemies on with
gold, whereof they knew them to be very couetous, casting it in certaine places, that
comming to gather it vp, they might pierce them more easily with their poysoned arrowes,
whereof they died like mad men. Hoieda prest with these difficulties, and with
hunger, raised his siege, and went to another Borough, where he found some small store
of victualls, and tooke some prisoners, and among others, a woman, whose husband
came before Hoieda, and promised by a certaine day to bring her ransome, at which prefixed
time hee came, being accompanied with eight archers, who began to shoot many
poysoned arrowes among the Spaniards, wherewith Hoieda himselfe was hurt, and
others died, wherefore the Spaniards slue them all nine. Hereupon Bernardin of Talauera
arriued with a ship laden with victualles and three score and tenne Spaniards to succour
Hoieda, but this did not much comfort the Spaniards: wherefore Hoieda fearing
that they would mutine, hee resolued to returne himselfe to Saint Domingo, to make
sufficient prouision of victualles and other things necessarie, leauing for lieutenant in
his place Francis Picarro, who was afterwards marquesse of Atabillos, with an expresse
charge, that if within fiftie dayes they had no newes of him, they should make the best
shift they could. So Hoieda parting from Caribana, hee arriued in the Iland of Hispaniola
a citie of Saint Domingo, where being tired with the toyle hee had endured, and
with the bad successe of his voyage, desperate, wounded, and sicke of his person, he became
a Franciscan Frier the remaynder of his life. Diego of Nicuesa who had taken the
rout of Beragua, aduaunced with a carauell and two brigantines, and past the land
without discouerie: but one of his brigantines commaunded by Lope of Olano, turned
backe to consider of that coast, then returning to the other brigantine they went together,
to enter in at the mouth of the riuer of Charge, which they called Lagartos,
where they found the rest of the army, except Nicuesa, who was strayed with his carauel.
Being come to the riuer of Beragua, thinking to finde their captayne Nicuesa there, but
hearing not any newes of him, they were out of hope euer to returne vnto their houses,
breaking their vesselles in peeces which were halfe rotten, they chose Lope of Olano for
their captayne, who beganne to make a fort there, and to till the ground, meaning to
make his abode there. In the meane time Nicuesa who had lost his carauell, was come
to Sorobaro in great want of victualls, so as hee and his companie liued some daies with
wild fruits; the which was reported to Lope of Olano, by those men who had stolne away
his carauells cocke-boat: wherefore hee presently sent a brigantine vnto him laden
with victualls, in the which he came to Beragua: but there enuying the good successe
of Olano, he began to charge him that he had incroched vpon his authoritie, intreating
him ingratefully, whereat the whole company was much discontented: after which he
caused them to dislodge, and to leaue that country, where they had sowen much Mays,
leading them to Porto Bello, where hee left halfe his men, and led the rest to a place
called Marmoll or marbre, where hee began a fort, which since hath beene verie famous,No^bre de Dios
which he called Nombre de Dios; there Nicuesa and his people were in such extreame
necessitie, as they were forced to eate their dogges, whereof some were sold

for fiue and twenty ducats of Castile,Extremitie of the Spaniards at the Indies yea they did eate the flesh of an Indian, whom
they found dead and halfe rotten. They which Hoieda had left in Caribana, seeing that
their captaine returned not at the fiftieth day assigned, being opprest with hunger, they
imbarqued by the aduice of Francis Picarro, and hauing lost one brigantine, they sayled
towards Cochibocoa, neere to the which they met with the bacheler Martin Fernandes
of Enciso, hauing a shippe laden with victualles and men, and a brigantine, who commaunded
them to returne backe with him: and hauing landed and watered at Camari,
they came to Vraba, in which gulfe they built a Towne, the which they called Guarda.
The King or Cachique of that countrey called Cemaco, being incensed that without his
leaue they built vpon his land, hauing hidden all the wealth of his towne among the
reedes, hee drew together fiue hundred Indians, and beganne to threaten the Spaniards:
then was the Bacheler in great distresse, and beganne to make vowes and promises,
That if he got the victorie of those men, hee would build a Temple of the Cachiques
towne, the which he would haue called, Our Lady of the Ancient of Darien, and
that he would send a certayne quantity of gold and siluer to the church of our Lady the
Ancient of Seuille: whereupon a hundred Spaniards did charge these Indians, and defeated
them, and their towne was taken and spoyled, and their hidden treasure found,
which was not small, and then they began to build the towne and colonie of the Antique
of Darien.
17 Whilest that these men guided by aurice, and by the practise of cruelty, thought to
amplifie the religion of our Lord Iesus Christ at the west Indies, the cardinall D. Francis
Ximenes of Cisneros archbishop of Toledo, vnder the same pretext, but it may be thrust
on by some other affection, made offer to go in person into Affrike, and there to make
warre against the Moores, animated thereunto (besides his owne desire to make that
enterprise) by the spoyles which some pyrates Moores had lately made vpon the coast
of Spaine, from whence they had carried away many poore slaues of all ages, men and
women: and that which did more pricke him forward, was, that D. Diego Fernandes
Gouernour of Mersalcabler had beene lately defeated by the Moores of Oran, importunately
prouoked by him; which disgrace hee desired to reuenge vpon that citie. These
things happened during the kings absence, whenas he was at Naples, from whence being
returned, hee was presently sollicited by the Cardinall to vndertake this enterprise
of Oran, whither hee offered to goe himselfe: wherein hee had many oppositions and
crosses, not so much by the king, as by the noblemen of the court, who scorned him,
holding him for a man drunke with ambition, and ignorant how to maintaine himselfe
in his ranke and profession, saying, That it was a pleasant change to see the great captaine
Gonsal Fernandes famous for so many victories which hee had obtayned, now telling
of his beads at Vailledolit, and the archbishop of Toledo to leaue his miter and crosse
and to put on armes, hauing not thoughts but of killing and sheding of bloud: but those
courtiers which found this so strange, had not perused the Annales of Spaine, where they
might haue read warrelike exploits of many other Bishops, equalling the greatest captaines
of their time.Enterprise of Oram by Ximenes. Notwithstanding all the oppositions of these disdainefull spirites,
yet the cardinall obtained what hee pretended: for the king knew his qualities and vertues
better then any other, and could so extoll him to his Councell, and other noble
men in Court, as in the end they did allow of the Cardinalls proposition, they commended
it, and perswaded the youth to follow him into Affrike. This warre being concluded,
there was present order giuen, that all the gallies and other vesselles of warre,
and ships to carrie victualls and baggage which were made ready in diuers ports, should
come to Malaga or Carthagena: there was prouision made in diuers places of come and
all kindes of victuall, great store of caske to water in the enemies countrey, and of poulder
in euery part of Spaine: and there was commaundement giuen to all vassals holding
fees, commaunderies, and militarie benefices, to be there in person, and no man to be
exempted but for a very lawful cause, and for the necessary defence of the Christian commonweale:
the souldiers which were in the kings pay, and remaining in ordinarie garrisons
were also sent, and new leuies made. There were also two Alcaides or Prouosts of
Iustice of the court appoynted to assist the cardinall, which were Callego and Aguirro, who

in the Kings name, and by his authoritie, should containe euerie man in his duetie.
Herewithall there were giuen vnto the Cardinall many blanckes signed and sealed by
the King, to vse them when neede should require, namely, to institute and appoynt
Iudges to punish offenders:Conscience of Ximenes. wherewith the cardinal would not meddle, for that hee
was a Franciscan Friar, and a man of the church. These things prouided, the great captayne
Gonsalo Fernandes did aduise, that the managing of the warre should bee giuen vnto
Pedro Nauarro Earle of Albeto,Pedro Nauarro chiefe conductor of the Affricane warre. who some few moneths before had built the fort of
Pegnon de Veles against the Moores, and was a captaine of iudgement and great experience.
The cardinall conferred with him of all matters, and did write to Vargas of
the Kings councell, and to Villalobos commissarie of the victualles, that they should
deliuer the victualls and munition ordayned for this warre, as Pedro Nauarro should appoint,
and to the colonels to cause their men to march towards Malaga: the chiefe of
which were D. Roderigo Moscoso Earle of Altamira,Colonels at the warre of Oran. D. Iohn Spinosa, Alphonso Vanega,
Gonsalo Ayora, Pedro of Arias, and Iohn Vilalna, hauing many good and valiant captaines
vnder them. To Garcia Villaroello was giuen the commaund of the horse: Ierosme Vianello
was made marshall of the campe, by reason of the experience and knowledge hee had
of the countrie of Africke, and therefore held fittest to choose the situation of the camp,
and the places where they should assaile the Moores. Thus the cardinall drew together
about foure thousand horse and tenne thousand foot. To this warre, besides the money
which the king did furnish out of his treasure, and that which the cardinall drew out of
his coffers,Foresight of the Cardinall. the chanons of Toledo did also contribute: for the cardinall knowing that
money is that which maintaines and giues perfection vnto warre, hee would not make
any iust proportion of the charge of this worke, or what it might amount vnto, but
sought to gather so much together, as hee might haue an ouerplus. The execution of
all these prouisions was much delayed, and the voyage almost broken, for many did still
detract the Cardinall and his enterprise to the king, tearming it foolish and vnfit for a man
of his coate, so as the king being almost altered, was in a manner resolued to referre it
to another season: the which the commissaries, collectors, captains of gallies, gouernors
of townes, and others hauing publique charges, perceiuing, there was not anie one that
cared to doe his duetie, nor to obey Pedro Nauarroes commaundement; there came
not a shippe to Malaga, the victualls and munition which was not neere, were made
deere for the cardinalles men, who had not his money yet readie: the which D. Pedro
seeing, he sought himselfe to diuert this expedition by another enterprise which he propounded
vpon some other parts in Afrike; wherewith the cardinall was much perplexed,Magnanimitie of the Cardinall Ximenes.
but hee must shew his magnanimitie and perseuerance: for then hee resolued to
imploy all his meanes, and friends, rather then to faile in that which hee had vndertaken,
which was published to all the world, and had beene a great dishonour to the
king, to him, and to all Christendome, if after so great a shew of armes, they should
retire without cause: which hauing made knowne vnto the king with pertinent reasons,
and vehement persuasions, hee had answer from the king according to his desire, that although
hee were dissuaded, yet hee would haue the armie passe into Afrike at the first
opportunitie, yet notwithstanding there grew new difficulties, the souldiers beeing
hardly stayed, and the victualls and other prouisions, through the couetousnesse and
malice of the commissaries, delaied, and in a maner denied, and many of the men at armes
gone backe: yet hee surmounted all these difficulties, making the rendes-vous for his
armie at Carthagena: he himselfe parting from Alcala, being accompanyed with a
great number of his friends and seruants in armes, where there were many Friers of his
houshold, which girded themselues with swords vnder the habite of Saint Francis, hee
came to Toledo, where hee made knowne vnto the Chapter the cause of his voyage,
and hauing recommended the charge of the archbishopricke in his absence to D. Iohn de
Velasco bishop of Calaorra, he came to Carthagena. Many of his chanons desirous to
see the world, would haue followed him, but he stayed two onely, and sent backe the
rest:Sedition in the Cardinals camp caused by a rascall. those two were Francis Aluares learned in the lawes, and Charles of Mendosa Abbot
of Saint Leocadie. Being readie to imbarque, the souldiers began to call for money,
else they would not goe: the author of this sedition was a rascall of Alcala of Henares,

called Arnold, who had beene a broker in his youth: the which did somewhat trouble
the cardinall, not knowing whether it had a further reach, being resolued not to giue
the souldiers any money vntill they were past into Afrike. Vianello master of the campe,
caused as many of the seditious as hee could lay hand on to bee hanged, or to passe the
pikes: wherein vsing too great seueritie, the Cardinall sent Garcia Villaroello vnto him,
to admonish him to proceed more mildly for the loue and respect of his person, and
the religious habite which hee bare, whom so great rigour did not befit, and the rather
for that manie of these souldiers were raised in his Archbishopricke, and were
come to the warres for the loue of him, abandoning both wife and children. It is not well
knowne in what maner Garcia deliuered his message to Vianello, but he made him a proud
answer,Vianello^^ Master of ^he ^^hurt by Garcia Villareelo. to the disgrace of Garcia, and of the Cardinall himselfe; with which affront D.
Garcia being incensed, he could not containe himselfe, but drew his sword and hurt Vian^llo
very fore, and then hee fled into a castle, whereas a kinseman of his was captayne,
fearing the Cardinalles indignation, who was much offended with these actions. Vianelloes
hurt did somewhat stay the departure of the armie; in the meane time they got
the mutined souldiers to imbarke, with promise that they should haue money as soone
as they were on shippe boord, the which was perfourmed. Beeing then imbarked, especially
by the care and policie of Salazar colonell of them of Toledo, they sawe in the
Generalles galley manie sackes full of crownes, deckt with bowes, and many barkes about
it, drest in like maner, with a great noyse of trumpets and drummes, which made
them forget all discontent,Army parts from Carthagena. receiuing their pay with great ioy. The Cardinall did also
imbarke, but hee was forced to stay some dayes for a winde, the which turning faire,
they past happily into Afrike, beeing foure score shippes of burthen, thirteene gallies,
and many other smaller vessells, carrying tenne thousand foot, and foure thousand horse,
with many marchants, victuallers, groomes, pioners and other people necessarie in a
campe. The Spaniards which write of this action, say that the Cardinall at his departure
from Carthagena, had conceiued such a hope of victorie, as hee did sollicite the
king by his letters to prouide for the gard of Oran which he had alreadie conquered, assuring
him that he might shortly make vse of the armie which he led, for his affaires of Italie,
whither hee himselfe would goe if need required, and that it should please him to
commaund him. Hee was not deceiued in his conceit: but comming to the coast of Afrike
on Ascension day, the whole countrey was presently aduertised by the watches and
fiers which were made by the Moores, and all the Christians shippes came safely that
night into the port of Mersalcabir, although it were verie darke. Hauing called a Councell,
it was resolued to seaze presently vpon the streit passage which is betwixt Mersalcabir
and Oran, whereas the beacon is set, and to bring the shippes of burthen in
view of Oran, and to plant their batterie speedily, before that the Alarabes being aduertised
from all parts, should gather together to make head, and hinder their descent.
Vpon this resolution Pedro Nauarro caused all the vessells as soone as the souldiers were
landed, to passe towards Oran, and presently to towe all the barkes which should carry
the horse, holding them vnnecessarie in a Countrey which was rough and vneuen: the
which the Cardinall not vnderstanding so well as the other, hee held it for a disgrace
which Nauarro meant to doe him, commaunding the horse that they should follow by
land as well as they could, disposing gardes in conuenient places, for feare of the Moores
surprises, the which did serue to some purpose. The passage was attempted and woon,
not without great difficultie, beeing defended by the Moores, and Alarabes, which
came out of Oran: the which was in the meane time battered from the Christians
shippes and gallies. It happened that many souldiers landing out of the gallies, they
hindered the Moores and the Alarabes from flying into the towne, hauing beene chased
from the passage of the mountayne, and were pursued by Pedro Nauarroes
troupes, so as the Citie wanting men to defend it, it was taken none knowes how^
the souldiers climing myraculously ouer the walles and rampiers,Oran taken miraculously. with the helpe of
theyr pikes: the which beeing tryed by manie after the taking of it, they could not

get vp by reason of the height of the walles, and the weaknesse of theyr pikes,
so as this prise was held miraculous; Sosa who carried the Cardinalles cornet was
the first that mounted, crying Saint Iago, Ximenes, and victorie. The Moores fayling
both in defence and courage, shut themselues into their Mesquites, or into their
strongest houses; some held the market places, being resolued to die fighting. But the
citie gates being broke open, and all the armie brought in, all this wretched multitude
ranne towards the port which is towards Tremessen, to see if they might escape. But
Garcia Villaroello was set there in gard with some horse, to put all them to the sword that
should seeke to flie away. It happened that neere vnto that port there lay hidden in the
gardens and other places couered with trees a hundred and fiftie horse Alarabes,Treacherie of the merunare (...). of those
which had beene chased from the passage of the mountaine, with no other intent but to
spoile the people that should flie out of the citie (such trecherous and couetous theeues
they bee) when as they saw these Christian horsemen, who watcht also for their pray,
they charged them sodainely and with such fury, as before they had viewed them, they
slew tenne, and put the rest to flight, whereas Garcias horse was slaine. This accident
gaue many poore Moores meanes to escape. Within the citie the victorious army put all
to the sword that they found in the streetes or houses, in hatred of their religion, not
sparing neyther age nor sex, neyther did the care of the commanders and captaines preuaile
any thing, who causing a retreat to be founded, called euery one backe into his
quarter, the night approaching: for most of the souldiers being dispersed in the Moores
houses and streetes, hauing fed well, fell so soundly asleepe among the dead bodies, as
many of them could not bee awaked the next day at noone:Dutie of a well aduised captaine. wherefore it was needefull
that the Earle Pedro Nauarro and the captaines with troupes chosen out of their best men
to watch that night. Pedro Nauarro beeing sufficiently aduertised of the Moores subtilties,
did neuer disarme, neyther did he sleepe, vntill hee saw all things assured, performing
therein the duetie of a well aduised captaine. The Moores which had fortified themselues
in their Mesquites and other places, beeing summoned to yeeld, and refusing, detesting
the conquerers crueltie, were forced. In this slaughter there was a miserable
spectacle of a little infant which stroue to take the mothers dugge being slaine. There
were slaine as some write,Number of them that were slaine at Oran. aboue foure thousand, and about fiue thousand prisoners, or
eight thousand, as Ierosme Iulien the cardinalls Secretary writes, and of the Christians
only thirtie. The spoile of that citie was esteemed to be worth aboue 500000 crownes,
the which is credible, for they hold that there were fifteene hundred store-houses, or
marchants shoppes. To conclude, all men made themselues rich there, yea the verie
horse boyes. The cardinall being in the fort of Mersalcabir hauing had intelligence of
the winning of the citie of Oran, caused himselfe to be conducted thither in the gallies,
where hee entred with great acclamations, causing a crosse to be carried before him:
there hee receiued the keyes of the Alcazaua, that is to say, of the chiefe fort, from
whence there were drawne aboue 300 poore Christian prisoners and set at libertie.
The spoyle being all gathered together, and kept to be presented vnto him, that he might
dispose thereof as generall of the army,Distribution of the spoyle at Oran. hee retained nothing for himselfe, but onely caused
certaine things to be layd a part for the king: he did seperate also a part for the commoditie
and vse of the army in generall, leauing the rest to the captaines and souldiers:
many of the which who had shewed themselues most valiant he honoured with presents.
It was no small difficultie to cleanse the towne of dead bodies, which did already stinke,
and were likely to corrupt the ayre, for the number beeing great, after that they had buried
many in great and deepe pittes, and burnt many, yet did they many dayes after
finde some in the streetes and houses; besides, there were few men that would busie
themselues to bury the dead, for there was not so great gaine, as in killing them that
were liuing. They found aboue threescore peeces of ordonance, and an infinite number
of other engins for defence, so as it is admirable, that a towne so well peopled and so
well fortified made no defence, being assured of succours from the Alarabes, vagabonds
and mercenaries of Afrike, whereof they had means to entertaine good numbers. True it
it is that some say this city was taken by practise and treason plotted by the Cardinall,

and by the ministerie of Martin Argoto of Cordoua, and Alphonso of Martos prisoners
in Oran,Oran taken by practise as some hold. since the defeat of D. Diego Fernandes gouernor of Mersalcabir, and that these
two did corrupt Hamet Acanix, or Aben Canex, and Isael Otaybi receiuers of the reuenue
which the king of Tremessen had there, and a Iew dwelling at Oran, called Cetora,
who were the cause that the ports were shut against the Alarabes which were repulsed,
from the passage of the mountaine, of the watch, and gaue entrie to the Spaniards: the
cardinall hauing had aduice by these traitors, that he must assaile the towne the day after
his ariuall, for if he delayed it, he should be deceiued of his expectation, for that the king
of Tremessen had a mighty army which marcht to succour the city. And they say, that he
that was captaine of the Alcazaua or fort of Oran, called Cedrin, was kinseman to Acanix,
and a partisan of his treason, the which is probable: for in trueth the Spaniards did first
enter into Oran by the fort. The cardinall hauing cleansed the Mesquites, the chiefe of
them was dedicated to the Annunciation, and an other to Saint Iaques: hee made an
hospitall called Saint Bernard, and two Couents, one of Franciscan Friars, and the other
of Iacobins, and hauing ordered all things concerning religion the best he could, he
left the care of state and warre to Pedro Nauarro, and so returned into Spaine, for there
was no good agreement among them. The cardinall spent a whole yeere in these matters,
for he arriued in Spaine the same day that he parted: He did erect a dignitie with
the title of an Abbot in regard of this victorie, to the which hee assigned a seate in his
church of Toledo.
18 This yeere, one thousand fiue hundred and nine, D. Catherine Infanta of Castille,
widow to Arthur prince of Wales, was married to Henrie king of England, the eight of
that name, brother to her deceased husband, who was that yeere come to the crowne,
by the decease of their father Henrie the seuenth, and was crowned on Saint Iohn Baptists
day, which by reason thereof was solemnized with extraordinarie pompe in Castille
by king Ferdinand: who to perform the articles of the league made at Cambray, sent
at the same time a sea-army to the realme of Naples: wherefore the Viceroy of Naples
beganne to shew himselfe vpon the coast of Apulia in shew of an enemy,Army of Spaine sent to annoy the Venetians. to force the
Venetians to yeeld vnto the king his master, the townes of Manfredonia, Trani, Monopoli,
Brindez and Otranto, which had beene ingaged vnto them, during the precedent
warres with France. The Pope, the Emperour, and the French King did likewise inuade
them, the euent whereof I will forbeare to relate, it belonging not to this Historie of
Spaine.
During the warre against the Venetians, there was a controuersie reconciled betwixt
the emperour Maximilian, and king Ferdinand, touching the gouernement of Castille,
after the death of king Philip. The emperour thought, that being grandfather by the fathers
side vnto prince Charles the heire of that realme, and of his brother and sisters, D.
Ferdinand, D. Leonora, D. Maria, D. Isabella and D. Catherina, issued of his sonne and D.
Ioane, and therefore pretending right in Castille, it was more fit that hee should haue
the gouernment, than the king D. Ferdinand, their grandfather by the mothers side;
but king Ferdinands title seemed to be the better,Controuersie betwixt the emperour Maximilian and king Ferdinand reconciled. for that D. Ioane his daughter, the proprietarie
Queene of Castille was yet liuing, and that it was an vnwoorthy thing that the
gouernement of a realme, which had beene honored and inlarged by him with such great
conquests, should be taken from him, to giue it vnto strangers. This controuersie was
ended by the mediation of the French king, vpon these conditions, That the king D.
Ferdinand should gouerne the realme of Castille, Leon etc. in case hee had no sonne by
queene Germaine, vntill that prince Charles should come to the age of fiue and twentie
yeares, at which time hee should resigne the gouernement vnto the prince, with this
charge, that during the life of queene Ioane his mother hee should not intitle himselfe
king of Castille: That during this time king Ferdinand should pay vnto the emperor fifty
thousand ducats yearely, and to prince Charles other great summes of money, and that
persisting in the accords of the league made at Cambray, hee should contribute to the
warre of Lombardie against the Venetians. After this accord the Emperour and the
French King vnderstood, to their great griefe, what the Pope and King Ferdinand had
done with the Venetians.

19 The pope doubting that the French king who was mighty in Italie,Practises of pope Iulio the 2. against the French. would seeke
some reuenge against him, he began to study by what means he might diuert him from Italy,
and if occasion were offred to expell him quite: wherefore he drew the Suisses vnto
him, hee did sollicite the king of England to make war against the French, and did what
hee could to cause D. Ferdinand to declare himselfe their enemy; but the Popes practises
were then of small effect, for England stirred not, and king Ferdinand seeing that the French
king made no shew that hee meant to annoy the pope, hee persisted in some sort in the
league of Cambray, saying that hee would according to the treatie made with the emperour,
assist him in the warre of Lombardie whither he sent foure hundred horse, and two
thousand Spanish foote, vnder the command of the duke of Termini. The pope fearing
that the Venetians ruine would also cause that of the state of Rome, and of the other potentates
of Italy, he sought to haue some pretext to quarrell with the French king, hoping
that if hee declared himselfe his enemie, with any colour he should sway the league
of Cambray much; wherefore he tooke an occasion for that king Lewis fauored Alphonso
of Este duke of Ferrara, against whom hee had a quarrell, punishing him with his spirituall
and temporall armes: and to gratifie king Ferdinand and to draw him to his deuotion,
hee confirmed vnto him the possession of the realme of Naples, with the said conditions
that the king of Arragon his predecessors had formerly held it: the which hee
had before refused, and moreouer hee drew a promise from the king, to aide him with
three hundred men at armes, if need were, for the defence of the territories of the church.
King Ferdinand foreseeing and fearing the miseries that might ensue, if the French king
and the pope should grow to an open quarrell, he did all good offices to reconcile them,
but hee could not: for the pope was obstinately bent to oppresse the duke of Fe^erra, and
the king held it dishonourable for him to abandon his allie: whereupon king Lewis moued
with a iust indignation, began to treat a new league against pope Iulio, with the emperour
and other princes and potentates of Christendome, persuading Maximilian as
emperor, to pursue the vniting of the lands held in Italie by the pope as belonging rightly
vnto the empire, and that the Germans and French ioyntly should demaund a generall
Councell,Councell propounded to reforme the pope. for the reformation of the pope and clergie: and to giue some forme thereunto
for his part, hee called an assembly of the prelates of France, in manner of a Nationall
Councell, in the citie of Orleans, to the end they should withdraw themselues from the
popes obedience by a decree. The prelates hauing transferred the assembly from Orleans
to Towers, they drew some articles to be presented vnto the pope in the name of
the French church, and in case hee did refuse them, then to protest that they did not acknowledge
him for their superiour, appointing in that respect an other assembly within
sixe moneths after,Cardinall of S. Croix a Spaniard against the pope. of the clergie of France. To this enterprise the king had drawne some
cardinalls, namely D. Bernardin of Caruajal bishop of Siguensa cardinall of Saint Croix
a Spaniard, who had beene apostolike legat in the emperours court, hoping to make
king Ferdinand to yeeld vnto it, for the respect hee bare vnto the emperour. The pope
besides the interest of the Venetians and of all Italy which did moue him, being in heart
an irreconcileable enemie to the French, and to all them beyond the mountaines, he desired
nothing but troubles, as appeared by his courses. In the mean time king Ferdinand,
by reason of an army of Turkes which had beene discouered neere vnto Otranto, was forced
to call home his souldiers which he had sent into Lombardie, in fauour of the league
of Cambray: which made the emperour and French king suspect that hee would ioyne
with the pope; whereupon they sent vnto him to know his intent: whereunto king Ferdinand
made a plaine answer, without any ambiguitie, that although by reason of the
fee of Naples, hee had furnished the pope with some horsemen, yet hee meant not for
all that to leaue the league of Cambray, but would entertaine it more then before: and
therefore hee promised to send his souldiers backe into Lombardie: but as for the other
league which they treated of, hee could not yeeld vnto it, and much lesse that which
concerned a generall councell,Excuses made by king Ferdinand for not yeelding to a Councell. for that, sayd this catholike king, it were a scandalous
thing, and would trouble all Christendome; being most apparent, that this councell
was not propounded but to offend the pope, whom both he and all Christian Princes did
acknowledge to be Christs vicar in the church of God: and that peace and vnion should

bee the end of all holy councels, wherefore hee excused himselfe from entring into
any other league, then that of Cambray, exhorting them for the tranquilitie of the
state of Christendome (torne and dismembred with warre) to hearken to some good
agreement with the Pope,Excuses made by king Ferdinand for not yeelding to a councell. notwithstanding which answere the French king and the Emperour
made a new League, for the executing of the league of Cambray against the
Venetians, leauing libertie for the Pope to enter within fiue monethes, and for the
kings of Spaine and Hungarie within foure: and if the Pope should refuse to enter
into their league, then they would call a generall Councell: for the effecting whereof,
the Emperour should assemble the Prelates in Germany, as the French king had
done them in France. Thus, great miseries did threaten Italie, through the obstinacy of
Pope Iulio.
20 Whilst that the Christian Princes of Europe treated of these things in
the yeare one thousand fiue hundred and tenne,1510 the coast of Africke was much annoyed
by the army of Spaine, of the which the earle Pedro Nauarro was gouernour,Bugia taken by Pedro Nauarro.
who tooke the citie of Bugia, which had beene a great Vniuersity for the
Moores; the which strooke so great a terrour throughout all Africke, as the towne
of Algier and many places vpon that coast became tributaries to the crowne of Castille,Algier tributary to Castille.
agreeing with Pedro Nauarro what annual rent they should paie, and sending embassadors
into Spaine, who brought with them 50 Christian, slaues, and they landed at Valencia,
at such time as king Ferdinand hauing left the Infant D. Ferdinand his grand-childe
with Cardinal Ximenes, whom they called the Cardinall of Spain, and the councel at Vailledolit,
he came into Arragon, and called the estates of the realmes to Monson. The earle
Pedro Nauarro continuing his conquests, hee woone* Tripoli in Barbarie: and soone
after,Tripoli in Barbari taken. about the middest of August, D. Garcia Aluares of Toledo arriued at Gelbes
with some ships and Spanish souldiers, the which hee ioyned to the army of D. Pedro
Nauarro. D. Garcia was eldest sonne to D. Frederic of Toledo duke of Alua, a gallant
knight, but vnfortunate in this expedition, for hauing landed in that countrie
with his troopes,D. Garcia Aluares of Toledo slaine by the Arabians. hee was fought with all, vanquished and slaine vpon the place by
the Arabians, and could not bee relieued by the earles army, which was at sea, his
men before they came to fight with the enemy, being almost dead with thirst which
they had endured in that drie and barren countrie. Some did taxe the earle D. Pedro
Nauarro for this rout of D. Gancia, saying, that hee would not succour him as he might,
being discontented and iealous of his comming in qualitie of generall of that lamentable
enterprise.
21 At the west Indies Diego of Nicuesa had not much better successe in his Colonie
of Nombre de Dios,Behauiour of the Spaniards at the West Indies. Seditions among them. which was built vpon the firme land. Those also that were
in the Colonie of the Antique of Darien were also in mutinies and seditions among themselues,
raised by a great souldier, but verie mutinous, called Vasco Nugnes, of Balboa,
borne at Badajos, who had incensed some of the people, against the bacheler Martin Hernandes,
of Enciso, who was appointed gouernour in that place by the king: but the
Bachelers Letters were vnfortunately lost, whenas hauing caused Francisco Picaro, and
the companions of Hoieda to returne with him, the ship wherein hee was, was cast
away at his comming to Vraba: wherefore Vasco Nugnes hauing quarreled with him,
saying, that such charges did not belong to Bachelers, and hee opposing to the contrarie
that he had receiued it fro^ the king, he could not shew it: so as there was great and long
contention betwixt them, vntil the comming of Roderigo Henriques of Colmenares, with
two carauels laden with victuals and prouisions, and 70 men, who went from the port of
Beata of S. Domingo, to seeke out Hoiedas companions. He being come to a place called
Garia, had landed with fifty Spaniards, to fetch water, but they were instantly charged by
a great number of Indian archers, who slue 47 and tooke the rest aliue, and then they eate
them all: whereupon Roderigo dislodging, he entred into the gulph of Vraba, where he
found some steps and marks of the Spaniards landing: wherefore he shot off certain peeces
of ordenance, and made a great smoake, to giue aduertisment that he was on shoare,
to end that if there were any Spaniards they should answere him. Those of the Antique of
Darien perceiuing the smoake, and hearing the shot, made answere in like maner: wherefore

Colmenares directed his course that way,1510 where he was receiued with great ioy. The
Spaniards were relieued by him of their miseries and pouertie: for had he not arriued, they
had been cut in peeces, or perished for hunger. Roderigo Henriques of Colmenares labored
in such sort as he did pacifie these mutines of the Antique of Darien, making them al consent,
except Vasco Nugnes of Balboa, and the Bacheler Martin Hernandes of Enciso, who
were the heads of the factions, that the superintendency and authority should bee giuen to
Diego Nicuesa, as to him who had order from the king to co^mand. And then Colmenares set
saile towards the fort of Nombre de Dios, with one ship and a briga^tin, and hauing found Diego
Nicuesa there poor, he did co^fort him with good news of his election, so as after much
discourse of his misfortunes, he imbarked him 60 with of his companions, to carry him
to the Antique of Darien:Arrogancy of Nicuesa makes him lose the gouernment of the f^rme land at the Indies. but Nicuesa being an indiscreet man, and ful of arrogancy, he began
in his voyage to braue and threaten them which had not yet receiued him for their magistrate,
saying, he would teach Balboa and Enciso, the authors of these factions, to hazard
the affairs of the king their master by their diuisio^s, and that he would punish them seuerely,
and put others in their places, that he would take away their gold, and doe many other
wonders: which words proceeding as from a mad man, displeased Roderigo Henriques of
Colmenares, and others of his company, who failed not to make report therof to them of
the Antique, yea to the 2 heads of the factions, who receiued Nicuesa with 1000 scoffes
and iniuries, making him to take another course with his 60 companions. This wretch directing
his voyage to the Iland of Hispaniola, with an intent to accuse the bacheler Enciso, and
Vasco Nugnes of Balboa, before the admiral D. Diego Colombus, eldest sonne to Christopher
Columbus, then lieutenant general or viceroy in those countries, in the place of the commander
Nicholas of Oua^to, he perished at sea, with all his co^pany. The dissention betwixt
Enciso and Balboa co^tinuing, Roderigo Henriques of Colmenares did adhere to Vasco Nugnes,
of Balboa, who shewed himself so proud and rash as he not only atte^pted to put the bacheler
Martin into prison, and to confiscate his goods, but, if some had not staied him, he was resolued
to do him a publike shame, which he himselfe did better deserue.
The yere 1511 being come,1511 in the which king Ferdinand after the assembly of Mo^son, being
returned to Madrid, and grieuing for the death of D. Garcia Aluares of Toledo, and of his
men at Gelbes, he caused a great fleet to be made ready in the ports of Malaga, Gibaltar and
Calis, being resolued to go in person into Afrike, and to make war against the Infidels: from
the which he was diuerted, by the intreaties of the estates of his realms, shewing him the
inconueniences which were to be feared, if his person should miscarie, beseeching him to
giue the charge of that war to his captains. The hatred betwixt the Pope and French
king, was very great: the Pope did besiege Mira^dola, with such vehemency, being himself
at the siege in person (against the aduice of the colledge, and the dignity of his papal estate)
that he took it, and hauing put 500 Spaniards, and 300 Italia^s there in garrison, he took the
way to Bolonia, the princes seeking to quench this fire by all good means, yea the king D.
Ferdinand by his embassadors, D. Ierosme Vich of Vale^cia in the court of Rome, and D. Pedro
of Vrrea, in that of the emperor, whom he desired to reconcile with the Venetians, hoping
that the French king would afterwards yeeld vnto it: intreating them all to giue him this
co^tentment, to see Christendom at peace, that he might with more liberty atte^d the war
of Africke; an enterprise which by reason should please, and be fauoured by all Christian
Princes: but he labored particularly to diuert the emperour from proceeding to an assembly
or conuocation of the Prelates of Germany,King Ferdinand opposeth against the calling of a Councell. concerning a Councell, the which hee
did vtterly disalow: propunding instead thereof an assembly of embassadors in the city of
Mantoua, to consult of a pacification. By his care and diligence this assembly was made,
and there met at Mantoua, for him the abouenamed embassadors; for the empererour
the bishop of Gurgensis, and for the French king, the bishop of Paris, whose labour proued
fruitlesse. The time was come in regard of the league of Cambray to retyre king Ferdinands
three hundred men at armes, which had serued the Pope, wherefore these
horsemen being retained longer then was agreed, they returned to Naples. The Pope
being obstinate and furious, not caring for the Emperour, and much lesse for the
French king, was forced to dislodge from Bolonia, for feare of the French army,
which did approch, which city, either for that it was abandoned by them he left there,

or by intelligence with the Bentiuoly,15^^ came into the power of king Lewis, without any difficulty:(...)
and soone after there were bils set vp in the publike places at Mantoua, and at Bolonia,
declaring that a generall councell was assigned in September that yeare 1511, to
the which (the Pope and his adherents being accused of many crimes) were cited: for the
which the Pope (being a cholerike and furious man) thought to run mad, calling those
Cardinalls which were opposite vnto him, wicked Sectaries, vsurpers of the Soueraigne
bishops authority, to whom only (said he) it did belong to cal a councel, inciting the Vniuersities,
and faculties of diuinitie, who declared this act to be hereticall. The Emperour
had made offer as a fit place, and fatall to disordred Popes, of the citie of Constance, Turin
had also beene propounded, but Pisa was held most conuenient. The furye of this war
was so great in Italie, as king Ferdinand (being iealous of his realm of Naples) sent three
thousand Spaniards to his viceroy D. Raymond of Cardonea, vnder the command of Pedro
Nauraro, earle of Albeto, stil doubting that king Lewis did gape after it, notwithstanding
the accords made in regard of the marriage of Queene Germaine; and hee deferred his voyage
of Africke,Cardinals sauouring the councell of P^s^ attending the issue of these troubles, and of the councell of Pisa, the
chiefe fauourers whereof, were the Cardinalls of S. Croix a Spaniard, Bayeux, Saint
Malo, Albret, brother to Iohn of Albret king of Nauarre, Frenchmen; they of Cosensa, and
Saint Seuerin, Italians: but Pope Iulio, for that he would not seeme to faile in his pastorall
office, pretending that the calling of a councell did belong to him, and to disperse that of
Pisa, he did publish another at Saint Iohn de Latran in Rome: the which wrought great
effects in the hearts of princes, and of religious people which did abhor schismes. So as
notwithstanding that the French king had sent 24 bishops to Pisa, in the behalfe of the
Clergie of France, expecting that the emperour according to their accord should do the
like for the Clergy of Germany, yet whether retained by conscience or otherwise, he neither
sent bishops nor embassdors, finding somtimes one euasion sometimes another.
23 King Ferdinand being also sollicited by the Pope, and (as it is credible) hauing good
intelligence with him, he made a publike declaration, that seeing neither by intreaties, nor
persuasions, he could not diuert the French king from his resolution to disquiet the Apostolike
sea, he tooke it into his protection: and it is likely that the emperour Maximilian
had beene also wonne by these two. This declaration was made at Seuile, whether
soone after came letters from the councell of Pisa, sommoning king Ferdinand to send his
Prelates,Warre bet^i^^ France and Spaine. and embassadors thither, whereof hee made no accompt: whereupon he parted
from Seuile and came to Burgos, from whence as the Spaniards say, he sent to Iohn of Albret
king of Nauarre, to int^eat him him not to beleeue the councell of the Cardinal his
brother, not to adhere in any sort to that false Councell of Pisa. Yet the k. of Nauarre ioined
with the French king, and was declared a schismatike, which made king Ferdinand to inuade
his realm, as we wil shew. And being now come to open war king Ferdinand sent the
whole army which he had prepared for Africk to Naples, whereof he made D. Alfonso of
Caruajal, son to D. Diego of Caruajal, Lord of Xodar, general, and one called Camudio,
Colonell of the foot. In this army were 3000 foot, and some 1100 horse, whereof 600
were light horse. During his abode at Burgos, he had news that Pope Iulio was fallen da^gerously
sicke, so as there was neither hope of life nor recouery, the which held many Potentates
in suspence, fearing some great alteration, but he recouered. From Burgos he sent
embassadors to Henry king of Engla^d his son in law, to moue him to make war against the
French king vpon his old pretensions; against whom and his Councel of Pisa, there was a
league made, which had bin breeding betwixt the king D. Ferdinand, the Pope, and the Venetians,
since the beginning of these quarrels, vnder colour to defend the rights of the Apostolike
sea, to disperse the schismatical and heretical councel of Pisa, for the recoueries of
the cities of Bolonia and Ferrara, and the restoring of them to the church. King Ferdinand did
offer for this war 12 hundred men at armes, one thousand light horse, and 10000 Spanish
foot,League betwixt king Ferdinand the Pope and the Venetians. the Seigniory of Venice eight hundred men at armes, one thousand horse, and 8000
foot, and the Pope 400 men at armes, fiue hundred light horse, and 6000 foot: Moreouer 12
galleys for the king D. Ferdinand, and 14 for the Venetians: making D. Raymond of Cardone
viceroie of Naples, generall of this warre: for the entertainment of which army the Pope
should furnish twenty thousand ducats a month, and the Venetians as much, and fourty

thousand presently:1511 and this league was published at Rome, in the church of Sancta Maria
del populo, in Octob, this yeare one thousand fiue hundred and 11, into the which the
king of England should be admitted, if he would. After which they did admonish and proceed
against the Cardinalls which disobeyed the Pope with the accustomed ceremonies,
solemnities, and delaies, to bring the^ into the bosom of the holy mother church, that is to
say, to the Councell assigned by the Pope at Saint Iohn de Latran: which if they disobeyed,
they should be depriued of their dignities and liuings, and punished as schismatitkes
and heretikes; which act was celebrated by the Pope, in his pontificall habit, and in
a consistorie of seuen partiall Cardinals. Those of the contrarie faction, notwithstanding
all this, began to hold the councell of Pisa, whereas the Florentines would not suffer
3 hundred Frenchmen at armes to enter, which the Fathers and Prelates demanded for
their gard, being led by Gaston of Foix, the kings nephew, and duke of Nemours, fearing
least they should sease vpon that city for the French king. The fathers comming to
the first session, they were so mockt by the people, and receiued so many indignities, as they
were forced to transferre the councell of Pisa to Milan, where they had neither more honor,
nor better vsage, notwithstanding that they were in the French kings dominion,
where they held their second session, the Cardinall of Saint Croix a Spaniard being president;
where they attended the prelates of Germany, and the Emperors embassadors in
vaine, but they wanted not excuses.
These seeds of warre being cast among christians,Order of the conception of Nunnes. Pope Iulio doing his du^ty in matters,
of religion, he confirmed the new order of the conception of Nunnes, instituted in the citie
of Toledo some yeares before, by one of the ladies of Queene Isabell, who was second
wife to king Iohn the 2, her name was D. Beatrix de Silua, of Portugal, who being suspected
by her mistresse, for that by reason of her great beauty, many courted her, and there
grew dailie quarrels among the courtiers, she was put in prison, where being kept three
daies in teares and heauines, without bread or drinke, shee was moued to make a vow of
chastity, and for this cause, they say, the virgin Mary appeared vnto her in the habit which
the Nunnes doe now weare, that is, a blew cloake, and a white hood, and did comfort her.
Being out of prison, and going to Toledo, with an intent to be a religious woman, there
appeared two Franciscane friers vnto her, which sight made her think that they were sent
to co^fesse her, and then she shold be put to death: but these fathers told her that she should
be the mother of many daughters, declaring vnto her the spirituall vndersta^ding of it, that
it should be of many religious women, and then they vanished: wherfore she going on her
way, being come to Toledo, she put herselfe into the monasterie of religious women, of
S. Dominike the royal, where she remained 30 yeres in a secular habit, liuing holily; afterwards
she remoued with 12 nuns to a place where now S. Foy is, which in former times
was called the palace of galiena, being desirous to institute an order in honor of the virgin
Mary, and there she remained with her company, by the permission of the queen D. Isabella,
wife to the king D. Ferdinand now raigning, vntill that the habit was confirmed vnto
them by Pope Innocent the eight, and the office of the conception, vnder the rule of Cristeaux,
without any other new order: in the which hauing co^tinued some time, they ioyned
with the Nunnes of Saint Peter de las Duegnas, of the order of Saint Benet, making a
medley of the rules of the Benedictins and Bernardines, vntill that Cardinall Francis Ximenes,
then prouinciall of the Franciscans, and generall reformer in Spaine, made
them to leaue the rules of Saint Bennet and Saint Bernard, and to take the habit and the
Office of the conception, vnder the rule of Saint Clare, putting them into the monasterie
which at this day is called of the Conception, which was woont to bee the conuent of
Franciscane Friers, transported by reason of them to S. Iohn des Rois. There this yere 1511
Pope Iulio confirmed them in their own rule and order of the conception, leauing that of
S. Clare. This yere all the coast of Affrike was terrified vpon the brute of the great preparation
which had been made in Spain, to inuade them: The king of Tremessen sent his
embassadors to king Ferdinand, to offer him vassalage, and a tribute of 13000 double ducats
of gold payable in the citie of Oran. In Spain there died D. Beatrix of Bouadilla, Marquesse
of Moya, and soone after her husband D. Andrew de Cabrera.
The yeare one thousand fiue hundred and twelue following, king Ferdinand hauing

vndertaken the Popes defence, hee commanded D. Raymond of Cardoua viceroy
of Naples, appointed generall of the holy league, to ioyne his forces with the
Popes and Venetians, the which was done at Imola, where they made the body of
the army, in the which was Legate for the Pope Cardinall Iohn of Medicis, of the
title of Sancta Maria in Dominica. Theseforces entring into Lombardie, in a manner
all that the duke of Ferrara held on this side Po; yeelded vnto the league, without
any force, but La Bastie, which the earle (...) Nauarro tooke: and then they
camped before Bolonia: but Gaston of Foix duke of Nemours, a gallant young nobleman
comming to rele^ue it, the army of the league was forced to retyre to Imola.
On the other side the Venetians tooke Bresse, but not the Castle; and Bergamo,
with other places were yeelded vnto them: but the duke of Nemours comming to
succour the castle of Bres^e, hee encountred Iohn Paul B^illon vpon the way, with part
of the Venetian army, and put them to rout, and then hee entred the towne and put
eight thousand Venetians and inhabitants to the sword,Exploits of Gaston of Foix. hee tooke Andrew Gritti their
commander prisoner, with Anthonie Iustinien, and other men of great quality, and
soone after recouered Bergamo, and all the places which the Venetians had taken. In
the meane time king Ferdinand prepared a fleet in the ports of Biscaye and Guipuscoa,
to assaile France vpon the coast of Guienne, hauing induced the king of England
to reuiue the old quarrell, who at the persuasion of the Popes embassador, had made
an assemblie of the Prelates of his realme, and promised to send to the Councell of Latran:
and for a greater demonstration of his hatred, hee caused the French embassadors
which did reside in his court to dislodge.
25 During these troubles,Nauarre. the king D. Iohn, and the Queene D. Catherine of Nauarre
his wife, did enioy their realme in peace, since the expulsion of the earle of Lerin
the Constable, and of Lewis of Beaumont his sonne, with others of that faction: then all
their care was to restore it to the ancient estate, and the places reunited which were disstracted
and held by the king of Castille: for the which, and to demaund other rights
which they pretended, they had sent many embassadors to king Ferdinand, who had returned
with good hope to obtaine what they demanded, or the greater part: wherefore
they sent againe doctor Iohn of Iassu Seigniour of Pauierre, Ladron of Monleon, and the
Protonotarie Martin of Iaureguisar, who were of the councel, with ample instructions to
capitulate, compound, and end all their pretentions, in this form: That they should intreat
the king of Arragon,Embassage of Nauarre to king Ferdinand Regent of Castille, that, if he made any accord with the French king,
the kings of Nauarre might be comprehended. That the embassadors should make great
instance to king Ferdinand that the townes of Saint Vincent, Sos, Arcos, Garde and
Bernedo, and moreouer the places of Sosierra, held by him, and the crowne of Castille,
might bee restored vnto them according vnto the will of the deceased Queene
D. Isabella at her death, as places belonging to the Crowne of Nauarre: That in like
maner they should demand as hereditarie things, the Duchies of Gandie, and of Momblanc,
the earledome of Ribagorsa and the citie of Balaguer in Arragon; the duchie of
Pegnafiel, and the Infan tazgo of Castille, the townes of Cuellar, Castro Xeris, Haro,
Villalon, and other lands, and moreouer the summe of foure hundred and twenty
thousand a hundred and twelue florins of gold, sixe soulz and eight deniers of Arragon,
giuen in dowrie by king Charles the third of Nauarre, to his sonne in law, D. Iohn king of
Arragon: These were the pretentions of the kings of Nauarre against Castille, for the
which they had beene fe^d with many vaine hopes, that reason should be done them: but
in effect king Ferdinand shewed by his delaies that he had no such meaning, and that he expected
some other occasion to acquit himselfe, and yet not to leaue any thing that he held:
wherein the best euasion hee had was the restitution of them of Beaumont, which
he knew to be most odious to the kings of Nauarre. The embassadors hauing done their
duties, and lost many iourneys in following the court of Castille, they returned without
any effect, discharging themselues vnto their kings D. Iohn and D. Catherine,
who were in France: whereupon they returned into Nauarre, whereas being, when
as the aboue-mentioned warres were hottest in Italie, king Ferdinand who had a
designe to leade an Armye into Gascoyne, in fauour of the English, sent to

demaund a passage of them for his souldiers victualls, and munition, and for his assurance,
they should giue him in hostage, the castles of Estelle and Maye in Nauarre,
and that of Saint Iohn de pied de Port, vpon the frontiers of Fraunce: promising
them, as hee had done at other times, in requi^all of this pleasure, to restore vnto
them the townes of Saint Vincent, Arcos, Garde, and others, of the principalitie of
Viana. The king D. Iohn, and D. Katherina were much troubled at this demaund,
for they sawe themselues much ingaged to either of these two realmes of France and
Castille, so as in the quarrels of these great Monarchs, taking the party of the one,
they declared themselues enemies to the other, and being neuters, they were a pray
to both. Being thus in suspence, their owne vncle A^and of Albret, Lord of Obal,
being then in their court embassador for France,King of Nauar adheres to the French king. made them to adhere to king Lewis
his master, promising them infinite fauours, and aduancements, from the which
Mondognedo embassador for the king of Castille sought in vaine to diuert them, shewing
them the miseries that would ensue. King Ferdinand being presently aduertised
hereof, hee thought it a fit occasion to further his designes, and to vnite the crowne
of Nauarre to that of Castille: wherefore hee made great complaints of this resolution
and adherence of the kings of Nauarre to the French king, whome hee called
schismaticall, and an enemy to the church of Rome, and to Pope Iulio; who hauing
vsed the ordinarie meanes, by admonitions and fatherly persuasions to these
princes, according to the forme and stile of Rome, to quit the allyance of the peruers,
and to ioyne with him and his adherents, seeing that they did persist to hold the
party of France, hee proceeded against them by the last remedie, declaring them
by the aduice of the consistorie of Cardinals,Sentence giuen by the Pope against Iohn Albret king of Nauarre. schismatikes and heretikes, depriuing
them and their posteritie, of all right to the realme of Nauarre, and of all their goods,
giuing and transferring them to king Ferdinand regent of Castille, whose forces
being prepared to passe into Guienne, did serue him fitly to conquer Nauarre. King
Iohn of Albret vnderstanding of all these proceedings, hee sent D. Alfonso Carillo, his
constable, and D. Pedro of Nauarre marshall of the realme, embassadors, to preuent,
if it were possible, these apparent dangers, who hauing found Lewis of Beaumont,
and other banished men in the court of Castille, much fauoured, soliciting D. Ferdinand
to vndertake the enterprise of Nauarre, holding it to bee the onely meanes for
them to bee restored, they were so ill entertained, as they made all the hast they
could to returne, to make report vnto the king and to the estates assembled at
Tudele, that all things tended to warre. King Ferdinand hauing the Popes sentence
for a pretext to assaile this countrey, and for meanes the intelligences of many
fauorers, of the faction of Beaumont, hee held it an easie matter to conquer it:
wherefore hee deferred the warre of Guienne: yet for his greater iustification hauing
gathered his armie together about the citie Victoria,Demands vn^iuill made by king Ferdinand to him of Nauarre. whereof Frederic of Toledo duke
of Alua was the generall, hee sent againe to sommon the kings of Nauarre to deliuer
into his hands the aboue named places and castles, aduertising them that vpon refusall
thereof, hee would put the Popes sentence in execution, and spoile them not onely
of Nauarre, but of all that they held in France. Notwithstanding all these protestations,
king Iohn refused him the passage, and the deliuerie of the castles, obiecting
the league and allyance which hee had with the French king, neither could hee persuade
himselfe that king Ferdinand, whome hee had neuer offended, should pursue
him with such rigour as he said, but he found himselfe deceiued, for the duke of Alua had
commandement presently, that leauing the way of Guipuscoa, he should enter into Nauarre,
to co^quer it. At that time by the death of D. Bernardin of Velasco, first duke of Frias,
and 3 earle of Haro,Castille. his brother and heire, D. Inigo of Velasco was made constable of Castille.
There dyed also that yere D. Iohn de Sylua, earle of Cifuentes, president of the councel,
and Ferdinand infant of Granado, sonne to king Muley Alboacen. In Germany the emperor
who sought but an occasion to breake with the French king, had called an
assembly of the Prelates at Ausbourg, who declared the councell of Pisa to bee odious,
and worthy to bee reiected: The emperour had in like sort refused the marriage
which had bin offered by king Lewis of his second daughter Renee with prince Charles

of Austria,1512 and the restitution of that which he held in Bourgondie: Yet the warre continued
still in Italie, and succesfull for the French, who hauing taken many places in Romania,
and deliuered them to the cardinall of S. Seuerin, who was created Apostolike
Legat for the Councell at Pisa, they besieged Rauenna, which the armie of the league
comming to succour,Battell of Rauenna. the French defeated them in battell, but with the losse of their Generall
Gaston of Foix, duke of Nemours, who pressing the enemie that fled, was slaine.
The losse of this battell much troubled the Pope and all the cardinals at Rome, and their
onely care was how to auoyd the furie of the French, whom they thought to be at their
backes:Despaire of the Pope. And had not king Ferdinands embassadour vsed great diligence, Pope Iulio had
cast himselfe into the Florentines armes, who were friends and allies to the French king,
to obtaine some good conditions of peace by their meanes* but being better informed
of the whole successe by Iulio de Medicis, who was afterwards cardinall, and then Pope
Clement the seuenth, he changed his resolution, and continued the warre, being incouraged
by the descent of the Suisses into Itali^, to defend the Church of Rome. At that
time began the first session of the Councel of Latran, that of Milan being so ridiculous,
as the cardinall Iohn of Medicis, a prisoner, hauing ample authoritie from the Pope, gaue
dispensations, absolued from censures, and did all acts of an Apostolike Legat, with a
great concourse of people, before the cardinals and prelates of the opposite Councell;
the which the gouernours of Milan for the French king did not contradict.
King Lewis fearing to be assailed in Fraunce by the forces of Spaine and England, and
and the Suisses being incensed against him,Victorie of Rauenna vnprofitable for the French. hauing passed the Alpes with the cardinall of
Sion, the Popes Legat, the Emperour Maximilian hauing also called home all the Germans
that serued the French, prest with many difficulties, he was forced to yeeld the field
to the enemie, and (after that he had sought an accord in vaine) to abandon the estate of
Milan, and to retire his forces into France, and to defend his owne. The cardinals of the
Councell of Pisa retired: Bolonia, and in a manner all other places were recouered, Genoa
obtained her libertie, and Iohn Fregoso was chosen duke; so as the French king had
nothing remaining in Lombardie, but the castle of Milan, that of Cremona, Bresse, Crema,
Lignago, the Lanterne of Genoa, and Castellet.
28 Thus Pope Iulio seeing his affaires so succesfull,Popes fulminations against K. Lewis the xi^. began to thunder out his spirituall
censures and fulminations, against K. Lewis, causing him to be declared, by a decree of the
Councell of Latran, an heretike and schismatike, depriuing him for that cause of all honour
and royall dignitie, yea of the name of Most Christian, which had beene so long affected
to the kings of Fraunce; which title he would transferre to the kings of England:
And on the other side he did honour the king D. Ferdinand with the title of Catholike,
the which the kings of Spaine carrie at this day, vnder colour of the happie warres which
he had made and ended, against the Moores which had vsurped the prouinces in Spaine,
and other Infidels; but being chiefly mooued by the good offices which he had done for
him and the See of Rome, opposing himselfe at that time against the French and the
Councell of Pisa, and fauouring the designes of Pope Iulio, which were to prejudice the
Crowne of France: whereof letters and Apostolike briefes were presented vnto king
Ferdinand, being in the citie of Burgos, in the yeare 1512.
The realme of France was not so easie to be swallowed vp as that of Nauarre:Nauarre. which
was inuaded by the duke of Alua, king Iohn and queene Katherine being at Pampelone,
and the Castillan armie within eight leagues of them; they were so vnprouided of all
meanes to make resistance,King Iohn of Albret forced to retire into France. as king Iohn could take no better resolution, then to abandon
the realme, and retire himselfe into Fraunce. The inhabitants of Pampelone seeing
themselues forsaken, demaunded of him, That seeing he left them, what his pleasure was
they should doe; Defend your selues (said he) as well as you can, and if you cannot make
it good, yeeld vnto king Ferdinand vpon some good conditions, for I will take good order
that he shall not long enjoy Nauarre. Queene Katherine found it strange, that the king
her husband should so soone abandon his realme, before that the armie of Castille had
done any notable exploit: but whether it were feare, or distrust that he had of them of
Pampelone, who he knew were affected to the earle of Lerin, and to the faction of Beaumont,
he left it, notwithstanding all her reasons and persuasions, on the two and twentieth

of Iulie, this yeare 1512; saying, That he had rather liue in woods and mountaines, than
to be a prisoner in his owne countrey. His retreat was by the vallie of Baztan, and the
castle of Moya, and so went to the Court of France, leauing the queene his wife at Pampelone,
who hauing stayed there but two dayes after him, followed him, with prince Henrie
her sonne, and three daughters; and hauing ouertaken him, among other speeches ful
of bitternesse,Speech of Q. Katherine to the king her husba^d she said vnto him: O King; you shall remaine Iohn of Albret, and neuer thinke
more of the realme of Nauarre, for that hauing beene superfl^ously good, you haue beene the lesse
esteemed of your subiects, and haue vndone your selfe and your realme. D. Pedro the marshall
of the realme, parted with these princes, and many other knights of the faction of Gramont.Fac^io^ of Beaumont in the Court of Nauarre.
D. Lewis of Beaumont, earle of Lerin, had such intelligences in the Court, and
throughout the realme of Nauarre, as hee had particular aduise of all that was done,
whereof he aduertised the duke of Alua, who marching before, came and camped within
two leagues of Pampelone, hauing in his armie six thousand foot, a thousand men at
armes, and fifteene hundred light horse, Castillans, besides the supplies of Beaumont, their
friends, kinsfolkes, and partisans. Then the inhabitants of Pampelone sent forth vnto the
duke, requiring that they might be receiued vpon certaine lawes and conditions (for they
had no power to defend themselues, nor, it may be, will:) To whom answer was made by
the duke, That it was for the vanquisher to prescribe lawes vnto the vanquished; wherefore
they should resolue to yeeld themselues freely into his hands, or to attend all the miseries
and calamities which are vsually felt in the expugnation of townes: by reason
whereof he restrained their demaunds to the obseruation of their auncient priuiledges
and liberties; the which was granted them, and moreouer some prouisions for the present
estate.Articles vpon the yeelding of Pampelone to the duke of Alua. Among these articles that were agreed vpon, the chiefe of them were these.
1 That the duke of Alua should from thenceforth be patron and mediator for the inhabitants
of Pampelone, in the demaunds and requests which they should make vnto the
kings D. Ferdinand and D. Ioane, for all matters either honourable or profitable.
2 That such as should remaine vassals or seruants to the kings of Castille, should be
maintained in their goods and estates, fees, rents, and pensions whatsoeuer, which they
had beene accustomed to receiue from precedent kings. And to such as meant to retire
themselues, such things should not be payed, but to the day of the yeelding vp of the
citie.
3 That the kings receiuors should gather vp the rents, reuenues, imposts, and other
profits of the Crowne, as they had beene accustomed, so as they did remaine in the citie
of Pampelone.
4 That the wages of Counsellors and Presidents of justice, Auditors of the royall
accounts, and other officers and magistrats of the kings D. Iohn and D. Katherine, should
be paied them, with condition that they should remaine in Pampelone.
5 That the inhabitants of Pampelone should remaine faithfull seruants to the kings
D. Ferdinand and D. Ioane, and in regard thereof they should enjoy their goods mouable
and immouable, rights, and auncient priuiledges: And in like manner those which had
followed the kings D. Iohn and D. Katherine, if within thirtie dayes they did returne into
the countrey.
6 That the inhabitants of Pampelone should not be bound to lodge any one without
paying for it, no more than they of Saragosse, Valencia, and Barcellona.
7 That all knights and gentlemen which within thirtie dayes should submit themselues
to the seruice of the kings D. Ferdinand and queene Ioane, should be well and honourably
intreated in their persons and goods, and not called in question for any crime
formerly committed in the time of the dissentions and factions of Beaumont and Gramont.
8 That when they should goe vnto the warre, their priuiledges and rankes, touching
their persons and qualities, should be maintained, as in the time of precedent kings.
9 That the rights of prouisions of victuals, silkes, money, and other things due by the
kings D. Iohn and D. Katherine, to their officers, citizens of Pampelone, which came to
serue the kings of Castille, should be paied them, so as it were duely verified.
10 That if any of these articles were prejudiciall to any one, the judgement thereof

should be referred to the kings of Castille, D. Ferdinand, and D. Ioane his daughter.
Many other heads were propounded, whereof some were granted, and others sent
backe vnto the king and his counsell; but these were the most remarkable, the which were
promised and sworne by the duke of Alua, in the name, and with the consent of the kings
of Castille, the foure and twentieth of Iulie, in the presence of D. Lewis of Beaumont
the constable, D. Antonio of Acugna, bishop of Cuenca, Pedro Lopes of Padilla, Ferdinand
S^arez of Toledo, and other knights. And notwithstanding that the duke had promised
not to enter into the citie vntill the next day, least it should be reproached vnto
them, That they had yeelded before they had seene the enemie, yet the earle of Lerin,
who was constable of Nauarre, entred the same day, being the foure and twentieth, and
the fiue and twentieth the duke with the rest of the armie.Duke of Alua enters into Pampelone. Thus the kings D. Iohn and Q.
Katherine, were spoyled of their realme of Nauarre, which they had held together eighteene
yeares and a halfe, and the queene almost ten yeares alone, after the death of her
brother Francis Phoebus.Vnion of Castille and Nauarre by conquest. From the 25 of Iulie 1512, being S. Iames day, Nauarre was vnited
to the Crowne of Castille, 468 yeares after that it had beene diuided from it, in the
time, and by the death of the king D. Sancho the great. After the yeelding of the chiefe
citie, the duke of Alua caused the other places of strength within the realme to be summoned
to yeeld, promising that in so doing they should be intreated with the like clemencie
to Pampelone; if not, he would pursue them with fire and sword, as sectaries to princes,
who were declared schismatikes and heretikes. In the beginning some townes seemed
difficult, but hauing better considered of their affairs, the townes of Lumbier, Sanguesse,
Montreal, Olite and Tafalla, with the citie of Tudele, yeelded, yet the castle thereof held
good for the kings that were expelled,Denis of Desa faithfull to king Iohn of Albret. Denis of Desa, a gallant knight, and a good
seruant to his masters, commaunding therein. They of the vallie of Roncal, and of the vallie
of Amescoa, trusting in the naturall force of their mountainous countrey, made no account
to yeeld. King Ferdinand being at Burgos, hearing the successe of this conquest,
sent supplies of men to the duke of Alua: And the better to justifie his actions, he sent D.
Antonio of Acugna, bishop of Zamora, embassador into France, to king Iohn, offering
him, That if he would quit the friendship and alliance of king Lewis, he would restore his
realme to him againe. The bishop came not to king Iohn; for notwithstanding the prerogatiue
of embassadors,King Ferdinands embassador arrested in Bearn. he was staied prisoner in Bearn, from whence he parted not, but for
a great ransome. Vpon this excesse the duke of Alua was readie to passe into Bearn, to
be reuenged of the wrong done vnto the king his master, and to his embassador: but seeing
the towns of Tudele, Olite, Tafalla, and Estella, begin to be somewhat moued at the
brute of king Iohns comming with a French armie, he remained in Nauarre; where hauing
ordered matters in such sort as they seemed secure, he assembled the chiefe men of
Pampelone, in the monasterie of S. Francis; where hauing made a long discourse vnto
them, to justifie the conquest which his master had made of that realme, he required them
to take an oath to king Ferdinand, and they demaunded three dayes respite to consider
thereon; which being expired, they said, That they were content to take an oath as subjects,Difference betwixt a vas^all and a subiect.
but not as vassals. And what difference, demaunded the duke, make you betwixt
vassals and subjects? He (said they) is to be vnderstood a vassall, whom the lord may intreat
well or ill, at his pleasure; but the subject ought to be well intreated by him. Then the
duke hauing shewed them that they should not doubt but the king would intreat them
well and fauourably in all things, he alledged many reasons which induced them to take
this oath, acknowledging king Ferdinand for their king, who parting from Burgos, came
vnto Logrogno, neere to Nauarre, where he staied the remainder of that yere, to prouide
for the defence of this new conquest.
This yeare died D. Pascall,Castille. of the Order of the preaching friers, bishop of Burgos, at
Rome D. Iohn of Fonseca, bishop of Palence, and superintendent of the affaires of the Indies,
was preferred in his place; D. Iohn of Velasco; bishop of Calaorra had that of Palence
and D. Iohn Castellan of Vilalua, came to that of Calaorra; he was brother to the colonell
Valalua: D. Valerio Alphonso Ordognes of Villaquiran, bishop of Ouiedo, died also, and his
bishopricke was giuen to D. Diego of Muros, who was bishop of Mondognedo, he who
did found the colledge of S. Sa^ior in the Vniuersitie of Salamanca, which hath the name

of Ouiedo:1512 the bishopricke of Mondognedo was giuen to D. Diego of Villamuriel, President
of the Chauncerie of Granado.
29 King Ferdinands affaires standing in these termes in Europe, the Spaniards remayning
at the Indies, at the place called the Antique of Darien, being commaunded by Vasco
Nugnes of Balboa,Exploits of Vasco Nugnes of Balboa. they obtained of him the deliuerie of the bacheler Martin Hernandes
of Enciso, who could not be staied by any intreaties in that countrey, to be chiefe Iustice
ouer all, but went presently to S. Domingo, and from thence into Spaine, where hee
made his complaint vnto the king, accusing Vasco Nugnes of much wickednesse and excesse:
whereupon there was a grieuous sentence pronounced against him, the punishment
whereof he auoyded by his great future seruices. The first voyage which Vasco Nugnes
made against the Indians, was against a Cachique, or king of that countrey, called Careta,
lord of Coyba, who hauing refused him victuals and gold, was by him and his troups,
which were 130 Spaniards, assayled, taken, and his burrough sackt, where they found
three Spaniards, who, for villanies committed, had fled from their captaine Nicuesa,
and had beene receiued and wel intreated by this Cachique, at whose intreatie he was deliuered,
and held for a friend, and Vasco Nugnes promised to aid him against another Cachique,
his enemie, who was called Ponsa. Being prest with hunger, and want of all necessaries,
these Spaniards of Antique sent Samudio and Valdiuia, two of their men, into the
island of Hispaniola, to fetch them victuals; and another into Spaine, called Zamudio, who
carried the processe of the bacheler Martin Hernandes of Enciso. Vasco Nugnes in the
meane time went in person against the Cachique Ponsa, who fled away with his people,
carrying all their wealth with them: whereupon he went against another Cachique, called
Comagro, whose land was not farre from the South sea: for the region of Darien is but
an isthmus,Darien an isthmus or neck of land. or a strait necke of land. Vasco Nugnes contracted friendship and alliance with
this Cachique, for he found him mild and tractable. He lodged him in a hall which was
150 paces long, and 80 broad, whereas he and all his Spaniards made good cheere with
their victuals, wine of dates, and ^ther fruits after their maner: and the Cachiques eldest
sonne brought the weight of 4000 dragmes in gold wrought, and seuentie slaues, which
he gaue vnto the Spaniards;Co^etousnesse of the Spaniards somewhat checked by an Indian. who seeing them through greedinesse to contend and quarell
about the diuision of these things, he wondred much, and said vnto them, That seeing
they had so great a desire of gold, which was but earth, as for it they did thrust themselues
into so great dangers, and did trouble so many peaceable nations, he would shew them a
region not farre of, and neere vnto the other sea, where they should glut their couetousnesse;
but they must not goe with so small a troupe, being necessarie to lead a thousand
Spaniards thither. Vasco Nugnes and Roderigo of Colmenares being verie joyfull of this
aduertisement, and more for that they heard him speake of another neere sea, imbraced
this lord, who was called Panquiaco, intreating him to become a Christian, and that hee
should goe with them: the which he did willingly yeeld vnto, and was baptised Charles, in
honour of prince Charles of Austria, the heire of Spaine. This region whereof Charles
Panquiaco spake, was called Tumanama, to come vnto the which they must of necessitie
passe the mountaines and woods inhabited by the Caribes, cruell people, and eaters of
men, carrying arrowes dipt in deadly poison, which made them madde that were wounded
therewith: and therefore Vasco Nugnes returned to Antique, to prouide all things
necessarie for this voyage and conquest. Hauing found Valdiuia returned from S. Domingo
with some victuals, he sent him into Spaine, and with him 15000 dragmes of gold, for
the kings fift part of diuers booties which they had taken; giuing him charge to beseech
the king to send a thousand Spaniards for the conquest of the South sea. But Valdiuia miscarried
by the way, he and all his treasure being drowned. In the meane time Vasco Nugnes
with a brigantine and many barkes began to saile into the gulph of Vraba, to seeke for
victuals, and finding a great riuer which he called S. Iohn, he went ten leagues vp against
the streame, but he found not any man, for all were fled vp into the countrey, hauing bin
terrified with the crueltie and insatiable couetousnesse of the bearded Spaniards (as they
called them) by Cemaco the Cachique, who had beene vanquished by Martin Hernandes
Enciso: yet the Spaniards forraged the countrey neere vnto the riuers sides, and made
great bundels of arrowes and other armes, nets, couerings, and other Indian implements,

the which afterwards they cast into the sea, for that in their returne they were taken with
a storme, carrying away the value of seuen thousand Castillans in gold, but nothing that
could satisfie hunger: for these people in truth were poore, and liued only of fishing, exchanging
their fish with their neighbours for Mays. Roderigo Henriques of Colmenares
running vp along the riuers side with seuentie companions, returned without bread, or any
other victuals; but he brought much Casse-fistula, which he found growing in those
regions in great aboundance. Hauing joyned againe with Balboa, they entred into the
mouth of a floud, which they called the blacke riuer, where they were to incounter a Cachico,
called Abenamaquer, whom they defeated and tooke prisoner, whose arme a villanous
Spaniard cut off, in cold bloud, for that he had been wounded during the skirmish.
Colmenares remaining there with this Cachico, and the moitie of the Spanish troupes,
Balboa with the rest past on, and came vnto a place where as he found a building made vpon
great old trees, much like vnto a cage to keepe birds in: there a Cachico kept, who
thinking himselfe to be in a safe place, and inexpugnable, they mockt at the Spaniards who
were on the ground, and did summon the^ to yeeld: but when as they saw them begin to ouerthrow
the foundation of his palace with axes, he came downe with two of his sonnes,
and presented himselfe humbly to Balboa, excusing himselfe that hee had not any gold,
whereof he had no need, but promised that he would goe and seeke some, if he would suffer
him at libertie. Balboa trusting him, let him goe free, but he was deceiued: For this
Cachico falsifying his faith, consorted with other Cachicoes and their people, in great
numbers, who fell vpon the Spaniards, but to their owne losse, for they were repulst with
the losse of many Indians. Not content with this insolencie, the Cachicoes about the
blacke riuer and that gulph, conspired to assaile the Antique of Darien suddenly with all
their power, and to kill the Spaniards and eat them: The which was discouered to Vasco
Nugnes by a faire Indian woman whom he entertained as his friend, who had beene aduertised
to free her selfe of this danger, by a brother of hers, who was of the conspiracie,
and for her sake did frequent familiarly among the Spaniards. Vasco Nugnes of Balboa
caused this Indian to be taken, and hauing vnderstood the truth from him, and what course
the Indians meant to take to execute their enterprise, he wrought in such sort on the one
side, and Colmenares on the other, as they dispersed their forces, put a confusion in their
counsels, and did in a maner subiect all the countrey of Vraba. Being returned to the Antique
of Darien, they sent Iohn of Quincedo, and Roderigo Henriques of Colmenares, into
Spaine, to make relation vnto king Ferdinand of that which they had done, and of the conquest
of the South sea, which they intended, and to beseech him to send them 1000 Spaniards
to that end. That yeare there went out of Spaine, with the kings leaue, and at his
owne charge, Iohn Dias de Solis, pilot major to the king, who taking the course of Pinsons,
past beyond S. Augustines cape fortie degrees vnder the Equinoctiall, vnto the great riuer
of Parauaguasu, which signifies in the Indian tongue, great water, the which was by Iohn
Dias called the riuer of Plata,Riuer of Plata found by Iohn Dias de Solis. that is to say, of siluer, for that they found there some grains
of that mettall: and hauing planted many crosses there in signe of possession, he returned
into Spaine, laden with Brasil, where he gaue an account vnto the king of his nauigation.





@THE 25 BOOKE OF THE
Historie of Spaine.

The Contents of the 26 Booke.
1 WArre continued by the duke of Aluain Nauarre, and the frontires of France. An
armie of French in Nauarre, and their poore exploits.
2 Proceeding of Pope Iulio against the Councell of Pisa, and the fauourers thereof.
3 Practises of the duke of Ferrara against king Ferdinand. Death of Pope Iulio the second,
and election of Leon.
4 Queene Germaine giues a drinke to king Ferdinand her husband, to haue children by him,
which causeth his death.
5 Warre of Milan, and dissolution of the Councell of Pisa.
6 Discouerie of the South sea at the Indies, by Vasco Nugnes of Balboa.
7 Warre continued in Italie by the Emperor and Spaniards against the Venetians.
8 Behauiour of Vasco Nugnes of Balboa at the Indies.
9 Designes of Pope Leo, an enemie both to Spanish and French.
10 Seditions at the Indies. The miserable end of Vasco Nugnes of Balboa.
11 Comming of king Francis to the Crowne, and treaties betwixt him, the Emperor Maximilian,
and king Ferdinand.
12 Enterprises of king Ferdinand against France. Vnion of Nauarre and Castille.
13 Exploits of king Francis in Italie. Abolition of the Pragmaticke sanction.
14 Comming of doctor Adrian Florantin to Spaine. Testament of king Ferdinand, and his
death.
15 Exploits of the king D. Manuel in Africke. Exactions vpon the Clergie of Portugall. His
third mariage.
16 D. Charles of Austria, first of that name, 22 king in Castille, 43 in Leon, and 20 in Arragon,
and in Nauarre the fourth of that name, and 36 king. Gouernment of Cardinall Ximenes
and doctor Adrian, in the kings absence.
17 Estate of king Charles his house.
18 Troubles in Spaine by D. Pedro Giron and others, pacified by the wisedome of cardinall Ximenes.
19 Ordinances for the ordinarie legions in Spaine, and other orders made by cardinall Ximenes.
20 Gouernement of Nauarre. Counsell to ruine the townes, and to make the countrey of Nauarre
desolate. Death of king Iohn of Albret and queene Katherine. Order of the iustice of
Nauarre.
21 Troubles at Malaga by reason of the priuiledges and iurisdiction of the Admiraltie. Punishment
of the inhabitants.
22 Contentions for the towne of Areualo, and reprehension of Velasques of Cuellar.
23 Pitifull estate of queene Ioane, mother to Charles of Austria, troubled in her sences.

24 Arcenals and stor^houses for munition appointed in Spaine.
25 Search of auncient* writings and instructions for the publike good, appointed by cardinall
Ximenes in Spaine, by the which many frauds were discouered, etc.
26 Algier taken by Horusco Barberousse, and the vaine attempts of the Spaniards.
27 Rigorous Edict in Spaine against the Genouois. The cause thereof, and the reuocation.
28 V^iust proceedings against the accused by the Inquisitors. Contention for the bishopricke of
Siguensa.

In this six and twentieth Booke are vnited the
Realmes of Castille, Arragon, and Nauarre, in
D. Charles of Austria.22 in Castille 1.43 in Leon 1.20 in Arragon 1.36 in Nauarre 4.
THe realme of Nauarre being conquered with so great happinesse
and ease,1512 was afterwards defended and kept with more difficultie.Nauarre.
About the moneth of May the English armie landed in Guipuscoa,
being eight thousand foot, most archers, and some other men
of warre, whereof the lord marquesse Dorset was Generall, who
stayed some dayes vpon those marches, attending the duke of Alua,
who was busie in subduing the vallies of Amescoa, Salazar,
and Roncal, with the helpe and diligence of colonell Vilalua: whose armie being fortified
with new troups sent from king Ferdinand, who was offended at the detention of his
embassadour,S. Iohn du pie^ de Port taken by the duke of Alua. the bishop of Zamora, in Bearn, it was led to Saint Iohn du pied de Port,
which place yeelded vnto him: From whence he sent word vnto the marquesse, what he
should doe to come and besiege Bayone. But the English generall thinking that the duke
of Alua had caused him to stay there for the conquest of Nauarre, which concerned his
master, after that he had burnt Saint Iohn de Lus, and done some other spoyles vpon the
sea coast, he imbarkt his men, and went home; saying, That he would returne another
time: besides, there was a brute of a great French armie which marcht through Guienne,
to make head against these Spanish and English forces; by reason whereof the duke of
Alua hauing fortified the castle of Pied de Port, and rased that of Montgelo he returned
into high Nauarre.Armie of Fre^ch goes into Nauarre. The French armie whereof the brute was, was led by Francis of Valois,
duke Angoulesme, who was afterwards French king, in the which there was king
Iohn of Albret, Charles of Montpensier, duke of Bourbon, Odet of Foix, vicont of Lautrec,
the earles of Palisse and Longueuille, and others, making about fortie thousand foot
and foure thousand horse. About the end of the yeare 1512, the king of Nauarre aduanced
with six thousand foot,King Iohn of Albret goes into his realme of Nauarre with an armie. and a thousand horse, accompanied with the lords of Palisse
and Longueuille, he entred into his countrey by the vallie of Roncal, where hee tooke
Burgui, hauing cut the Spaniards in peeces which were in garrison, with their commander
Valdes, captaine of king Ferdinands gard. On the other side the duke of Angoulesme
caused the duke of Bourbon and the lord of Lautrec, to enter by Guipuscoa, with ten
thousand foot, and foure hundred horse, who ruined Yrum, Vransu, Ojarcum, and the
townes of Harnam and Renterie, and besieged S. Sebastien, but they left it soone, the vicont
of Lautrec going to joyne with king Iohns forces, who marcht towards Pampelone.
At that time Diego Lopes of Ayala, lord of Ceuole, was gouernour of Fontarrabie,
who caused the platforme called Diego Lopes to be built towards France. The marshall

D. Pedro was in king Iohns armie, with many of the faction of Gramont, whose partisans
being dispersed throughout the realme, caused many places to reuolt to the king, as
Iohn Ramires of Baquedan,Places returne to the ebedience of king Iohn. lord of Saint Martin, the towne of Estella, Ladron of Mauleon,
that of Mirande, Martin of Gomi Tafalla, Pedro de Rada^, that of Murillo, Iaime Velez
de Medran, S. Care, with others by other men. The king thought that the citie of
Pampelone would haue done as much, but he was deceiued. Hereupon D. Alphonso of
Arragon, base sonne to king Ferdinand, and Archbishop of Saragosse, sent six hundred
men from Teruel, Daroca, and Albarrazin, to enter into Pampelone; who passing within
halfe a league of Saint Martin,Victorie of 90 men ouer 600 Arragonians. they were charged by fourescore and ten footmen of
the vallie of Roncal, and fiue horsemen, who defeated them, stript them into their shirts,
and sent them home: their colonell came to Olite to demaund aid, but he was in danger
to be hanged by the Archbishop. Anthonie of Fonseca recouered some of these reuolted
places, and brought the hostages to Pampelone, into the which he put himselfe. D.
Francisco of Beaumont, the constables cousen, set vpon Estella, and tooke the towne, but
not the castle, and recouered that of Bernette: and D. Pedro of Beaumont, the constables
brother, the castle of Montjardin. The duke of Alua being in the meane time in a maner
inclosed in betwixt the armies of the duke of Angoulesme, and the king of Nauarre:
he deceiued them, escaping by vnknowne wayes, and came with his armie to Pampelone.
And to the end the siege of Estelle should not stay and disturbe the forces of the
king of Castille, Diego Hernandes of Cordoua, was sent with a supplie to them that besieged
it: Wherefore Iohn Ramires of Baquedan being extreamely prest, was forced to
yeeld it, vpon condition, That they should depart with their armes, baggage, and ensigns
displayed,Iohn Ramires of Bequadan faithfull to his prince. refusing the great offers which king Ferdinand had made him, if he would come
to his seruice: So this good knight came to the king of Nauarres campe. The towne of
Larraga defended by a French captaine, was also yeelded by composition. The king of
Nauarre tooke the castle of Tiebas by force, where was the ladie of Gurendayn, of the
house of Artieda, whom he suffered to goe away freely: and hauing receiued a new
supplie of two thousand Germans,Pampelone besieged by king Iohn. he besieged Pampelone towards Saint Nicholas port,
where there were many sallies and skirmishes made, whereby the king of Nauarre vnderstood,
that the force of the besieged was great. The duke of Alua put some of the
faction of Gramont, whom he suspected out of the towne, and hauing visited those parts
of the towne which might be dangerous, ordering all things, and ramparing vp the
breaches which the enemies made with their furious batterie,Assault maintained by the garrison of Pa^pelone against the French. he prepared himselfe to
maintaine the Assault which was giuen on Saturday, the seuen and twentieth of September,
from the which the assailants were repulsed with great losse. King Ferdinand being
in the meane time at Logrogne, and aduertised of the estate of his affaires, hee had
drawne together the forces of Alua, Biscaie, Rioja, and part of Guipuscoa, notwithstanding
that a good part of the French armie was yet in those limits, being in all fifteene
thousand fighting men, assigning their rendez-vous at Pont de Royne, whither he sent
D. Pedro Manriques, duke of Nagera, surnamed the S^rong, to be generall of this armie.
At the brute whereof the king of Nauarre, being out of hope to take Pampelone, and
in great necessitie of victuals,Siege of Pampelone raised. Winter also tyring his armie, he raised his siege the last
day of Nouember, by the counsell and persuasion of the lord of Palisse, and other
captaines of experience: And the next day the duke of Nagera arriued with his armie,
whereof there was not any need, seeing that the siege was raysed, who for that reason
refused the battell which the French sent to present vnto him, by a king at Armes. So
king Iohn of Albret complaining his ill fortune, returned on this side the Pyrenees, in
the straits of which mountaines the reereward of the French armie was much troubled
by the Guipuscoans, and other mountainers, being forced to leaue in the mountaines
of Velate, and Leysondo, part of their artillerie, the which was drawne to Pampelone
with great pompe, in the castle of which citie there are many peeces to bee
seene at this day: By reason of which prowesse and good seruice, the king, besides many
exemptions and priuiledges,Armes of the prouince of Guipuscoa. added to the Armes of the prouince of Guipuscoa,
the twelue peeces of ordnance or in a field of azure, the which it carries at this day.

The duke of Nagera hauing brought his armie backe to Logrogne, the duke of Alua
remained Viceroy of Nauarre, which realme he brought all vnder the obedience of king
Ferdinand, except the castle of Moya, which held long for the kings of Nauarre, who
were expelled vnder a pretext of schisme, as we haue said.
Vpon the same occasion D. Bernardin of Car^ajal,Castille. cardinall of Saint Croix, and bishop
of Siguensa, was deposed by the Councell of Latran, from all Ecclesiasticall dignitie;
and to his bishopricke D. Frederic of Por^gal, bishop of Segobia, was preferred; to
Segobia D. Diego of Ribera, bishop of Majorca; and to that doctor Roderigo of Mercado,
Abbot of Saint Martha, borne at Ognate, who was afterwards bishop of Auila, and
President of the Chauncerie of Granado.
2 During the warre of Nauarre king Ferdinand sent a new supplie of men into Italie,
with the commaunder Solis, and was in a maner resolued to send the great captaine thither,
had not the counsell of some enuious diuerted him. The French affaires declining
there, the duke of Ferrara, who in all their actions had assisted them, found himselfe in
great danger to be depriued of his estate, and expelled by the Pope, his deadly enemie:
to preuent the which, and to purchase vnto himselfe friends and fauour, he set Fabrie^o Colonne,
his prisoner, at libertie, without ransome; by whose meanes, with the embassador of
Spaine and others, he obtained a safe conduct, with the which he went to Rome, to treat
of his affaires: but he could not make his peace with the Pope, being obstinately bent
to dispossesse him of Ferrara, and to vnite the citie to the estate of the Church, offering
him in recompence the countie of Ast,Pope Iulioes hatred to the duke of Ferrara. which he held not, but maintained that it was of
the patrimonie of the Church: so as Fabricio Colonne and the rest, who had assured his
comming to Rome, were forced to put themselues in armes, to warrant him, and to conduct
him to a place of safetie; whereof there followed great hatred betwixt the Pope
and the Colonnois. And king Ferdinand was no lesse displeased at these violent proceedings
of the Pope; for he had a particular affection vnto duke Alphonso, his kinsman,
borne of a daughter to king Ferdinand the first, of Naples. But to make an end of that
which had beene concluded by the league: that is, to (...) the French out of Italie, and
out of the world, if they could, D. Raymond of Gardona, Viceroy of Naples, who since
the battell of Rauenna had beene in his gouernement, returned this yeare with his armie
about Bolonia, to continue the warre. But the Pope and the Venetians finding
themselues seised of a good part of that which they pretended, refused to furnish money
for the entertainment of his armie, as had beene agreed by the treatie of the league:
so as there grew a great mutinie in the campe among the souldiers, for want of pay, and
the Viceroy was forced to retire, with great danger of his person, to Modena, where
he found meanes to recouer some money, with the which he returned, and kept his souldiers
together, who began to disband.
At that time there being a day appoynted at Mantoua, to consult of the affaires of
the warre, the Viceroy of Naples came thither, with deputies from the Pope, Emperor,
Venetians, and Suisses. There it was concluded, That they should put Maximilian
Sforce, sonne to Lewis Sforce, in possession of the duchie of Milan: And moreouer it was
propounded, to assaile the Florentines, who were friends and allied to the Crowne of
France, as wel for this cause, as to restore the familie of Medicis, expelled out of that commonweale,
to their goods and honours: the which the Pope did presse much, in fauour
of cardinall Iohn of Medicis, his legate, and others of that familie. This was the Viceroyes
first taske, after his returne to the armie, to lead it into the estate of Florence,
from whom he tooke the town of Prato, where there were slain aboue two thousand men
of the Florentines part,Estate of Florence vexed by the Viceroy of Naples. and many taken. Whereat the citie of Florence being amazed,
and their Councell vnprouided of forces and meanes to resist, they yeelded to the restitution
of the Medicis, and to whatsoeuer the Viceroy would impose vpon them. For
besides the summes of money which they payed for the entertainment of the Spanish
armie, and another summe vnto the Emperour, they made a league with king Ferdinand,
promising to entertaine two hundred men at armes in the armie of the league, and
yet the people were depriued of a good part of their libertie, by the cardinall of Medicis,
who created magistrats and officers at his pleasure.

These exploits being done in the Florentines countrey, the Viceroy led his armie to
Bresse, which the Venetians did besiege, so as the lord of Aubigny was out of hope to
be able to keepe it, this Spanish armie hauing so great a fame, for that it had humbled so
powerfull a commonweale as that of Florence: and therefore he did capitulate with
the Viceroy of Naples, although the Venetians had layed the siege, and yeelded it vpon
condition to depart himselfe and his men free, with their armes and baggage, their colours
flying, and without artillerie. After the taking of Bresse, the bishop of Gurcensis,
embassadour for the Emperour, came to Rome, whereas he of Spaine laboured much
to reconcile the Emperour and the Venetians, there remaining no difference but onely
for the citie of Vincence. This embassadour did also seeke to reconcile the Pope with
the Colonnois,League made against the Venetians. with whom he was much displeased, for the duke of Ferraraes cause. Yet
there was a new league made betwixt the Pope and the Emperour, against the Venetians,
approued by the Councell of Latra^, leauing a place for king Ferdinand to enter.
The reason of this league was, for that the Venetians would not yeeld to certaine conditions
which the Pope propounded vnto them. King Ferdinands doubt herein was,
that the Venetians would joyne with the French king, if they were too much prest: wherfore
his embassadour fauoured them what he could. The comming of Maximilian Sforce
to Verona, caused the bishop of Gurcensis to part from Rome, to establish him in the
Emperours name in the duchie of Milan, whither he conducted him, hauing found him
at Cremona, with the Viceroy D. Raymond of Cardona. The duke much desired by the
Milanois, was receiued there with great joy. The cardinal of Sion presented him the keies
in the Suisses name, who would haue the honour of his restoring.
Notwithstanding the league newly made against the Venetians, the Pope had a great
desire to ruine the duke of Ferrara: to preuent the which the embassadour of Spaine,
by commaundement from his king, did all good offices, and vsed all the meanes he could:
And this was one of the chiefe causes why king Ferdinand would not please the Pope,
 and enter into the league. Notwithstanding the duke shewing himselfe vngratefull (no
man knowes vpon what reason) procured a scandalous and horrible attempt against him,Iugratitude of the duke of Ferrara pretended by the Spaniards.
as the Spaniards write, persuading D. Ferdinand of Arragon, duke of Calabria, sonne to
king Frederic, and conspiring with him, to depriue him of his life. There was a certaine
monke who was messenger from the duke of Ferrara to him of Calabria, who had also
for negotiator on his part, Philip Copula, sonne to the earle of Sarno, whose head king
Ferdinand of Naples had caused to be striken off. This Copula had made some voyages
into France, and treated with king Lewis, to giue a retreat and meanes in his realme to
the duke of Calabria, being then in the Catholike kings Court at Logrogne, and
should haue saued himselfe in the French armie,Conspiracie againg king Ferdinand. which was about Pampelone, hauing resolued
first to set fire on certaine powder that was hidden in the kings lodging: But God
would not suffer so wicked a practise to take effect. The matter being discouered, Copula
was quartered, and D. Ferdinand duke of Calabria was sent prisoner to the castle of
Xatiua, neere vnto Valencia, where hee remained aboue ten yeares, vntill that the
Emperour Charles pardoned him, and set him at libertie. Hereupon king Ferdinand
conceiued so great a hatred against the duke of Ferrara, as hee commaunded the
Viceroy of Naples to ayd the Pope with his armie, or any other thing hee had, without
any respect to the pretended pay. The Venetians seeing the Pope and Emperour
leagued together to annoy them, and that the Emperour would not giue eare to the Catholike
kings embassadour, who did still persuade him to make a peace with their commonwealth,
and to take a summe of money in the place of Vincence, they joyned with
the French king (who had not wholly forgotten the affaires of Italie, and did still hold the
castles of Milan and Cremona) at the same time when as a truce was accorded betwixt
king Lewis and king Ferdinand,(...) betwixt ^rance and Spaine. for a yere, to the great discontent of the king of England,
who was readie to enter into France, and attended to be assisted by the Spanish armie:
by reason whereof the French king did deferre the recouerie of the realme of Nauarre
for a time, to the which he was greatly solicited by the dispossessed kings, Iohn and
Katherine. Which truce the French king had much desired, to assure his realme on that
side, being aduertised that the king of England made great preparation to assaile him,

being still prest thereunto by Pope Iulio,1513 who conceiuing great and pernitious enterprises
in his mind, died at Rome in Februarie,Death of Pope Iulio. in the yeare 1513. By his death the duke of
Ferrara was freed from great care and feare; who embracing the occasion, recouered
some places in Romania, and had taken more if the Viceroyes armie had not stopt him,
being lodged betwixt Regio and Plaisance, through the fauour whereof Parma and
Plaisance came into the hands of Maximilian Sforce, the new duke of Milan. The cardinals
being assembled,Pope Leo chosen they did chuse Iohn de Medicis, cardinall of Sancta Maria in Dominica,
for Pope, and called him Leo the tenth.
The Viceroy being aduertised of the truce betwixt Fraunce and Spaine, he began to
resolue vpon his retreat to Naples, sending for the garrisons which were in Tortona
and Alexandria; and causing the armie to march towards the riuer of Trebia, hauing
with him twelue hundred men at armes, and eight thousand foot, all choyce souldiers:
the which did much terrifie the Milanois and their duke, knowing that the French king
made great leuies of men to recouer that estate, and fearing that the Suisses, who were
all their hope, would not be able to defend them, if the French armie did presse them
on the one side, and the Venetians on the other: wherefore at their intreatie, and the
Popes intercession, the Viceroy and the Spanish armie stayed, and held the warre in
suspence.
The truce which the two great kings had made,Nauarre. assured king Ferdinands conquest of
Nauarre, the noblemen and Estates of which realme, after the retreat of the French from
before Pampelone, deputed the constable D. Lewis of Beaumont, earle of Lerin, to take
the oath of fealtie and homage, as to their king. And the duke of Alua being returned
into Castille,Diego Fernandes of Cordoua, Viceroy of Nauarre. there remained Viceroy of Nauarre in his place D. Diego Fernandes of Cordoua,
marquesse of Comares.
4 The great prosperities of D. Ferdinand king of Arragon, Regent of Castille,
were accompanied with some griefe,Castille. for that he had no lawfull issue male: but queene
Germain his second wife, by whom he had no children, was more perplexed, for her
owne interest, who by a womanish affection sought curiously for all deuices to conceiue,
thinking by art and humane helpes to obtaine that which comes from the meere
bountie and blessing of God: Wherefore it happened this yeare (it is not knowne by
whose aduice) that,Drinke giuen to king Ferdinand by the ^^his wife. with the kings consent, the queene her selfe, D. Maria of Velasco,
wife to D. Iohn of Velasco, superintendent of the treasure, and D. Isabella Faure, made a
drinke, or broth, for the king, to giue him force and vigour: But he had no sooner taken
it, but he found nature toucht with an incurable infirmitie, whereof he languished continually,
and in the end dyed. This was done at Carroncillo, whither the king was come
to desport himselfe with the ladies: And it is not credible that they did present him this
potion to any other end, but to quicken him in Venus sports; for all the queenes happinesse
and greatnesse depended vpon the kings life. Hee was like to haue dyed of
this drinke in the monasterie of Mejorado; but beeing somewhat recouered by physicke,
hee came to Vailledolit, to an assemblie of the Estate, where hee dispatcht many
affaires.
5 The French king in the meane time had in a manner dispossest Maximilian Sforce
of all his duchie of Milan,Defeat of the French at Nouar^ by the Suisses. he had onely remaining Como and Nouara: Into the last he
had put himselfe with many ensignes of Suisses, and was besieged by the French, where
followed that memorable sallie of colonell Mott^n and his Suisses, and the defeat of the
French, with great slaughter, and the losse of their artillerie, as you may read at large in
that historie: whereupon the French repast the Alpes. And on the other side D. Raymond
of Cardone, Viceroy of Naples, being with his armie vpon the passage of the riuer of
Pau, opposite to the Venetian armie, led by Bartholmew of Aluiano, who hauing newes
of this rout of the French, retired for feare to Ponte Vico, and from thence to Tomba,
neere to the riuer of Thesin. The Viceroy suffering them to passe, busied himselfe
about the reduction of Genoua, which the French had deliuered into the hands of Adornes
and their factions: sending, at the instance of Iohn and Octauia Fregose, three thousand
Spaniards thither, led by the marquesse of Pescare, himselfe following with the rest of
the armie. Wherewith the French and the Adorn^s their partisans, being amazed, they

left the citie, and Octauia Fregose was made duke. In the meane time Aluiano tooke
Lignago, by the means of Iohn Paul Baillon, who slue most of the Spaniards and Germans
that were there in garrison. He also attempted Verona in vaine. All which did much incense
the Viceroy of Naples, who passing the Pau with his armie, did soone take Bergamo,
Pescare, and Bresse, Aluiano flying before him, who hauing diuided his armie into garrisons,
put himselfe into Padoua.
Pope Leo at his first aduancement trying by the best meanes he could to dissolue the
Councell of Pisa, he then receiued into grace D. Bernardin of Caruajal, cardinall of
Saint Croix, and Frederic of Saint Seuerin, deposed from their dignities of cardinalls,
and depriued of their reuenues and benefices by Pope Iulio and the Councell of Latran.
These two hauing stayed a while at Florence, by the Popes commaundement, like priuat
men, they came by his permission to Rome, where they entred by night, and the next
day they presented themselues vnto the Consistorie, in all humilitie, where, vpon their
knees,C^rdinals receiued into grace. they acknowledged their faults, and demaunded pardon, the which they obtained,
approuing the decrees of the Councell of Latran, and the election of the present Pope,
and confessing their deposition to haue beene just, and that the Councell of Pisa was false
and abhominable: whereupon they were absolued, and went and embraced all the cardinals
in their rankes, who moued not from their places; after which they put on their cardinals
weeds, and sat in their vsuall places: and although they did not recouer their benefices
and reuenues, yet afterwards they had other things in recompence.
6 At the same time the South sea at the Indies was discouered:Indies. For Vasco Nugnes of
Balboa, jealous that any other should obtain commission from the king to that effect, and
depriue him of the honour of this discouerie, which he had now attempted, without attending
any answer from Spaine, nor the 1000 Spaniards which he had demaunded from
the king, parting from the Antique of Darien, in September this yeare 1513, with 190
Spaniards, in a galleon and ten barkes, he came to Carecta, where he landed his troupe,
and marcht into the countrey of the Cachico Ponsa, whom he forced to giue him gold,
and guides to conduct him to the mountaines, whereof notice had beene giuen him by
the Cachico D. Charles Panquiaco. With these guides they came into a countrey called
Quareca, and the Cachico Torecha, where they were forced to fight: They slue the lord
and dispersed his people, not accustomed to see such great wounds as swords of yron
make, nor to heare then noyse of harquebuses, nor the biting of furious dogs, which the
Spaniards led to the warre with them, whom they caused to teare in peeces certaine Indian
Sodomites, whom they found in that countrey. Passing on, Vasco Nugnes went vp
certaine high mountains, with 67 of his souldiers, leauing the rest to gard them that were
hurt and sicke, in a burrough at the foot of the mountaine. Being neere vnto the top, he
caused his troupe to stay, and would himselfe goe vp alone, where he discouered the waters
of the South Ocean,South sea discouered by Vasco Nugnes of Balb^a. for the which he was exceeding glad, and gaue God thanks, and
then he called all the souldiers to haue them see it. There they made mounts of stones, in
signe of possession taken. Being come from the mountaine, they went to assaile a Cachico,
called Chiape, who being obstinat, they put to flight: yet being friendly inuited he returned,
and made himselfe vassall to the king of Castille, accompanying him vnto the
South sea shore, whereof they tooke possession, and drew a writing on the 29 of September,
being S. Michaels day 1515. By this seruice which Vasco Nugnes of Balboa did then
vnto the king, he well deserued his pardon, if he had offended in any thing. The company
which he had left at Quareca being joyned with him, he past a great riuer with 80 Spaniards
leauing the rest vpon the banke, and went and forced another Cachico, called Coquera,
who put himselfe in defence, as Chiape had done, and brought him vnder his obedience.
Then thrust on with a great courage, he would enter into that sea, notwithstanding that
Chiape did dissuade him, saying, That the current was strong and troublesome: so as he was in
daunger of drowning, seeking to recouer a neere island, where he arriued with much
paine and peril. There raigned there a Cachico called Tumaco, who made offer to
fight, but being aduertised by the Indians, guides to Chi^pe; that the Spainiards
were good men, this Tumaco sent them a sonne of his, to know what they demanded:
Vasco Nugnes spake courteously vnto him, apparelled him, and him looking glasses,

with such other toies, the which he carrying to his company, it moued them so, as Tumaco
came himselfe in person to the Spanish troope with shews of loue and friendship, of
whome the Spaniards demanded perles, for they saw the Indians of his company weare
some, whereof they did furnish them with a good quantity, and aduertised them
that there was a plash neere hand,Perles. where they did fish some as big as a mans eye, the
which did please the couetous Spaniards and their Captaines: but for that they were
few, and there were great difficulties and dangers, they deferred this prey vnto another
voyage, wherfore they returned to their companions, and past into the country of the
Cachico Chiape, where they refresht themselues, and rested some daies. Chiape the Cachico
did also fish vpon his shoare, and gaue them aboue foure charges of perles. Vasco
Nugnes of Balboa tooke his leaue of him, leauing some Spaniards with him, for he wept
being much grieued at their departure, for the opinion he had of their wisdom: then they
past a riuer to come into the countrie of a Cachico called Teoca, wher the Spaniards were
receiued with great ioy, and Teoca gaue them presents of gold and perles. From thence
they went through desart and barren places, full of Tygres, and Lyons with hunger,
thirst, and extreame danger, into the lands of Pacra, a cruell tyrant, and a Sodomite,
who pursued by the conscience of his owne wickednes, thought to escape by flight, but ^e
was brought backe, and after information made of his tyrannies, and dishonesty, Vasco Nugnes
caused him to be torne in peeces by his Mastiues, with foure other lords, his confederates
and ministers of such filthines, and then the peeces to bee burnt: Hee called the
cou^trie of Pacra, All Saints. Vasco Nugnes going from thence, he came to Buquebuca, the
lord of which region, thinking that the Spaniards were diuine people, he was ashamed to
appeare before them, holding himselfe vnworthy, but he sent them some vessels of gold
well wrought, and craued pardon of them. Going on with more desire to find victuals than
gold, they saw certain Indians which crost their way, who being brought back vnto them
and demanded of what region they were, and where there was any victuals, they said, that
they were subiect vnto a king called Corizo, who desired to know them, and to bee their
friend, of whome afterwards they receiued thirty plates of golde, offering them all that
was in his power, and intreating them to aide him against another Cachico his enemy, in
whose countrie hee assured them they should find great wealth: Balboa promised him
friendship, aide and fauour, presenting him with their hatchets and other iron works, and
then he past into the land of Pecorosa, where he found victuals, and receiued gold and slaues,
and hauing left his sick men there, he went on with sixtie souldiers onely, vntill he came vnto
the Cachico Tumanama, of whome D. Charles Panquiaco had spoken vnto him; whom
he surprised in his lodging at night: And for that he was giuen to the brutish sin against
nature, Balboa was ready to haue him burnt, but thinking to draw from him some secret of
his hidden treasure,Hope of gaine make vice remaine vnpunished. and of the qualitie of the countrie, he was content to reprehend him
sharply, and to keep him prisoner, giuing some satisfaction to his accusers: and there Balboa
remained the rest of that yeare 1513.
7 The Spaniards affaires prospering after this manner at the Indies, the Armie
which was in Italie against the Venetians,Italy. was no lesse succesfull. After the retreat of
Aluiano the Venetian generall, the emperours lieutenant beseeged Padoua in vaine. The
viceroy of Naples being resolued to put part of his armie into Bresse, and part into Bargamo,
and there to winter, he was importuned by his soldiers, to keep the field with the Germanes,
hauing the Caualarie of Naples, and the Popes, with 4500 Spaniards; hauing
sent one thousand Spaniards to assist the duke of Milan: The viceroy hauing with these
forces sackt Bouoelta,Cruell warre of the Spaniards against the Venetians. past the Brent, and marcht vnto the sea, burning townes and villages,
and all the houses of the gentlemen of Venice, which were in that countrie: and the
more to afflict and braue them, he caused ten peeces of his greatest ordnance to be mounted
at a place called Marguera, and shot against the city of Venice, whereof the bullets fel
at S. Seconds church, with trouble and amazement to all the inhabitants, and the more,
for that night comming, it did represent vnto them more plainely, the great fiers and ruines
of their houses of pleasure in the countrey; the which they held to be the greatest
indignitie that euer the common wealth of Venice receiued: which thinking to reuenge
they encreased their disgrace: for Aluiano hauing assured the Senat, that the enemies

armie laden with spoiles in those moorish places, and trenches of riuers, would find
such difficulties in their retreat, as it would bee easie to put them to rout, and therefore
had gotten leaue to draw their forces to field after that hee had coasted the
enemies, seeking to stoppe their passage at the riuer of Brenta, being himselfe deceiued
and surprised, as hee thought to stop their passage going to Verona, whether
they marcht onely with an intent to retyre, hee was fought with all, and vanquished
about Vincence,Venetians defeated by the Spaniards hauing lost aboue fiue thousand Venetians, and many Captaines
slaine: vpon the place, with their Pouididor Andrew Lauredan, who was slain by
the contention of two souldiers, whose prisoner hee should be, besides many captaines
and gentlemen of Venice, that were prisoners: which rout did much trouble the affaires
of that state. What succeeded afterwards in that warre, I leaue to other Histories
whome it concernes more particularly.
King Ferdinand being much impayred by his languishing infirmitie, growen by
reason of the potion which had beene giuen him, attended as well as hee could the
gouernment of his realmes: but hee had a good Councell, and faithfull ministers, so
as his affaires both of state and iustice, were nothing impayred, neither were they
in any sort peruerted.Forts built in Afrike. This yeare there was a fort built at Oran, and another at a
place called Pegnon, or the rocke of Alger in Afrike, whereas the crowne of Castille
held Melille, Casa^a, Oran, Masalquiuer, Tripoli, and Bugie, and the two rockes
or Pegnons of Alger, and of Velez, besides the Princes and townes, that were Tributarie
vnto it. And so ended that yeare 2513.
8 In the yeare one thousand fiue hundred and foureteene,1514 Vasco Nugnes of Balboa, hauing
staied a good space in the countrie of the Cachico Tumanama discouering the mines
and treasures of that region,Behauiour of Vasco Nugnes of Balboa at the Indies. he parted from thence, leading one of that princes sons with
him, to be instructed in the Romish religion, and came into the country of D. Charles Panquiaco,
who receiued Balboa being sicke verie courteously, with all his companions, giuing
the^ al the ease and commodities he could, and when they would depart, he presented them
with 20 pounds of gold. Being thus satisfied of him, they retyred to their fort of the Antique
of Darien, the which they found much better peopled than they had left it: for
vpon the brute of the great riches that were on the firme land, many were come from Hispaniola,
and the citie of S. Domingo to inhabit there. It is thought that Balboa brought beside
the contentment he had to haue discouered the south sea, the value of aboue 100000
Castillans in gold,Booty taken at the Indies. besides perles and other precious jewels in great aboundance, hauing
made a long and dangerous voyage, gone through many barbarous natio^s and enemies, by
desart and vnknown places,Trauels endured with great patience and happines by the Spaniards. hauing not only to incounter men, but Tygres and Lyons,
hunger and thirst, thick woods and craggy mountaines, and yet neuer was put to rout, neuer
lost a man, nor himselfe wounded in any sort. Of al their spoiles they laied to the value of
20000 ducats for the kings right; and then they diuided the rest among them, euerie one
receiuing according to his place, yea their mastiues had pay aswel as the men, for it is reported
that a dog belonging vnto Vasco Nugnes,Mastiues receiued pay and a part of the spoile among the Spaniards. called Leoncillo, had for his part 500 Castillans,
receiuing a greater pay than a harquebusier. After that Vasco Nugnes had ordered
some things in the fort of Darien, he sent a friend of his called Arbolancha, born at Bilbao,
into Spain, to carry news vnto king Ferdinand of his voyages and discoueries, and the fift
penny of what they had gotten.
At that time the French king did sollicit both k. Ferdinand and the emperor Maximilian
to conclude the marriage betwixt D. Ferdinand brother to prince Charles of Austria,
and the lady Renee, the French kings second daughter, for whose dowrie hee would quit
his pretensions to the duchie of Milan: but hauing made a peace with the king of England,
by a marriage contracted betwixt him and Marie that kings sister, he changed his opinion,Designes of Pope Leo to put strangers out of Italy.
and gaue ouer that treatie for Renee and Ferdinand. The Pope hauing diuers designes
to free Italie of strangers, hauing no desire to see the French king lord of Milan, yet
he entertained him with this hope, to make vse of him and his meanes, to get the realme
of Naples from k. Ferdinand, to settle his brother Iulian of Medicis king there, and therof he
had already had some practise with the Venetia^s.Pope seekes to get the realme of Naples. To fauor the Popes designes, being profitable
for the common-weale of Venice, Andrew Gritti was appointed by the Senat to be

generall of an army to inuade the banks of Apulia,1514 thinking by that meanes to diuert the
Spanish army out of Lombardie, and that they should haue none but the Germanes to incounter.
Hereupon Bartholmew of Aluiano hauing surprised certain Spaniards, he caused
them to be hanged at Padoua; saying that they had been suborned by their co^manders to
kill him in treason: the which put the viceroy of Naples into such a rage, as he made a miserable
spoile of the country about Padoua, and hauing chased Bernardin Antinola, nephew
to Aluiano, he shut him into Citadelle, which place being battered, was taken partly by a
breach, and partly by scalado. Bernardin of Antinola and his men were carried away prisoners,
and the place sackt. To recompence this losse, Aluiano defeated some troups of light
horse nere to Este: the army which besieged Creme, being hardly retained for want of pay
was forced to retire.Spanniards surprised in theire lodging The armie of Spain after the taking of Citadelle, diuided it selfe into
diuers lodgings, the viceroy to Verona, the Marques of Pescara to Lendenara, with 3000
Spaniards: there came about ^00 men at armes to Rouigo, of which D. Garcia Manrique
was captain, who suffered themselues to be surprized by Aluiano, who led both him and all
his company away prisoners: some write they were 300 horse, and 1000 Spanish foot. On
the other side Renzo de Cer^, being freed from the siege of Creme which hee had defended
valiantly, being fortified with men, hee surprised Bergamo by intelligence of the inhabitants,
but soon after the viceroy recouered it againe, hauing ioined his Spaniards with the
forces of Milan, led by Siluio Sauello, Renzo, who was within it, yeelding it vpon honorable
conditions. The Bergamasques were punished for their rebellion by the purse, redeeming
the sack of the town, and other punishments prepared for them, for great sums of money:
the which did much displease the Spaniards, who were in hope that the spoile of this
town should haue been giuen to them. Winter approaching, the armies were lodged and
for that it was bruted that the Fench king prepared a great power to passe into Italy in the
spring, D. Raymond of Cardone the viceroy, who had his Spanish army much diminished,
went to the emperor to Inspruch, to take councel touching the affairs of the future warre.
At Rome the embassadors for the emperor, King Ferdinand, and French king vsed, their
art and skil to win the Popes fauor for their masters: but he being cunning, politike, and
enemy to them all, discouered not his conceits, but entertained them with vaine hopes.
10 About the end of this yere, before that k. Ferdinand had any intelligence of the successe
of Vasco Nugnes of Balboa,Pedro Arias of Auila made viceroie of the firme land at the Indies it was resolued in councel, to send to the Antique of Darien,
and into the region of Castille del or, a knight for gouernor whose name was Pedro Arias
of Auila, born at Segobia: which charge was demanded by many, Arbolancha whome
Vasco Nugnes had sent into Spain, being not yet ariued, for otherwise without doubt that
charge had bin giuen him in recompence of his labors and great seruice which he had done
vnto the king in the discouery of so rich countries: yet he was made gouernor of the coast
towards the South sea: but D. Iohn Rodrigo of Fonseca, bishop of Burgos, who had the
superintende^cy of the affaires of the Indies, and did much fauor Pedro Arias, protracted the
time to make the dispatch of his prouision, yet the sentence giuen against him at the suit of
the bacheler Enciso was cancelled and made voide. Pedro Arias then hauing imbarked
at Saint Lucar of Barrameda,Iohn Cabedo first Bishop of the Antique of Darien with one thousand fiue hundred men in 17 vessels,
the 14 of May, hauing in his company, frier Iohn Cabedo first bishop of the Antique of
Darien, and first Prelat of the firme land at the Indies, and for pilot Iohn Vespucio, Florentin,
he sailed in 38 daies to the Antique, where he was receiued with great ioy, and Vasco Nugues
of Balboa lodged him in his own lodging, with al the honor he could deuise, and was informed
by him of the whole estate of that country, and of the discouery which he had made
of Castille delor, for so he had named it, by reason of the great riches thereof, and of
the South Sea, and of pearles: wherewith Pedro Arias de Auila was verie much pleased,
finding that there was worke done, and that there remained nothing but to people
and husband it. He made the Licenciat Gaspar of Espinose, borne at Medina del Campo,
Alcayde maior, or president of his Iustice, and according to his charge, he beganne
to diuide the prouinces to his people, sending Francis Bezerra with 550 Spaniards
towards the Riuer of Dabayba, who indured great miseries there, and returned with notable
losse. Iohn of Ayora with foure hundred men was directed into the countrie
of the Cachico D. Charles Panquiaco, a most faithfull friend to the Spaniards,

who notwithstanding was so ingratefully intreated by them,1514 and the Indians his subiects
so cruelly and couetously vext, as they were forced to take armes, and to chase away Ayora,
who returned flying from whence he parted. Captain (...) being sent towards Caribana,
and Barthelmew Hurtado to Acla, they had no better successe; not others in other
places: so as Vasco Nugnes, was not so fortunate, but Pedro Arias and his company were
as vnfortunate in all their enterprises. King Ferdinand toward the end of this yeare 1514
did so decay in his health, as there were apparent signes of a dropsie in him: One of the
captaines which Pedro Arias de Auila, called Gonsalo of Badajos, had sent to people in the
maine land, tooke his course towards Nombre de Dios, in the beginning of the yeare
1515,1515 where hee found Indians that were strange and vntractable, so as hauing increased
his troupe, being about 80 Spaniards, by the arriuall of Lewis of Mercado, who brought
50 more, they went in company towards the south Sea, and being come to a place called
Coyba, they sackt it, for that the lord of the country called Yuana flying the acquainta^ce
of these bearded men, had retired himselfe into the woods: then they made prey of many
things, and especially of slaues. Passing on by a riuers side, on the 5 day they met with two
Indians laden with bread, which a blind Cachico sent vnto them, who brought them to
the place where this Cachico dwelt, with whom they made good cheare, and receiued presents
of gold with information of those countries, which they sought, and guides to conduct
them. Continuing on their course they came wher there raigned a lord called Taracura,
who also gaue the^ a good quantity of gold: but yet they did not forbeare to fier a borough
belonging to a brother of his, for that he was not to be found at their arriual: then
passing by the countries of the Cachicos Cheru and Nathan they receiued so much gold
and other things, as the treasure which they got in that voyage, amounted to aboue 80000
ducats, and at the least 400 slaues. But, as prosperity makes people careles and ouerweening,
being come into the countrie of a mighty lord called Pariza,Spaniards defeated and slain by the Indians. holding no order nor discipline,
thinking they should find friendlie reception in all places, they were suddenly charged
by a great number of Indians, who slue 80 of his Spaniards, put the rest to flight, and
got their gold and slaues, with all the booty which they had made in this voyage. The same
yere Gaspar of Morales being sent by the same gouernour with 150 Spaniards towards S.
Michaels gulph, he past, with the help of the Cachicos Chiape and Tumaco, into the isla^d of
Tarareque, leading 70 men only with him, being drawne on by the fame of perles and other
riches which were th^re, and vpon that shoare: there he had three incounters, wheras
the Indians shewed themselues braue, seeking to repulse the Spaniards, but at the fourth
charge they were vanquished, and the Cachico brought to obedience, by the meanes of
some Indians that were friends, and did accompany the Spaniards, who did highly praise
them,Perles in aboundance. and extol their inuincible power: Being friends, the Spaniards, were well intreated
by this lord, and receiued of him aboue 110 markes of perle, in recompence whereof they
gaue him hatchets and other smal mercery wares, of the which he and his Indians made
great esteeme: and this Cachico grew so familiar, as he discouered vnto Gaspar of Morales
all the riches of those islands, and moreouer made himselfe vassall and tributarie to the king
of Castille, promising to giue him yerely 100 markes of perle: he suffered himselfe to be
baptized, and was called Pedro Arias, by the gouernors name, and with this good successe
Gaspar of Morales returned hauing sped better than the rest. The gouernor Pedro Arias in
the mean time being entred into a great quarrel against Vasco Nugnes of Balboa (whether it
were through enuy,Mutinies at the Indies through en^ie. for that the one had been more happy in discouering, then hee in gouerning
of those new found cou^tries, or through the insolencie of Balboa, who scoft at his
enterprises, and the aduersities of his captains:) it did much trouble his gouernment: to pacifie
the which, and to reconcile them, frier Iohn Cauedo, the new bishop, tried all the meanes
he could, causing Vasco Nugnes to marrie Pedro Arias daughter: but notwithstanding this
allyance, they fel againe to great discord, which proceeded so far, as Vasco Nugnes being
in his gouernment towards the south sea, where he had caused foure Carauels to be built
to continue his conquests, the gouernour Arias caused him to be adiourned, and forced
him to appeare in justice at the Antique of Darien, where being arriued, he was laied hold
on, and the procurator fiscall pleading against him, he accused him of mutinies and other
insolences committed, for the which he had beene absolued; yet they condemned him to

lose his head, with fiue of his companions: the which did wonderfully incense all the
Spaniards that were in that countrie,Vasca Nugnes of (...). who lamented with reares the pittifull end of so
braue a Captaine, vnder whose conduct and good fortune they did hope in short time to
be the richest men in Europe.
11 Whilest these things past at the Indies, the councell of Spaine was in great difficulties
for the affaires of Italie,(...) by the death of Lewis 12. the French king, who dyed the
first of Ianuarie, this yere 1515, to whom Francis duke of Angoulesme had succeeded, a
young, braue, and valiant Prince, who at the first intituled himselfe duke of Milan, with
an intent to pursue the right of his predecessor and father in law: wherefore hauing confirmed
the peace made with the English, and vpon a hope of marriage betwixt the ladie
Ren^e, yonger daughter to the deceased king, being then but nine yeres old, and prince
Charles, who began to gouern his estates of the Netherlands, being assured of his friendship,
he prepared himselfe for the warre of Italie. It was contracted with the earle of Nassau
Prince Charles his embassador,(...) prince Charles of Aus^iria and Ren^e of Fra^ce that to the Princesse his future spouse should be giuen
600 thousand crownes, and the duchie of Berry in dowrie, in regard whereof hee should
renounce al rights and pretensions which she might haue to her mothers or fathers goods,
that is, to the duchies of Britaine and Milan, and moreouer, that prince Charles should be a
mediator to the king D. Ferdinand his grandfather, for the restoring of Iohn of Albret and
Catherine his wife, to their realm of Nauarre: and on the other side that king Francis should
aid prince Charles with men and shipping, when as (after the death of king Ferdinand, which
approached) it should be fit for him to passe into Spaine, where hee feared some opposition,
by his brother D. Ferdinand, who was bred vp and much beloued in Spain King Francis
sought to prolong the truce made by king Lewis his predecessor with king Ferdinand;
to win the Popes fauour, and to pacifie the Suisses: but hee found opposition in all these
there: for these Potentates were directly contrarie to the design which he made vpon the
duchie of Milan, and it was bruted that the Suisses prepared to inuade Burgongue, or
Dauphine.League again^^ king Francis. Besides, there was a streit league made betwixt the emperour, king Ferdinand,
and the duke of Milan, to force the French king to quit the title of duke Milan, and to
renounce his pretended right to the duchie. And there was another league made betwixt
the French king and the Venetians in that respect.
At that time Pedro Nauarro, earle of Albeto, remained prisoner among the French,
since the battell of Rauenna: for whose redemption king Ferdinand did not care, for that
some noblemen Castillans, of lesse merit than himselfe, through emulation of his vertue,
had imputed the losse of that battell vnto him:Pedro Nauar^^ serues the French king. which this wise and iuditious captaine
apprehended, and thinking his seruices were ill rewarded, hee agreed to serue the French
king, quitting the countie of Albeto, and all that hee held in the king of Castilles
dominions, making all acts and protestations in that case required: After which he began
to leuie troups of foot in Gascoine, seeming that they with other forces should serue
for the recouerie of the realme of Nauarre: but the princes whome it concerned, knewe
well that this great preparation was for the duchie of Milan, so as euerie one stood vpon
his gard.
King Ferdinand being bound by the league to inuade France by Cattelonia, and Guipuscoa,
he approached neere to Burgos,Enterprises of king F^^dinand against the French king. where hauing beene verie sicke some daies in the
monasterie of Mejorada, hee past at Aranda of Duero, from whence he sent Queene Germaine
his wife into Arragon, to assist at the Estates at Monson, and to prouide for that
which should be necessarie, if the warre grew hot in France, to the end hee should receiue
no harm on that side, himselfe taking the charge of Castille, and of the frontier of Guipuscoa.
Being come to Burgos, he called the estates, with whose aduice and aid he prouided
for the sea coast and the realme of Nauarre,Nauarre incorporated to the crowne of Castille. the which at that time, as a conquest made with
the forces of Castille, he did solemnly incorporate for euer to that crown: And for that
his charges would be verie great for the execution of those enterprises which hee had in
hand, namely for the conquest and defence of those places which hee held in Afrike and at
the Indies, and to free the seas from pyrats, the Pope gaue him leaue to raise certaine
summes of money vpon the Clergie for two yeares. His infirmity increasing, hee had such
continuall faintings, as on the seuen and twentieth of Iune, they thought hee would haue

died: wherefore finding himselfe neere his end, he desired to make his will, and caused it
to be written,Testament of king Ferdinand leauing his daughter Queene Ioane for his generall heire, and the infant D.
Ferdinand his grand child, gouernour of Castille; to whome he gaue for gouernour D.
Gonsal of Guzman treasorer of Calatraua, and for his Schoolemaster D. Aluaro Osorio
bishop of Astorga, hauing a great desire to cause the three masterships of Castille to fall
into his hands after his death; whereupon he made orders which hee thought might take
place, but afterwards he reuoked them. He had some amendment, and came to Aranda
of Duero, whether Anthony Augustine, his Chancellor of Arragon came, whom he caused
to be apprehended,Chancellor of A^^gon accused to haue sought to dishonor queen Germaine. and committed, being informed that he had presumed to attempt
against the honor of the queene, his wife: for seeing her too desirous to haue children, and
the king her husband by reason of his age and infirmitie, too weake, he had offered her his
seruice too familiarly. This Chancellor remained in prison, till after the kings death, and
then was set at liberty by the Cardinal Xtmenes, who was gouernor of Spaine. The same
yeare there hauing been an enteruiew at Vienne in Austria, betwixt the emperour Maximili^^,
and Ladislaus king of Hongarie, and Bohemia, the marriages were accorded of
the infant Ferdinand, with Anne Daughter to the said king of Hongarie, and of Marie sister
to prince Charles of Austria, Infanta of Castille, with Lewis sonne and heir to the said king
Ladislaus.
13 King Francis past into Lombardy, with a great army: what succeeded in those wars
you may read at large in the French Historie. The Pope seeing all things prosper for the
French, made an accord with the king: they had an enteruiew at Bolonia, with great
shewes of friendship;Enteruiew betwixt Pope Leo and king Fran^^^. there they confirmed their league, and conferred long of the conquest
of Naples, for the French king: but they resolued to deferre it till after the death of
king Ferdinand, which they knew to be neere: the Pope hauing no desire of it for the quiet
of Italie, alleaging for excuse, that the time of the league which hee had with the Catholike
king, did not yet expire of sixeteene months, yet in shew he seemed verie willing
to countenance that conquest, so as the French king (who was well content to haue it deferred
vntil another time, for that his treasur was exhausted) was verie wel satisfied. There
the Pragmatike sanction was abolished,Pragmatike sanction abolished. the Pope granting liberty to the king, to the preiudice
of the clergy of France, to name and present men at his pleasure, to ecclesiastical dignities
and benefices being voide within his realme; a priuiledge which belonged to
Chapters and Colledge: they made many other agreements to the contentment one of
another.
In this estate stood the affaires of Italie, towards the end of king Ferdinands daies,
whose disease did vndermine him by little and little yet he would needs part from Segobia,
to goe into Arragon to the estates, whether he had sent Queene Germaine his wife, transporting
himselfe to Calataiub: but he was forced to returne into Castille, as well for the
affaires of the realme, as to giue order to prouide men for Italie in fauour of the emperor
Maximilian, who made preparation to enter it in the Spring, and also to care for the defence
of that which he held in Afrike. At that time was the marriage betwixt D. Alfonso
Peres of Guzman, or Aluaro duke of Medina Sydonia, and D. Anna of Arragon, daughter
to D. Alfonso of Arragon, the kings Neece: to whom one of his Councel comming from
visiting a certaine woman, whom they held for a Saint in Spaine, called the holie woman
of Barca, reported from her, that hee should bee of a good courage, for hee should not die
before he had conquered Ierusalem: but this good woman was deceiued.
This yeare dyed of a double quarten Ague, the great Captaine Gonsalo Fernandes of
Cordoua duke of Sessa,Death of D. Gonsalo Fernandes of Cordoua, called the great Captaine. Terranoua, of Saint Ange, marquesse of Bitonto, Prince of Squilaci,
and Constable of the realme of Naples. Among the other vertues of this famous
man, hee is much commended for his great chastity, a rare thing in a Spaniard: his end
was in the seuenty third yeare of his age, leauing by his wife D. Maria Henrique, one only
daughter and heire, named D. Eluira of Cordoua: his bodie lies in the monastery
of Saint Ierosme, in that citie. The king hearing of the death of this worthy man,
sent to comfort his widow and daughter.
14 In the yeare one thousand fiue hundred and sixeteene,1516 which was the last of
king Ferdinands life, there arriued in Castille, at a place called the Sereine, doctor

Adrian Florent deane of Louuain, embassador for Prince Charles of Austria, and his
Scholemaster, who in time was made bishop of Tortosa, then Cardinall, and successiuely
Pope. His charge in shew, was for matters of gouernement, against the Lord
of Cheures, who was the princes gouernour? but in effect he came into Spaine, to prie
and looke into the state of things, and to aduertise the prince: And the King dying,
which was held to bee verie neere, hee had authoritie and commaundement to take
possession in his name of the gouernement of the realmes of Castille, Arragon, and the
rest. The king parted from Plaisance, with an intent to goe to Guadalupe, there to
performe a vow: passing from one place to an other, his infirmit^e still increasing, hee
stayed at Madrigalejo, a borough neere vnto Trugillo, where he had a kind of fluxe:
by reason whereof doctor Adrian (who was verie vnpleasing vnto him) transported
himselfe thither; yet shewing him a good countenaunce, hee willed him to goe and attend
him at Guadalupe: his sickenesse encreasing, they that were about him were
constrayned to aduertise him that his end drew neere, the which did much discontent
him: for hee thought hee had a longer time to liue; neyther did hee giue credit to all
that his Confessor Frier Thomas of Matienso said vnto him: but when they had often reiterated
this aduertisement, that hee might dispose himselfe to die like a Christian, he
caused the Licenciat Zapate and doctor Caruaial, who were of his chamber, and of his
Councell, to bee called vnto him, and with them the Licenciat Vergas his Treasurer,
who was also of his Councell, a man in whom hee had great confidence: whom he enioyned
and coniured to giue him good and faithfull councell, in that which hee should
demaund of them: hee told them that for the opinion hee had that prince Charles would
not come in person to gouerne the realmes of Spaine, hee had appoynted the Infant D.
Ferdinand gouernour of them for the Queene D. Ioane her daughter: whereupon hee
desired to know their opinions,Reformation of king Ferdinands testame^^ by the aduice of some of his councell. if hee had not done well. These three men zealous of
the good of those realmes told him freely, that in so doing he had not prouided for the
peace and quiet of the realmes, wherefore he should call backe that article, and name
prince Charles gouernour of them, as Lawe and Iustice required, shewing him the great
inconueniences which might happen, if haply the Infant D. Ferdinand, finding himselfe
feiled of so great Estates, should seeke to hold them; such thoughts being easie to
breede in the hearts of princes. The king yeelded to this Councell, and reformed his
Will in that point, in regard of Castille, and that which is incorporated vnto it: As for
Arragon and Sicile hee left the gouernement to his base sonne D. Alphonso archbishop
of Saragosse, and vntil that prince Charles came, he appointed gouernor in his absence, by
the aduice of this Councell, Cardinall Francis Ximenes of Cisneros, saying, that he knew
him to be an honest man, and wel affected, fashioned and aduanced by him and by the Q.
D. Isabella; one who had no great aliances, and had alwayes shewed himselfe a faithfull seruant.
As for the realm of Naples, he confirmed the gouernment with the same condition
to the viceroy D. Raymond of Cardone, and in Nauar there had bin viceroy D. Frederic d' Acugna,
comma^der of Montemolin, of the order of S. Iames, brother to the erle of Buendia.
Some few dayes before he had obtayned from Pope Leo, a new prouision in his owne
person, of the three masterships of Castille, Saint Iames, Calatraua and Alcantara, the
which he desired to resigne to the Infant D. Ferdinand whom hee loued deerely* but hee
was in like manner persuaded not to doe it, for hee should remember of what importance
in former times one of those masterships had bin, in the person of a priuat man, to
trouble the realme: and therefore hee must thinke that if all these were ioyned in one,
and he of the bloud royall, hee equalling (without doubt) the kings power might cause
greater alterations: whereupon the king demaunding, What then shall the Infant do
remayning so poore? It is, answered his Councellours, the best and goodliest inheritance
that you can leaue him: for finding himselfe poore, it wil giue him occasion to seek
the loue of prince Charles his brother, who will aduannce him. These things pleased the
king, who gaue vnto the Infant D. Ferdinand 50000 ducats of yerely rent vpon Brindes,
Tarentum,Infant D. Ferdinand ill app^inted. and other places in Apulia in the realme of Naples, by the aduice of the same
councellors Out of the reuenues of the realm of Sicile, he left vnto his wife Q. Germaine,

thirtie thousand florins of gold of yearely rent, the which was afterwards assigned in
Castille, vpon the townes of Arcualo, Ma^rigal and Olmedo: hee left moreouer
vnto her tenne thousand ducats in the realme of Naples. These Ordinaunces in forme
of a testament were written by the hand of one of the aboue named Councellours, reuoking
that which hee had made at Burgos; all beeing done in great secret, to the end
that nothing might come to the knowledge of the Infant D. Ferdinand, who was then
at Guadalupe, nor of his Gouernours and Ministers, who did hope to mannage the
realme after the Kings decease. The will beeing written out faire, it was receiued by
the Prothonotarie Clement of Velasco. The Queene D. Germaine hauing notice of the
extremitie of the Kings infirmitie at Calataiub, whereas the estates of Arragon were
held, shee came with all speed to Madrigalejo, and was at his death, which was on
the three and twentieth of Ianuary one thousand fiue hundred and sixteene, being three
score and three yeares old, and hauing raigned one and forty yeeres, one moneth, and
nine dayes,Death of king Ferdinand king of Arragon. comprehending the time that king D. Philip of Austria raigned. The Kings
Councell and the Noblemen beeing assembled, they resolued to send to the embassadour
Adrian, who attended the king at Guadal^pe: wherefore Doctor Caruajal and
the Licenciat Vargas were sent vnto him, who brought him to Madrigalejo, where
in his presence the kings will was opened and read, whereof they gaue a copie to the
embassador, at his request. Afterwards by the aduice of them all, D. Bernard of Rojas,
marquesse of Denia, and the licenciate Ronquillo Alcaid^or prouost of the Court,
did accompanie the Kings bodie to Granado, and the other Noblemen went to Infant
D. Ferdinand at Guadalupe, where the funerall was made with royall pompe and ceremonies.
The body passing by the citie of Cordoua, there ioyned with it D. Martin of
Angulo bishoppe of that citie, the marquesse of Priego, the earle of Cabra, with other
Lords and Knights which did accompany it vnto Granado, where with the state
woorthy of such a prince, hee was interred in the chappell of Kings, by Queene Isabell
his wife, whose bodie had beene left in the Alha^bre of that citie.
A little before the kings death, Iohn Dyas de Solis of Lebrixa, chiefe Pilot to the
king,Indies. parted from the port of Lepe, with three shippes armed, to goe and discouer
countries in the new world, vnder the equinoctial, where hee had already beene, and
found out the great riuer of Panaraguasa, which hee had named the riuer of Plata, or
of Siluer, where beeing arriued and entred, hee landed with fiftie Spaniards, thinking
to (...) all things quiet, as hee had at the other time: but hee found himselfe surprized,
and charged by a multitude of Indians, who slew him and all them that had landed
with him,Spaniards slain is the riuer of Plata by the Indians. and eate them: the rest which kept the shippes being terrified, weighed anchor,
and returned into Spaine, laden with bresill, and white ansine, which they vse for
dying.
15 D. Manuel king of Portugall had alwayes continued his nauigations, and discoueries
at the East with good successe and profit,Portugall. and imitating the example of the king
of Castille, hee prest the African Moores his neighbors vpon the westerne shoare, from
whom hee tooke the towne of Zasin,Exploits of king Manuell in Afrike. by the meanes of Nugno Fernandes of Ataide,
who was the first Gouernour, and afterwards hauing sent Iames Duke of Bragance his
nephew, with two thousand horse, and fifteene thousand foote, who landing at Marzagan,
did assaile and take the towne of Azamon, beeing abandoned by the Moores:
and soone after Almedina yeelded, with other places of that territorie: in which expeditions
the Duke of Bragance purchased so great same,Bragance a terro^r to the Moores. as at this day the name of Bragance
is a terror to the Moores. To supply the charges of this war and conquests, the King
D. Manuel hauing emptied his cofers, he obtained from Pope Leo, by his embassadours
Tri^^an of Acugna, and doctor Diego Pache^o, aid and subuention, out of the reuenews of
the Clergie of his country: whereunto the Pope did the more willingly yeeld, hauing
heard the great exploits which he had done, and the discoueries which hee had made;
to whom the embassadours presented in the name of the King their master a great elephant,
a lionesse, and a bishops mitre or tyare garnished with perles and precious stones,
the richest that euer had beene seene at Rome. The Pope therefore to incorage and giue

meanes vnto King Manuel to proceede in so commendable an action, hee graunted
him the third part of the reuenewes and fruites of Spirituall Liuings,Third part of spirituall liuings graunted to the king of Portugall in his countrey. and moreouer
to haue a Croisado preached, wherein the Kings deputies behaued themselues so insolently
and couetously, as all men had occasion to complaine: whereupon the conuerts
and new Christians tooke occasion to fall into many errors and peruerse opinions,
touching our Religion. These things past about the yeeres one thousand fiue hundred
and twelue, one thousand fiue hundred and thirteene, and one thousand fiue hundred
and foureteene. The yeere one thousand fiue hundred and fifteene being come, the king
vndertooke to build the sort of Mandora in Afrike* but his prouisions and men were all
disperst and lost there, by the incursions of the Moores, so as few, and those verie poore,
returned into Portugall.Opinion fauourable for the Clergie. This vnfortunate successe was imputed to the exactions which
the kings Officers vsed vpon the clergie: being an opinion alreadie setled in the hearts
of men: that those princes which touch the treasures of the Church, prosper not.
This yeare Queene Mary was deliuered in the city of Lisbone, of the Infant D. Edward
future husband to D. Isabella daughter (...) D. Iohn duke of Bragance,Genealogie of Portugall. from whom issued
D. Edward, and D. Ca^^erina duche^^e of Bragance, wife in our dayes to the duke D. Iohn
second sonne to duke Theodosius, and grandchilde to the first D. Iohn. Of D. Edward of
Portugall, and D. Isabella, was also borne D. Maria, who was married to the prince of
(...), sonne to Octauio Farnese, and to Marguerite of Austria, base daughter to the
emperour Charles. Soone after the death of D. Ferdinand king of Arragon, the king D.
(...) was full of care, for the insolent behauiour of two of his vassalls, who sought to
disquiet him in his nauigations and voyages to the Indies. These were Ferdinand of Magellanes
and R^y F^^ero, who for some discontentment retired themselues into Castille,
whereas the cardinall D. Francis Xime^es archbishoppe of ^oledo gouerned, offering to
discouer a short course or way; to go to the rich Hands of the Moluques, whence the spices
came,Magellanes and Fa^ero Portugalliser^^ in Castille. more profitable and commodious then that of (...) and China. Magellanes
gaue D. Iohn Rodrigues of Fonseca president of the royall councell of the Indies and other
counce^^^^^ to vnderstand, that they might find a better and more short cut to goe to the
Moluq^^ by the coast of Bresill and the riuer of Plata, then by the cape of Bonne Esprance:
and moreouer they told them, that the great Iland of Zamatra, and Malata, were
comprehended in the streit and line of the nauigation of Castile: they did maintaine that
the Ilands of the Moluques were not farre from Pan^^^a, and the qulph of saint Michael,
and that in all those countries and regions they found aboundance of gold, pearles, pretious
sto^es, spices and drugges: and to make these councellors more desirous, they told
them many other wonders of unknowne lands, which they offered to discouer. Magellanes
saying, that he had a relation of Lewis of Vertheman o^ Bolonia, who had beene at Badan,
Bornay, Bachian, Tidore, and other countr^es of spices, which are vnder the Equiroctiall,
shewing many letters written from his friends to the Indians: And moreouer,
hee had a ^^^ue of the Iland Zamatra, who vnderstood many languages of that Countrey,
and an other slaue recouered (...) Malaca. By these reasons and persuasions, induced
them of the councell; and the Regent D. Francis Ximenes gave good hope to Magellanes,
to obtaine ships and meanes to make this voyage, at the comming of the prince D.
Charle^, who would not stay long before he parted from Flaunders, to come and take possession
of his realmes of Castille and Arragon. The king D. Manuell made many complaines
against these fugitiue subiects, by his Ambassadors, to the Councell of Castille,
and they against him, and the voyage was performed as wee will shew. About the spring
one thousand fiue hundred and seuenteene, Queene Marie second wife to the king D.
(...), died (...) Lisbone, lying in child bed of the Infant D. Anthonio, who liued not long
after his mother, which caused great heauinesse in the king:Death of Mar^^ Queen of Portugall. Shee lies in the monasterie
of the mother of God. Shee was then fiue and thirtie yeares old, and the king (...) and
fortie, who beleeuing what the pre^aies and (...) men of his realme had often preached
vnto him, that his crosses and aduersities came for that he tooke the re^^news of
the church, and imployed them for the affaires of his realme, he caused the collections and
contribution^ (...),King consciencious. promising to pay vnto the clergie 150000 ducats in 3 yeres, at 3
pay^^^^ This (...) to his third wife D. (...) to prince Charles of Austria

Infanta of Castille, neece to the two former queenes, being then 19. yeeres old, and the
king 50. She was conducted into Portugall by (...) in the yere 1518. a little before
the arriuall of King Charles in Spaine: the marriage was celebrated (...) Crato, with great
pompe and state: of which marriage were borne the infants D. Charles, and D. Marie.

D. Ioane Queene of Castille, Arragon, Nauarre,
Naples, Sicile, Sardi^ia etc. for whose in capaciti^, the reigne of
D. Charles her (...) being the first of that name, and the
two and (...) king of Castille.
16 AFter the decease of King Ferdinand,Castille. Queene Ioane his daughter succeeded in all
his realmes, lands, and seigniories. Charles archduke of Austria, and erle of Flanders
her eldest sonne, who should (...) all those great estates after her, was then in
Flaunders: for whose absence, and for the Queenes incapacitie, Cardinall Francis
Ximenes of Cisneros,Cardinall Ximenes gouernor of Castille. according to the (...) of the deceased King, tooke vpon him
the gouernement of Castille, with the (...) of all the Councell and Nobilitie of the
realme: notwithstanding that the gouernours and ministers of the infant D. Ferdinand,
would, by vertue, of the first testament made at Burgos, haue him intrude himselfe into
the gouernment of affaires as regent. He hauing written to them of the councel to come
vnto him to Guadal^pe, and vsing too high titles in his letters, one of the councell, said
freely vnto him that presented the Infantaes letters, Tell him that wee will be shortly at
Guadalupe, where knowing well our dueties, we will doe him the honour and reuerence
that belongs vnto him, and that we haue no other king but Cesar, The prince Charles was
not yet chosen emperor: but that (...) was taken as a presage of his future election. The
first care of cardinall Xime^^s, was to make an agreement with doctor Adrian, who had
brought letters and authoritie from prince Charles by the which he declared him his lieutenant,
in case that the king D. Ferdinand should die, during his legation in (...) The
accord was thus made,Accord for the gouernement of Spaine. that vntill they had other newes from prince Charles, they should
ioyntly signe all dispatches. After which they were to pacifie a trouble that was of no
small consequence; for D. (...) called the Deafe, brother to the duke of Escalona,
the stemme of the Marquesse of Villene^^^ at this day, had obtained after the decease
of the great captaine, who aspired to the mastership of S. Ieams, bulls and prouision
from the pope, of that mastership and did sollicite the commanders of the Ord^^ to assemble
togither to recieue him:Contention for the mastership of S. Ieams. but prince Charles during his grandf^^hers life, had also obtained
a later prouision, by the ^eans of D. Bern^rdin of (...), of all these three masterships,
in his person, and it is most certaine that king Ferdinand was not (...)
that he would haue giuen them to the infant D. Ferdinand. The cardinall being advertised
of these things, he sent (with the aduise of doctor Adri^^, and the Councel) (...),
one of the Alcaides of the court with letters and (...)
this assembly of the commaunders; whereunto they obeyed, euen (...) himselfe,
who desisted from his enterprise. This Cardinall had a watchfull eie upon the actions of
the Infant D. Ferdinand and of those which did gouerne him* l^^ing alwayes neere vnto
his person,Prouidence of Cardinal Ximenes for the a peace of Spaine. for he feared lest the noblemen of Castille, who desired som alteration in the
state, would corrunt him, and make vse of his name. He prouided in such sort for queene
Germaine in this beginning (to whom all things were difficult) that shee might not want
money for the entertainment of her house and royall dignities* The place of residence
for the councel was chosen at Madrid, for that it was commodi^^^ for the (...) being
not farre from his archbishopricke of Toledo, from whence they (...) Peter of C^mpreal,
and Rengifo of Auila, to carrie news vnto prince Charles of the (...) of the king his grandfather,
and of all that past since. The prince was (...) at (...), where he had (...) and
bred vp, and his brother D. (...) in Spain^, the one instructed in the (...) and fashions
of the Flemings, the other in tho^^ of Spaine; which (...) the Spaniard^ (...) che^^^^
the yonger more, and did much trouble the Cardinall (...). The chiefe^^^ which at
that time did gouern the person of prince Charles. (...)

of Bourgondie, and afterwards Chauncellour, the Lord of Cheures, and Laxat^^,
Chamberlaines, Laurence Gorrebot great master, and Charles of Lannoy Master of the
Horse. Hee had a Phisition of Mil^n, called Peter Marlian, a learned man and of great
experience, who was the inuentor of that Mott Pl^^ vltra, the which prince Charles vsed
betwixt Hercules pillers, hee was afterwards bishop of Tuy, but against the will of cardinall
Ximenes. The lord of Cheures was of greatest authority about the prince, hauing
bred him vp: hee was so hated of King Ferdinand as a little before his death, in
a certaine treaty made with doctour Adrian, hee would haue it expresly reserued that
Cheures should be chased away,Cheures gouernour to prince Charles. the which did much discontent him, who for that cause
conceiued a great hatred against doctor Adrian, but hee was forced to yeeld that to the
King, that hee might winne his loue to prince Charles, for hee sawe his intent was to debase
him, to aduaunce the Infant D. Ferdinand, if hee could. Of Spaniards D. Iohn
Manuel was in some credite in the court of Flaunders, a flatterer and breeder of debate
betwixt King Ferdinand and Philip of Austria his sonne in lawe, for the which hee was
put in prison by the lady Marguerite gouernesse of Flaunders: but after the kings death
hee was presently set at libertie by prince Charles. D. Antonio of Estuniga brother to
the duke of Bejar was also honoured in that Court, D. Pedro Portocarrero sonne to him
that was deafe, of whom wee haue spoken, D. Lewis of Cordoua, D. Alphonso
Mantiques, the bishop of Badajos, and Pedro Mota archbishoppe of Seuile, a famous
preacher, and Secretary to the prince, Such was the estate of his Court, when hee receiued
newes of the death of the king his grandfather, for the which hee shewed a griefe
befitting nature, and the neerenesse of bloud that was betwixt them: hee commended
him for the election which hee had made of the cardinall Francis Ximenes, and did write
vnto the Infant his brother, to the widow Queene, and to the councell, giuing them
hope that hee would bee soone in Spaine. In his first letters to the Gouernours and
the Councell hee did intitle himselfe Prince: but some of the Councell of Flanders,
seeing Queene Ioane weake of her sences, and to bee but a vaine maske of royall dignitie,
they were of opinion that hee should take the title of King, the which hee did, for
that said hee, it was conformable to the custome of the princes of Flaunders and Germanie,Title of King allowed in Castille to prince Charles during his mothers life, but not in Arragon.
and that it was the aduice of the Emperour Maximilian, and of Pope Leo; the
which was not well liked of in Spaine: notwithstanding seeing hee had once taken it,
it would haue beene dishonourable to haue left it, and therefore hee continued this title,
the cardinall Ximenes causing the rest to allow of it: and thereupon they did aduaunce
the Standard and Armes of the new King Charles, in the towne of Madrid. The
Arragonois (strict defenders of their Lawes) would neuer allow of this title of King,
during the life of Queene Ioane: of whom D. Alphonso of Arragon, archbishoppe of
Saragosse was gouernor.
18 Whilest these things were done at Madrid by cardinall Ximenes, there grew new
tumults,Quarrell betwixt Pedro Giron, and the duke of Medina Sidonia. the which did first disquiet Andalusia, and afterwards all the Prouinces of
Spaine. The chiefe of this tumult was D. Pedro Giron, eldest sonne to the earle of Vregna,
who entred the countrey of the duke of Medina Sidonia with forces, and besieged
Luzero a sea towne, with an intent to seaze vpon the whole Duchie^, if hee could. And
this was the cause of his enterprise: D. Iohn of Guzman duke of Medina Sidonia married
two sisters successiuely, one after an other, daughters to the Duke of Bejar; by
the first hee had two children, D. Henrie, and D. Mentia; and by the second one
sonne called D. Aluaro: D. Mentia was married to D. Pedro Giron: D. Henrie was
vnapt for generation, and dyed without children: D. Aluaro borne of the second venter,
married, as we haue said, with D. Anne of Arragon, daughter to D. Alphonso of
Arragon: which marriage was made by the King D. Ferdinand, in hope that D. Aluaro
should succeede in all the seigniories of Duke Iohn his father: who beeing dead,
hee was put in possession of the Duchie of Medina Sidonia, notwithstanding the
opposition of D. Pedro Giron, who saied, that D. Al^^ro was a bastard, borne in
incest, not beeing tollerable neyther by Diuine nor Humane Lawes to marrie two
sisters: and if Popes had at anie time suffered it, it was for some great good and
benefite to the Common weale, which had no such consideration in the fact of

the deceased duke D. Iohn* but for all his reasons D. Aluaro enioyed the possession, beeing
fauoured and supported by king Ferdinand whilest hee liued, but being dead D. Pedro
Gir^^ thought, that prince Charles beeing absent, and the gouernement in the hands
of a monke. Hauing therefore gathered together a good troupe of licentious fellowes
hee went to field, and first attempted the towne of Luzero, but D. Pedro of Arras had
preuented him, and put himselfe into the place, to defend it; besides, the castle was
held in the kings name, with a garrison, by D. Gomes de Solis, as it it is the manner of
Spaine in polices vpon the sea, although they belong to priuate Lords. So as D. Pedros
attempt was vaine. In the meane time cardinall Ximenes being aduertised of this tumult,
hee had meanes to prouide for it, commaunding (by the aduice of the Councell) the
inhabitants of Seuile and Cordoua, to assist the duke of Medin^, Sidonia, and captaine
Solis with forces. Then D. Anthony Fonseca was sent with certaine ensignes of foot, and
with him an Alcade of the court, called Corneille, to disperse D. Pedroes troupes, and to
punish those that should be taken, as troublers of the publike peace, and guiltie of high
treason: wherewith D. Pedro Giron being terrified, hee retired for that time, but within
few dayes after hee incited the Constable D. Inigo Fernandes of Velasco, his vncle by
the mothers side, who on the other side was no good friend to Cardinall Ximenes, drawing
many other noblemen to his designes and enterprises: passing by Madrid with a great
troupe, hee stayed there keeping himselfe in his lodging, and would not vouchsafe to visite
the Cardinall, who was the kings lieuetenant, but as if hee would braue him, and
in a manner threaten him, to incense the noblemen of Castille against him, hee sent him
word that he was come to visite his kinsemen and friends: whereunto the Cardinall (who
knew well to what end all his courses tended) made no other answer, but that hee should
goe on in a good houre, and continue his officious voyage. There were great signes of
a mutinous and rebellious heart in the answer which hee made to some of his friends, demaunding
of him why hee vndertooke these things, without any respect or reuerence to
Cardinall Ximenes,Arrogant answer of D. Pedro Giron. who presented there the kings person: And what thankes, said hee,
will the king giuevs, if wee respect and honour his lieutenants as much as himselfe? but
he was much mistaken, for there was no comparison betwixt his meanes, and of all those
of his partie, and the power of Cardinall Ximenes, who besides the authoritie which he
had as regent, was so rich, both in reuenues and treasure which hee had gathered together,
as hee was well able to entertaine an army, without any helpe of the kings money.
D. Pedro Giron in his frenzie went towards his vncle D. Inigo Fernandes of Velasco, knowing
that he hated the Cardinall, for that hee vnderstood that hee had propounded to retire
all that which priuate noblemen did hold of the reuenues of the crowne, if they did
not shew good titles, and were grounded vpon lawfull causes: and therefore, fearing
hee should be depriued of certaine imposts hee drew from the sea, hee desired to see the
Cardinalls authority abated. There were meanes plotted betwixt the vncle and the nephew,
to attaine vnto that which they pretended: and to fortifie themselues they did
write, or went in person to all them that they knew to bee anie way discontented with
Cardinall Ximenes:Faction against the Cardinall Ximenes. the duke of Benauent was one, whom they had forbidden to finish
a fort which he had begunne to build at Cibales: the duke of Albuquerque, and the erle
of Medina Celi, for the affinity which they had with the earle of Vregna, offered themselues
to be ready against all persons that would offend him or his; and they did also hold
some of the kings rents. D. Frederike of Portugall bishop of Siguensa, fearing to be depriued
of his bishoprike, to giue it to doctor Carnaial, ioyned with that faction. Aboue
all they desired to draw vnto them the duke of the Infantazgo, the head of the familie of
Mendoza, whose power and riches they held a sufficient counterpoize to ouersway the
Cardinall their aduersary. The duke offered himselfe freely to be theirs in all enterprises,
so as it were not against the state and the gouernment of the realme: for he meant not to
attempt any thing that should contradict the will of the deceased king D. Ferdinand,(...) made by the Co^^able against the Cardinall. nor
the will of king Charles: wherefore all these noblemen went vnto him to Guadalajara,
whereas the Constable D. Inigo Fernandes of Velasco, made a long inuectiue against the
Cardinall, whom he called rash, insupportable, an obscure man, of an vnknowne beginning,
an enemy to nobilitie, vnworthy to commaund and gouerne those realmes, which

charge did belong more rightly to them, then to monke, who abused the authoritie,
to the dishonour and scorne of the nobility. That if they said, hee was appoynted to that
degree by the testament of the deceased king D. Ferdinand, let them remember that they
had endured indignities enow in his time, without fearing his vaine comaundements after
his death: but let him shew his letters of power and authority from king Charles: else
for his part hee was not resolued to obey him. The duke of the Infantazgo, the chiefe in
this assembly,Wise speech of the duke of the Infantaz^^ seeing euery man moued at the Constables words, I haue, said hee, many
occasions to complaine of cardinall Ximenes, euen in this, that contrarie to his faith
and promise hee hath hindered the marriage betwixt my nephew and his neece, and that
now he seeks to diminish my patr^^onie what hee can: but these are but priuate wrongs,
for the which I would not cause the least alteration in the world, in our kings absence: and
I will say more vnto you, that I haue alwayes knowne this man to be so vpright, as the
authoritie, power, nor credit of any man cannot moue him: you see what great reuenues
hee hath, and what lands and countries hee enioyes, whereunto the publique authority
is now ioyned: Thinke you that in this action hee will shew himselfe lesse constant
and resolute than hee hath beene? No doubtlesse, and hee will be very violent to
moue the people against vs, of whom wee are already but too much hated: wherefore
my friends, let vs attempt nothing against the commonweale, the which wee must of
necessitie doe, if wee vndertake anie thing against cardinall Ximenes: let vs finde out
some other meanes to maintayne our dignities, which may be allowed of all men, and
then esteeme mee vnwoorthy the ranke which I hold, and the house from whence I am
descended, if I be not the first to maintayne the honour of nobilitie, against the insolencie
of this man, and I will imploy all my forces and meanes, for the defence of you
my knisemen and alies. When the duke of the Infantazgo had thus spoken, the assistants
considering the weight of this reasons, were much cooled: wherefore it was concluded,
that they should send vnto king Charles, D. Aluaro Gomez, the dukes sonne in law, a wife
and an eloquent man, who in the name of these Lords, should beseech him to take from
cardinall Ximenes the authority and gouernement of the realmes, for the causes which
they gaue him by ample instructions. This done, the duke of the Infantazgo feasted the
whole assembly for certayne dayes with great sports and state; of all which the cardinall
was particularly aduertised, by his friends and spies, but not regarding it much, for hee
was priuie to their meanes and faculties,Nobilitie that spends much, (...) maintaine an enterprise. calling this nobilitie but shadowes and scarrecrowes,
who liued in continuall delight, and superstons expences wherewith they
were so consumed and indebted, as most commonly they had nothing left them to maintayne
their rash enterprises, but their tongues, and a vaine pride without any power:
Notwithstanding, for asmuch as these conuenticles and priuate assemblies could not but
breed troubles in the state, hee did aduertise them by graue men to desist for their owne
good, from such practises and enterprises, the which hee would haue them know hee
had meanes to resist, and to make them vaine, without imploying the kings treasure,
but with his owne estate; yea, were there question to put an army to field, whereby they
should soone finde their owne weakenesse: wherefore hee did admonish them, that seeing
they must of force be the kings subiects, and obey his lawes, not to put themselues
in daunger. Hereby this stirre ceased without any further bruite, and the assembly of
Guadalajara was dispersed: so as many of them which had beene there, did soone after
practise by all meanes to insinuate into the cardinalles fauour, namely the duke of the Infantazgo
and the Constable.Wisedome of Cardinall Ximenes to maintaine his authoritie. This wife and industrious man, knowing what crosses hee
might haue daily in the gouernement of so great affaires, amongest a nobility which did
both hate and enuy him, hee knew well how to prouide for his dignity, the safety of his
person, and the peace of Spaine. He had D. Diego Lopes of Ayala a most faithfull sollicitor
of his affaires in the court of king Charles, by whose sollicitation and diligence, hee
desired ^etters patents with full and royall authority in all things, and that namely hee
should haue free liberty in matters of state to doe that which he should thinke profitable
for the safety of the kingdomes: the like authority ouer Iustice, to establish, alter and
depose, as hee should thinke fit, and in like manner ouer the treasure, for hee was not
contented with the authoritie which was giuen him by the testament of the deceased

King D. Ferdinand confirmed, by priuate letters and messages from the king, if hee had
not letters drawne in forme of a publique Decree, and the resoulution of the princes
Councell: Notwithstanding, without attending them, hee put one thing in execution
which had beene formerly proiected, and attempted by the deceased King D. Ferdinand,
the execution whereof had beene hindered by the Kings infirmitie and death:Leg^^^ s^^ldiers instituted by cardinall Ximenes. That is, he
ordayned for the defence of the realme in generall, as well against foreine enemies, as
home bred mutines, legions and bands of ordinarie souldiers, taken out of the citizens
and burgesses of the good townes of Spaine, men of good fame, dwellers, and hauing
as they say, fire and family, remembring that hee had heard the deceased King discourse,
That an army of such men was more profitable, and of greater effect in any kinde, than
that which was leuied of vagabond people, and ill liuers, whereof most companies that
are extraordinarily raised doe consist, who haue no courage but to spoile, and are more
hurtfull to friends then enemies; whereas the other louing their honour, their goods,
wiues and children, are animated to fight more couragiously against an enemy, for their
defence, and fearing the Lawes, for that they haue something to loose, they abstaine
from doing wrong vnto their friends:Men that haue families fitter to make souldiers to defend a realme then vagab^nds. besides, it is a ready force, and is sodainely assembled,
which keepes them in awe that would seeke to inuade and spoyle the realme, or
moue seditions and tumults. This ordinance hauing beene concluded in the Councell
at Madrid, contayned, That such as should hee (...) beare armes, should giue in their
names, and be inrolled by certaine Commissaries deputed, and that they should enioy
many exemptions of taxes, subsidies, lodgings and other charges accustomed to bee
imposed, and leuied vpon the people, to whom should be giuen captaines, officers, trumpets,
drummes and fifes, payed with the kings money: They should arme and be readie
when they should be commaunded, and should come euery Sunday to be mustered before
the people. This Edict being proclaimed throughout the townes of Castille, was
receiued and found good, with great ioy and contentment: so as in an instant there
were aboue thirtie thousand men inrolled, euery one thinking it was an easie way to attaine
vnto a degree of gentrie: and in trueth they could not haue desired a thing more
profitable and more delightfull: for the youth which is corrupted through idlenesse, and
giuen to vice and damnable pleasures; by this meanes they gaue themselues to manage
armes, to ride horses, to leape, runne, swimme and other such exercises, as were inioyned
them, and giuen them in discipline by old experimented captaynes, and it was a
pleasing fight to behold their troupes well armed to march in good order. For the which
cardinall Ximenes did purchase the reputation of a wise and prudent Gouernor, yea with
foreine kings and princes, thinking, as it is true, that there is no force like vnto it, when
it is moderated with good iustice, especially in the beginning, by meanes whereof, we
reade that great and populous nations haue been easily vanquished by small potentates.
The seditious and men desirous of innouations in Spaine,Murmu^ing of the Spaniards against the cardinall for the (...) order. were so scandalized at this Edict,
as there was nothing to be generally heard but murmuring, and ill words of the
cardinall Ximenes: Whereto tend these militarie troupes? What new shew of armes
doth this Cardinall bring vs? Did hee thinke that Spaine was too quiet? Did hee
enuy our peace? There needed nothing else in the kings absence, but to arme the multitude,
to make him more insolent* and to authorize him to ruine the nobilitie: Let this
wilfull man (who likes of no councell but his owne) be well aduised what hee doeth, and
of what consequence it is to put armes and force in the hands of a rascall multitude, in so
proud a nation, whereof hee will see so many troubles and miseries to grow, as it will
be impossible for him to preuent them. Moreouer they said, that it was the very meanes
to make good townes desart and vnpeopled, and to draw away their Artizans and men
of trade, who leauing their shoppes, would haue no care but to be gallants, and to walke
like gentlemen, abandoning themselues to all insolencies and excesse, whereby it would
happen that townes vnfurnished of things necessarie for the life of man, should by little
and little be reduced to want and pouerty, which they could not in long time recouer,
notwithstanding any diligence whatsoeuer. By these and such like speeches, inhabitants
of Leon, Burgos, Salamanca, Medina del Campo, Arenalo, Madrigal, Olmedo,
and in a manner all the townes that were beyond the mountaines, beganne to oppose against

the Edict, so as it could not bee put in execution in their iurisdiction but that
which most contradicted the Cardinalls (...) was the towne of Vailledolit,
whereas the Commissaries that were sent to (...)
put in prison:Sedition of V^^lledo^^t against Ximen^s. and as one fault drawes on another, they tooke armes, and put themselu^s
in defence against Cardinall Xim^n^s, as against (...) of
his commaundement, and resisting him as an oppressour of their libertie, and an inventour
and bringer in by force and violence, new and vnaccustomed things; whereof the
cardinall was presently aduertised by such as were of his partie in that towne, and for that
cause suffered many indignities. The cause of these disorders and rebellions was the bad
intelligence which was betwixt the cardinal and D. Anto^^^ of Rojas bishop of Granado,
the chiefe of the roi^ll councell,Division among Councellors in a State is ^^^gerous. and some other councellors, who (...) hate and enuy him,
and did secretly giue (...) out that those ordinances were not allowed by the Councell, but
meere inuentions proceedings onely from the Cardinalles braine: whose testimonie, as
men which held a ra^ke in the affaires of the realme, was of great weight among the people,
and was a great argument of the (...) which diuision of Councellors brings vnto
a State: whereunto we must (...) the practises of the great men of that countrey, accustomed
to play the Kings, the meanes whereof were taken away by this ordinance, to
their great griefe. They that did (...) the inhabitants of Vailledolit to rebellion,
were the admirall of Castille, and the bishoppe of (...): for the admirall ha^ing great
authoritie, and hereditary rights in the gouernement of the towne, de^^ending from the
Henriques his predecessors, although hee were a very deere friend to the Card^nall, yet
when hee heard at Madrid,Lets of the Cardinalls military Edict. that they would put this E^^ict in practise at Vailledolit, hee
said openly that he would neuer suffer it: and m^^ing more esteeme of his owne priuate
inter^^^, then of the Cardinalls friendship, he went to Vailledolit, where calling his brethren,
kinsfolks and friends together, he procured euery one, by his credit to oppose himselfe.
The bishop who had been Scholemaste^ and (...) to the infant D. Ferdinand,
seeing that by the Cardinalles diligence and care hee could nor get any thing, hee grew
discontended, and poured oyle into (...) which (...) through the cities of Burgos, Leon
and others^ wherewith Cardinall (...) troubled: for although that hee
had all the country on this (...) Toledo, Murcia, and
also beyond them The cities of Zamora, To^o, Auila and others that were obedient, yet
hee thought it a hard matter to vse force, doubting that the contumacie of then of Va^^ledo^^
and Burgos would keepe the rest from perseuering: wherefore here proceeded against
these froward people with all the mildnesse (...) could, admonishing them, that if
they (...) any ancient priviledges which did extempt them from such charges they should
produce them, and they should haue i^^stice done them: but they being supported by
the (...) of great men their neighbours, did not respect the Cardinalls friendlie admonition,
but made answer, that whilest they had breath and life, they would defend their
liberties against (...) tyran^^e, vntill that their king D. Charles should come into
Spaine. These differences continued the following yeere: for the Cardinall would not
proceed rigor^^^^ (...) vntill that he had newes from the king, whom he did
adver^^^e part^^^ (...) of that which hee had (...); and of the causes which had moued
him to make these ^egionaries: solliciting D. (...) of A^ala his Agent in Court,
that he should persue the (...), and (...) which he (...) to be (...)
vnto him: else it was necessary for his honour to giue that change, by reason
of the great difficulties and oppositions which he found. And for that (...) new
that the rebells had sent vnto the king, and to (...) de Chewes, (...), which did
fill their (...) with many fla^nders, accusing these legi^^ds and Compani^s end (...) by
him, (...) and spoyles, and shewing that there was no cha^ge more insupportable
not lesse necessary (...), he (...) to shew the (...),
and that it was the onely me (...) had obserued to be obeyed,
ever since the Goth^s, vnto (...) fourth, who had a (...) a gard of horsemen
entertayned, the which after he had (...), by the persuasion of some, or through
negligence and (...), he ^ound himselfe (...) in those troubles and
(...) that histori^^ speake of* Wherefore seeing that time and (...) the

like remedy, to force many great men to the obseruation of the Lawes, hee had reuiued
this most necessary remedie, with the which hee meant to preserue him the realme
of his predecessors, without any charge vnto his coffers. For this cause hee besought
the king not to giue care vnto the slaunderous reports of his ill willers, who desired nothing
but troubes, seeing hee had had so great proofes of his loyalty and affection: and
that it would please him to write sharpe letters to the townes that would not obey him,
that they might bee drawne to their dueties, a contempt or rebellion being of great
importance, the which can not be light, no not in light matters: And for that since
the warre of Granado Spaine was much vnfurnished of armes, that it was necessarie to
send out of Flaunders, and the neighbour countries, great store of corslets, harquebuzes,Acts of Cardinall Ximenes approued by the King.
pikes and other armes: the which was faithfully sollicited by Diego Lopes, and
fauourably gr^unted by the King; so as at the comming of those Letters into Spaine,
the inhabitants of Vailledolit and others, seeing that the Cardinalles councell was allowed
by the prince, submitted themselues, and gaue ouer their factions. There were
foure sin^^ies of the people appointed at Vailledolit, who should assist at the Councell,
and might oppose against all decrees and resolutions which should bee made to the preiudice
of the King, or commonweale, and if they would proceede, then to aduertise
the King.Rebellions pacified in Castille. This was thought verie fit and necessarie by the Vailledolitanes, the chiefe
whereof were too much obliged to the Admirall and Earle of Benanent. Thus ended
the rebellion of those townes against the Cardinall, who by meanes of these prouisions
maintained himselfe in his charge and authoritie. These militarie Orders haue been
in our time practised by King Philip the second, hauing appoynted bands and captaines,
and graunted imm^nities to the souldiers throughout all his townes. And for
that the Cardinall had prouided in vaine for all inconueniences which might happen at
land, if he should not in like maner assure the realme towards the Sea, he added to the old
gallies which hee found in Spaine, twentie new, which were built and rigged at the
charge of the people,Defeat of Turks at sea by the Spanish gallies. dwelling vpon the Sea coast, vnder colour to defend them from
the incursions and surprizes of the Moores, Turkes and pyrates: the which prooued
honourable for him, for soone after that they were readie, the Spanish armie tooke
six Turkish gallies with the slaughter of aboue six hundred Turks, and brought them to
Alicant. This Cardinall forgetting nothing that might serue for the publique good,
hee repaired the sorts and publique monuments which went to ruine, amongst which
was the A^arazane, or Arcenal of Se^ile. His care and diligence extended to the Ilands
and West Indies,Orders for the Indies. where, by his pietie and wisedome, the Handers beganne to
^^iste some libertie. At that time there was resident in Madrid, D. Diego Colo^^^lim Admirall
of the Indies, who had beene called home into Spaine by the deceased King D.
Ferdinand, by reason of some quarrelles betwixt him and some that had charge at the
Indies, and for many complaints and accusaations framed against him by his enemies.
After the kings decease hee did sollicite Cardinall Ximenes the Regent to take knowledge
of his affaires, and to suffer him to execute his charge: where^^^ hee thought it
fitte to send some good and learned men to be informed of these quar^ells at the Indies,
and to that end hee made choise of (...), of the Order of Saint Ierosme, the one
was Lewis of Figuer prior of the monasterie of Mejorada of Olmedo, and the other
Alphonso of Saint Iohn prior of Ortega of Burgos,Cardinal Ximens cause^^ information to be taken at the Indies of the Spaniards. to whom hee ioyned Bernardin M^rz^ndo,
and gaue them charge to passe into the Iland of Saint Dominicke or His^aniola,
and there to take an exact information of the insolencies and abuses of euerie man,
and especially of the quarrells betwixt the Admirall and the Spaniards, and to inquite
of all things that were profitable or necessary for the publique gouernment, and especially
for the quiet and good vsage of the naturall Indians, who at (...) time were oppressed
with cruell ser^tude* recommending especially vnto them the instruction of those
people in religion. Afterwards hee appoynted that Alphonso Su^ses should follow them
for President of the Iustice, a man learned in the Lawes, and verubu^. The friers being
come into the Iland, beganne to execute their charge very diligently, and with discretion,
and did order many things, whereof this is memorable. King Ferdinand deceased,
had distributed the Ilanders and Indians to certaine captaines, and other Spaniards,

who had employed themselues in these discoueries and conquests, to haue the
care and defence of them, as Lordes of their vassalls and subiects, and for this reason
were called Commandataires, for that these poore Indians we recommended vnto
them: many of these hauing left the Indies, were returned into Spaine; and there remayned:
from whome the Fathers (disannulling ^he king D. (...)) tooke
their vassalles and subiects, saying, that it was not reasonable the absent liuing in idlenesse
and delights, should enioy the fruites due to their vertue, who sayling ouer the
spacious Ocean with so great daunger, did sweate continually vnder their armes to extend
the Empire of the Crowne of Spaine, and religion: wherefore the Ilanders were
diuided by them to the olde inhabitants residing at the Indies, according to euerie
mans merite and dignitie. Then they thought that these miserable Indians were slaues
by the Lawes of armes; by reason whereof their masters did intreate them cruelly,
causing them to draw and to carrie burthens like horses or asses, the which seemed verie
inhumane to these fathers, and strange from all Christian pietie: wherefore somewhat
to moderate that which they could not altogether helpe: they ordayned that
this people liuing then in the fieldes and desart places, of whom they made no more
accompt then of beasts, should bee drawne into townes and villages, and liue vnder
some forme of policie and municipall Lawe, taking from their masters this great authoritie
and power which they pretended of life and death, letting them know, that they
should vse them as vssalls, and not abuse them as slaues.
Thus the Fathers thought to prouide for the libertie of this people, against the tyrannie
of the souldiers: where they found great difficulties and debates, the which is vsually
seene when they seeke to abolish any peruerse custome; so as their holy diligence
did afterwards cause a very bad effect, through the wickednesse of the Spaniards, who
seeing the same order obserued by the fathers in other Ilands, and places of those regigions,
whereas the like diuisions and distributions had beene assigned, as well by the
Admirall Colombus and others, thinking that hereafter there would come others, so as in
the end the Indians should be set at full libertie,Cruelty of the Spaniards (...) the Indians. whereat the Spaniards were so mad, as
surcharging their subiects and vassalls with insupportable trauel they made them shrinke
vnder their burthens, and die. They saie, that by the industrie of these friers, the
art of drawing and refining of sugar was much bettered and augmented, and therefore
they were much honoured in Spaine, as the authors and inuentors of many profitable
things.
It happened at that time, that some without the priuitie of Cardinall Ximenes, had
gotten leaue of King Charles in Flaunders, to carrie foure hundred Ethiopian Moores
to the Ilands,Moores strong and fit for the warre. such as the Portugalles were accustomed to bring into Spaine, vnder colour
that the art of drawing and trimming their sugars required great and strong labour,
which the weake bodied Indians could not vndergoe: which the Cardinall vnderstanding
hee presently aduertised the King of the daunger hee foresawe therein; for
these Moores are more strong and giuen to armes; wherefore hee besought him to consider
what a subiect of sedition those men which had obtayned this leaue of him, carried
to the Indians, a simple and rude people, who without doubt would learne of
them to bee hardie and warrelike, and to rebell afterwards against the Spaniards. This
councell was contemned by the king, or rather by Monsieur de Che^res who gouerned
him, thinking that the Cardinall did not so much blame their trafficke of slaues for the
good of the Common weale, as for that hee beeing Gouernour of Spaine, thought it
should not be allowed without his priuitie; but he found afterwards by the euent, how
wise the Cardinalles aduice was. For in the yeare one thousand fiue hundred and two
and twentie, by the conspiracie of fortie of these Moores, they did cause a seruile warre
in the Island of Hispaniola, the which was hardly quencht by the vertue and diligence of
Melchior de Castro,Nauarre and Francis d' A^ila Inhabitants there.
20 The gouernement of Castille was not yet assured from troubles, when as they
had newes, that Iohn of Albret king of Nauarre came with a great armie of French, for
the recouerie of his realme, wherewith the Cardinall was troubled; hauing not sufficient

forces to assure so many affaires: knowing well that D. Frederic of Acugna, viceroy
of Nauarre was not prouided as hee ought: wherefore by the aduice, and at the
request of the chiefe* noblemen, hee gaue the defence of the realme to D. Antonio
Manrique de Lara, soone to D. Pedro Duke of Nagera, who willingly offered himselfe
to take that charge in so dangerous a time,D Antonio Manrique de Lara viceroy of Nauarre. hauing his lands neere vnto Nauarre, from
whence ^e might drawe speedie succours at all euents: and it is a bruite continued from
time to time that it was propounded in the councell of Castille, not onely to demantle
all the Townes and places of strength within the realme, by reason of the mutinies
which did rise at that time in Nauarre, but also to leaue the land wast to serue to feede
their troupes:Councell barbarous to make the countrie of Nauarre de^art the demantling did afterwards take place, but as for the desolation of
the fields it was held too barbarous. D. Inigo Fernandes of Velasco, Constable of Castille,
an inuereate enemie to the Duke of Nagera, sought to disappoint his sonne of
his gouernement, pretending that hee had aliances, with the faction of Gramont,
and did still feare the ruine of it: wherefore hee made protestations against this decree
made in Councell, whereby the necessarie prouisions were so delayed in this apparent
daunger, as if the French had aduaunced with more speede, they might easily
haue beene masters of Pampelone, and of the whole realme.
Their armie entring slowly by the Pyrenees on the side of Moya and Isana, it was
stayed in the valley of Roncal, and defeated by the diligence of colonell D. Ferdinand
Villal^a of Plaisance: The Marshall D. Pedro, who was the Leader, and his brother
Diego Velez, with other Noblemen Nauarrois, were taken and sent into Castille, to
diuers prisons, whilest that king Iohn was at the siege of the Castle of Saint Iohn, at
the foot of the Pyrenee mountaines, who hearing of the defeat of his men, returned
into Fraunce, out of all hope euer to recouer his realme. It was bruited, that there
were found in a coffer amongst the Marshalles baggage that was taken, certayne Letters
of D. Lewis of Beaumont Constable of Nauarre, and of other Noblemen
Nauarrois, who were grieued to see that auncient and noble Crowne reduced to a prouince.
Others say, that the countesse D. Briande Manrique, his wife, sister to the
Duke of Nagera, chosen Viceroy of Nauarre, hauing discouered these practises, by
certayne papers which fell into their hands, shee aduertised Cardinall Ximenes, who
gaue commaundement vnto Frederic d' Acugna the Viceroy, to seaze vpon the Constables
person, but as captaine Picarro would haue laied hands on him, hee escaped and
stoode vpon his gard, vntill the comming of the Duke of Nagera his brother in lawe,
to be Viceroy of the realme: for this cause the countesse his wife durst neuer afterwards
come in his company.
The affaires of Nauarre beeing assured for Castille by the defeate of the French
armie,Forts demanteled in Nauarre. the Cardinall caused them to beginne to demantle the sorts throughout the
realme, by the persuasion of colonell Villalua, or for that hee had formerly conceiued
it in his fantasie, the which they that haue come after haue found profitable: for it is
certayne that the Nauarrois could not forget their proprietarie and lawfull kings; and
there is no doubt but if the forts had stoode still, they would haue sought meanes to rebell:
but seeing themselues without anie retreats, they haue contayned themselues:
besides, in doing it, the Cardinall would spare a great expence, which hee must haue
imployed in the entertainement of so many garrisons, as was necessarie in a Realme
newly conquered: To conclude, all were demanteled and ruined, except the citie of
Pampelona, the Castle of Estella, and the townes of Lombier, and Pont de la Roine,
which the Constable D. Lewis of Beaumont obtayned for a time of his brother in law:
the Castle of Marzille a place strong by scituation and art, vpon the riuer of Arragon,
escaped this furie by the vertue of D. Anna of Velasco, Marquesse of Falses, who
drew vp the bridge against the Commissaries deputed for these demolitions, saying,
that shee would keepe the place well vntill the comming of King Charles, and so hindered
them.
Among other buildings which fell in this calamitie, the Conuent of Saint Frauncis
of Olita an auncient place, and reuerenced, was much lamented. The death of colonell

Villalua followed soone after,1517 suspected to haue beene aduanced by the Constable
Lewis of Beamont, who meeting him neere vnto his house of Lerin vpon the
way to Estella,Death of Collonell Villalua inuited him to sup with him, where it was thought hee had poison
giuen him, whereof hee dyed as soone as hee came to Estella: This was for the hatred
which hee had pourchased among all the Nauarrois, for that hee had beene the instrument
of the demanteling of the forts of Nauarre.
King Iohn of Albret dyed also,1517 this yeare one thousand fiue hundred and seuenteene,
of griefe,Death of Iohn of Albret king of Nauarre. seeing his affaires desperate; and his bodie was laied in the Cathedrall
church of Lescar in Bearn, for his will was to be interred in the great church of saint
Marie of Pampelona: His death happened fiue yeares nine moneths and twenty daies
after that hee was dispossest of his realme. The offices of colonell Villalua were confirmed
to his sonne, by the intercession of Cardinall Ximenes, who gaue this profitable
councell vnto the king, to giue the suruiuancy of estates to their children that died
in his seruice, as an incouragement to carrie themselues well and faithfully in their
charges: yet hee was not of opinion to giue him the place of Colonell which his father
had, holding that this great power and commandement ouer many men, should
not bee suffered in armes, being the cause of confusion and disorder, being a naturall
thing and most necessarie, said hee, that all should looke vnto one head. Colonell
Villalua was a valiant man,Qualities of Colonel Villalua soudaine and actiue, sharpe witted, of a great courage, and
a good souldier in all occasions: and as for his vertues they compared him to Haniball,
so the imperfection of his body did increase his fame, for he was blind of an eye, like vnto
Haniball. Queene Catherine suruiued her husband about eight moneths, and ordained by
her will that her body should bee buried in the Cathedrall church of Saint Marie of
Pampelone,Death of queen Catherine of Nauarre. to preserue the right to the realme of Nauarre, leauing Henry of Albret
her sonne, heire thereof: She died at Mont de Marsan, being seuen and forty yeares olde:
her body was left as it were in deposito, at Lescar in Beam, by her husband. Henrie of Albret
was then foureteene yeares old, and did intitle himselfe king of Nauarre: the Viceroy
of which realme at his entrie into his gouernment, assembled the estates at Pampelona,
causing them to swear to king Charles of Austria, and to the queen D. Ioane his mother,
hee also swearing on their behalfes to obserue the priuiledges of the countrie. And for
that by reason of the faction, wherewith that realme had been in former times diuided,
they had been accustomed to chuse a councel or court of justice of like number, of either
part of Gramont and Beaumont, the president of which councell being chosen by lot out
of one of the factions, did commonly oppresse the contrarie party, the Cardinall caused
the order established first by king Iohn of Albret, and continued by king Ferdinand to bee
followed: which was to giue them a President that was a stranger, notwithstanding the
Nauarrois did solicit in the kings court in Flanders, to haue the auncient custome practised
again. He also tooke the gouernment of Pampelone from an Arragonois, called Ferrera,
and gaue it to a Castillan, letting the king vnderstand that the Arragonois and Nauarrois
did alwaies disagree. He did also resist the Cardinall of Albret, who through the popes
fauour would enioy his bishopricke of Pampelone, from whence hee had beene expelled.
21 Nauarre being pacified,Castille. there grew troubles in the realme of Granado, by reason
of the rights and justice of the Admiraltie. It is an auncient order in Spaine, as
in many other realmes,Admiralty in Castille and the Iurisdiction. that the admirall hath charge of the Sea-coasts, and of armes
and warre at sea, and of ciuill and criminall justice ouer all sea-faring men, as well Mariners,
and passengers as Souldiers. And therefore in euery Prouince which lies vpon the sea,
where there are ports, ships, and any co^merce he hath his Iudges, as at Seuile, Malaga, and
such like, and sets vp gibbets and other such markes of supreme justice. They of Malaga
had often tryed in the time of king Ferdinand to free themselues from this jurisdiction,
and to abolish it in their towne, saying, that it did but hinder justice, and giue way to ill liuers,
to auoid deserued punishment: for in Sea-townes whither men come from diuers
places, and many times vnciuil, if any one bee called in question for any crime, he requires
to be sent vnto the admirabltie, and most commonly by these declinatories escapes the punishment
that should be inflicted vpon him by the royal Iudges. In like maner the garrisons

which were vpon the Sea-coasts did abuse these things, appealing sometime from
the kings justice, sometimes from the admiraltie. Being not able to obtain any prouision
therein from king Ferdinand, at such time as the Cardinal gouerned, they sent into Flanders,
to get an abolition of this justice from king Charles of Austria. But, as a multitude
hauing once a desire, hath no patience, order nor mean, those of Malaga, without expecting
of any answer,Tumult at Malaga. did tumultuously chase away the judges and beat down the gibbets,
and all other markes of the Admiralty in their towne and iurisdiction: whereof
the high admirall complained to Cardinall Ximenes, who was Regent, and to the councell,
who thinking by admonitions and threats to suppresse the heat of this people, they
receiued answere, that they would not submit themselues to any judgement touching
the differences betwixt them and the admiral, vntil that king Charles their soueraigne lord
were arriued in Spaine: and meaning to maintaine themselues in this opinion against any
force that should be offered them, they took armes, and planted all the artillerie they had
vpon their towers and wals, making one peece of admirable greatnes, by a generall contribution
of the people, wheron they did graue these words in latin, Malacitanae libertatis Assertores,
F. C. that is to say, the defenders of the Malaquins libertie haue caused it to bee
made. The multitude was entertained in this rebellion for a time, by some of their citizens,
to whome the Flemish lords that were neere vnto the kings person, did write letters,
and promise fauor: but the Cardinal after that he had vsed al mild remedies, sent an
army of the legionaries,Malaquins supprest. according to his institution, in the which were 6000 foot and 400
horse, led by D. Anthonio de la Cueua: whereupon the Malaquins fainting, when as the army
came but to Antequera, they sent word that they were ready to obey the Cardinals
commandements, sending two deputies vnto him, who in the cities name be sought him to
take them to mercy, and to abstaine from bloud. D Anthony hauing aduertised the Cardinall
of the Malaquins submission, hee had commandement to end matters with mildnes
and clemency, and to yeeld all hee might vnto them, preseruing the kings honour
and dignitie. There were fiue of the chiefe authors of the sedition hanged, and the rest were
pardoned. Of which things the Cardinall did aduertise the king, letting him vnderstand
how preiudiciall it would be to the common-weale, if this councel of Flanders did so easily
vndo that which had bin concluded with mature deliberation in the councell of Spain;
beseeching him therein to haue a care of his authority,Gouernors should be maintained in their reputation. the which was ioyned to the royal
authoritie, holding, that the chiefest foundation of the publike peace, did consist in the reputation
of the gouernour.
22 In Castille Iohn Velasques of Cuellar, superintendent of the treasure, son to doctor
Guttiere Velasques, sought to keepe the castle of Areualo by force, which place the queen
D. Isabella, wife to king Iohn the second, had had for her dwelling, and had beene committed,
as also the affaires of the widow queene,Contention for the towne of Areualo. to the custodie of doctor Guttiere, and then to
his sonne after his death: but the Cardinal had newly, by the aduice of king Charles, giuen
that place, with Olmedo, Madrigal, and Sancta Maria de Nieua, with their reuenues, vnto
queen Germaine, widow to king Ferdinand, in exchange of 30000 ducats of rent which the
king her husband had left her by his wil, to be taken out of the reuenues of Naples: wherupon
Velasques seeing himself put from the possession of the Castle of Areualo, which he
did think should haue bin perpetual, he durst presume to hold it by force, being prest therunto
by D. Maria of Velasco his wife, who was at that times as much hated of Q. Germaine,
as shee had beene formerly beloued: and fauoured by her; besides that many noblemen
desiring to see Velasques aduanced, either for loue, or for aliance that was betwixt
them, and not greatly affecting queen Germaine; they incouraged him to commit this insolency,
promising him aide at all euents: but such promises are most commonly vaine and defectiue,
when as the soueraigne magistrate pursues his right, euery man fearing when it
comes to a matter of fact, to incur the punishment of a rebell. Against this purpose of Velasques,
the Cardinal, after his accustomed maner, vsed al mild courses, causing the king to
write kind letters vnto him, and this preuailing little, he afterwards added threats: but he
gaue more credit to his wife, and to the persuasions of the admirall, the constable, the earle
of Benauent, the duke of the Infantazgo and others, who enuied the cardinal, of which the
admirall shewed letters signed by them al, promising that if the Cardinall attempted any

thing against the town of Areualo, they would send him succours, and therfore the Inhabitants
should take courage to maintein themselues vnder the jurisdiction of the crown, rather
than to receiue a woman for their lady and mistresse, being assured that k. Charles, being
in the countrey, he would like of their constancy, and dispose otherwise of their affaires.
The inhabitants of Areualo being animated heereby, they reiected all good Councell:
wherfore the Cardinal sent an Alcaide of the court thither, with some souldiers, to reduce
them to their duties, who summoned them by a trompet to obey the kings commandement,
else he would proceed against them with al rigour, as rebels, and would make Velascos
processe condemning him as a traitor, which note shold passe to all his posterity; and would
confiscate his goods. These sommations being reiterated according to the forme of Iustice,
and with solemnities and ceremonies, Velasco seeing that neither the admirall nor the
other noblemen, which had promised him so much assistance, did not make any offer to
defend him, he thought it better for him to yeeld vnto the Alcaide, the^ to attend the rigor
of armes, or the proceeding of justice, wherfore hee dismist the souldiers which were
in garrison in the Castle; the which with the towne were deliuered vp vnto Alcaide.
Some daies after Velasques went to court, and submitted himselfe and his affaires to the Cardinals
pleasure, who receiued him courteously, promising him al assistance and fauor to the
king, and did comfort him for the great afflictions which he had suffered, especially for the
late death of his eldest son, which grief did soon bring him to his end at Madrid, although
some did say that he was poisoned.
These things done in fauour of the royall authority, by Cardinall Ximenes, he found
meanes to maintaine them of Areualo and Olmedo in their priuiledges and liberties, and to
keep them from comming into the power of Q. Germaine, whom he did not loue, for that
he saw himself contemned by her, and that she did incline to the party of the Infant D. Ferdinand,
and of his gouernors, who were opposite vnto him: wherupon he did write vnto king
Charles in Flanders, shewing him by old and new examples how much it did import for the
safety of Castille, that Areualo and Olmedo places of strength and fit to trouble the realm
should remain vnited to the crown, and not be in the possession of any priuat lord, obiecting
that which D. Iohn king of Nauarre and Arrago^, had attempted, by the opportunity of those
two places, against D. Iohn 2 king of Castille: saying moreouer, that Q. Germain had cause
content her self with the large reuenues of Madrigal alone, wherwith she had bin satisfied
before the troubles of Areualo: That if he had supprest the inhabitants and Velasques, it was
more to teach them to obey the kings commandement, than for that he thought it expedient
that place should bee giuen to the queene, to whom he had granted it, before
hee was truely aduertised of the estate of her affaires; adding to his letters a copy
of the priuiledges granted by auncient kings to the townes of Areualo and Olmedo:
wherfore hee did easily obtaine from the kings, that which hee pretended; at the
least hee kept these townes in their liberty, and caused the matter to be deferred vntill
his comming.
23 The pitiful estate of D. Ioane queen of Castille,Estate of queen Ioan of Castille, mother to king Charles. did much trouble the Cardinall Ximenes,
being afflicted with a miserable infirmity; for this princesse was possest with a cruell
mela^cholike humor, so as she led a most lamentable life in the castle of Tordesillas, wheras
k. Ferdinand her father had lodged her, a pleasant and commodious place. Lewis Ferrier of
Valencia had charge of her, being also captain of the castle of Tordesillas, but he was vnfit
for such a busines; for whether by his slownes, growing by reason of his age, or throgh
ignorance, he could neuer get her to lodge in any pleasant and well ayred chamber of the
castle, but would alwaies lurke in darke and obscure places neere the ground, fit to entertain
and augment her malancholike humor: she did abhorre soft and delicate beds, and
would lie vpon the ground, and if she did lay herselfe vpon a board couered with a Carpet,
it was by great importunity: it was not possible to make her weare a furred gowne in
winter,Ambition raigning in Queene Ioane. nor any thing that was rich: She was often three daies together without
eating; neither could the prayers nor persuasions of her Seruants preuaile any thing
with her: she often complained that she was kept like a prisoner, and that they with-held
her from the gouernment of affaires, like a priuat person.
The Cardinall was much grieued for these things; and somewhat to remedie it, holding

for certaine that the negligence of Lewis Ferrier did feed the malice of her infirmity, hee
dismist him by reason of his great age, putting in his place Ferdinand Duca called Strate,
of Talauera, a man of a Noble family, wise and well aduised, who carried himselfe
so discreetly in his charge, as in a short time hee did moderate this violent humour
in the Queene, and got her to bee content to haue her chamber made cleane, and many
earthen dishes wherein they did commonly serue her to bee carried away: for shee
had an humor to make them leaue the dishes full of meat in her chamber, not suffering
them to carrie any one away, so as the meat corrupting, made a stinking sauour:
then by little he procured her to lie in a bed; hee persuaded her to goe abroad
to church, and made her to haue some feeling and apprehension that shee was a
Queene, and so acknowledged: and so by little and little made her familiar, and brought
her to a more milde and humane kinde of life: the which did much please king Charles
her sonne, who thanked Cardinall Ximenes by his letters.
The displeasure which Lewis Ferrier had conceiued for his displacing, was augmented
by the dismission of his sonne, from the gouernement of Toledo, for his misdemeanors
and negligence, which caused infinite confusions; in whose place the earle
of Palma, of the family of Portocarrero was made gouernour, a man worthy of great
honour, who was receiued notwithstanding the oppositions of the faction of Ayala:
for the citie of Toledo, hath beene long diuided into two factions of Sylua and of Ayala.
This was pacified by the diligence of the earle of Fuensalida, who was one of the
heads of it, a deare friend to Cardinall Ximenes. Doctor Gallego being sent to Toledo
to informe of the life and behauiour of the gouernour of Ferrier,Ministers of iustice punished exemplary. displaced by the Cardinall
and the kings councell, by a memorable example, and shewing his auncient seueritie,
hee caused some officers and ministers of justice to be publikely whipt, being
conuicted of corruption and other crimes, and would haue punished Arroios
treasurer of the Calatraua more grieuously, if hee had not fled away, being accused of
infinite villanies, rapes, and violences committed about his commandery of Zoria; whereof
being depriued by sentence, the Cardinal gaue it vnto Sancho Cabrera. By these offices of
peity and justice, the Cardinall made himselfe to be obeied, feared, beloued and reuerenced
in Castille, keeping the realme in peace, and prouiding in the meane time for those
things which might serue for future and vnexpected accidents. Hee appointed arcenals
or storehouses for artillerie, engines, and all munition of warre, in three places of
Spain:Storehouses for munition in Spaine. At Medina del Campo, beyond the mountaines, in Castille the old: in the realm
of Toledo, at Alcala of Henares; and at Malaga in Granado, that when any tumult or
sedition should arise, they might haue speedy meanes to suppresse it: As for that of
Medina del Campo, it is most certaine that it was then made. He had an humour to haue
coyned a peece of money, on the which should be grauen the Image of Saint Francis, but
the kings councell holding it to be somewhat ambitious in the Cardinall, who was a frier,
opposed themselues. He began a commendable and most profitable thing in all great
estates, that is, hee obtained a decree from king Charles, by the which there was commandement
giuen to bring in all sort of registers, accomps, memorials, instructions, and such
like writings,Search of ancient writings by Cardinall Ximenes. concerning the publike affaires, of the realm, or the state of the kings house,
which might be in the ha^ds of the counsellers and soueraign Iudges, or of those which had
beene imployed in embassages to foreine Princes and common-weales, and other persons
whatsoeuer, to be kept in certaine places, to be vsed when time and necessity should
require: the which if it had been executed, posteritie had beene better satisfied of that
which had past in precedent times, and better informed of that which was to be done. By
some little which was done according to this decree, the Cardinal came to the knowledge
of many things, especially of that which concerned the militarie orders of Spaine, as the
reuenues and ancient rights of the masters, and of their tables, of the common money of commanderies,
and the duties of commanders and their justice and Chapters; which things were
vnknowne to the kings officers, the masterships hauing beene retained and held by
kings, and then annexed to the crowne: so as there were infinite fraudes and abuses
committed, which gaue occasion to the great commanders of those orders, to make
oppositions, and to seeke to exempt themselues out of the Cardinalls power,

yea of the king himselfe: the prouision of Co^^^deries, was one of the quarrels
which they debated, saying, that it should bee Canonically done, according vnto
the orders which they held, and not giuen to any, but to them of them orders, respectiuely:
but it is hard to kicke against the power of kings: wherefore all that the
commanders could alleage was easily refelled by the Cardinall, who could giue
good interpretations to their Papall Bulles, and other instructions which they produced.
Through the Cardinalls diligence, by the reuision of the ancient accompts,
hee found that there had been imbezeled from the king aboue forty Millions of Marauidis
euerie yeare,Husbandrie of Cardinall Ximenes. the fraud consisting chiefly in that the commanders were in old
time to assist their masters in the warres against the moores, with a certaine number of
Souldiers entertained at their charges, the which they concealed, and freed themselues,
leauing the care and charge to the king. Finding that some townes belonging to these
masterships had beene vsurped, hee restored them to the kings reuenues, wherein he did
chiefly make vse of the labour and diligence of Touilla and Cabrera, commanders of
the orders of Calatraua. He made inquirie of the manners and carriage of the judges of
those orders, and censured them, displacing some, and instituting others: Hee had resolued
to doe the like to them of the Chanceries and great councells, as wel following the
court, as of Vailledolit, Granado, Gallcia, and others, with speciall commandement from
the king, which hee had procured to that end: hee did with great diligence and seueritie
cut off many gifts, fees and entertainments, which were not greatly necessarie*
the which did much ease the kings cofers, not fearing to offend his greatest and dearest
friends, for the profit of his Prince, wherby he purchased many enemies: finally, imitating
the emperor Seuerus, a most worthy Prince, he wold not haue any one receiue wages from
the king, nor to haue an office in the state, that were not profitable and necessarie for the
common-weale; and he disapointed all those rats, which did but deuour, retaining onely
in court, the Iudges or Councellors of the great Chanc^lie, the officers and ordinarie
ministers of the roiall Pallace, the garrisons of the frontiers, the foure prouosts of justice*
whome they call Alcaydes, and their archers, the marshall of the lodgings, and harbingers,
gards of the body, and such like. But it is doubtfull touching the taking away of officers
fees, whether he did it of his owne motion, or by the kings commandement: for hee
complained by some letters to the king, for that they gaue him alwaies an odious charge
to take away, and neuer to giue any thing. But howsoeuer, he was of opinion that sparing
was most necessarie and commendable in a prince, who must consider that all that hee
spends comes out of the bowels of his people, complaining greatly that in lesse than
foure months that he had begunne to gouerne the realm, king Charles had giuen away aboue
eighteene millions of Marauidis.Multitude of officers in the treasorie is hurtfull to the realm. Aboue all things, he held that a multitude of Collectors
and receiuers, and a great number of treasurers were verie pernitious and hurtfull
to a state: wherefore he desired that some man of a noble house, diligent and expert, were
made superintendent of all the kings money, whose charge should be to distribute the ordinarie
expenses, as need should require, and to reserue the remainder, to bee imployed in
vnexpected affaires, and in liberlities well imployed by king; and vnder him such a
number of deputies as should be necessarie: He held, that it was a great confusion in the
managing of the treasure, to inuert and imploy one kind of money to another vse than it
had beene assigned: of which rules he did continually aduertise the king his master by his
letters, and gaue an accompt of his gouernment, shewing with how little charge, in a
small time that he had been his lieutenant in Castille, he had effected great matters; Hee
had pacified the tumults in Andalusia, repulst the French in Nauarre, supprest the contempt
and rebellion of the Malaquins, held the frontiers wel manned, clensed the sea from
pyrats, and assured the coast, made an enterprize against Alge^, freed Bugia, Peg^on and
Melille from feare and the assaults of Horusco Barberousse, succoured Argille for the
king of Portugal, and with all discharged great debts, which D. Ferdinand his grandfather
did owe. That if he with a limited authority, and for another, amidest the enuy and crosses
of his ill willers, could effect such great matters, by the means of sparing and good husbandrie,
much more might he doe it, who was a king, and whose greatnes was without the
touch of enuie.

26 As for the expedition of Alger,1517 whereof hee makes mention in his letters, it had
not been verie happy:Alger held by Horusco Barberousse. it was after this maner. Alger a sea towne which some hold to bee
Cirte, the chiefe of the realme of Iuba and Siphax, but they are deceiued: Others say it
was the Colonie of Salde in Mauritania Cesariensis: it was then in a maner tributarie to
the Spaniards, but it was much afflicted by the dissension, of two brethren Moores, who
contended for the Seigneurie. The inhabitants desirous to shake off this yoake, had called
Horusco Barberousse to defend their liberties, who running along the coast of Afrike, with
his younger bother Haredin, had beene lately repulst from Bugia, a Spanish towne, with
the losse of an army, about the death of king Ferdinand. This famous Pyrat hauing thus
seased vpon that citie, co^modious for theft and Pyracies, he made himself king of Alger, hauing
slaine Celim the lawfull prince, and then hee began to spoile vpon the coast of
Spaine, and did not onely molest the Christians, but he did tyrannize ouer the pety
kings of Afrike of his owne sect: so as hee vndertooke to pispossesse Albuzeuen king
of Tunis, whome hauing slaine, hee pursued I^hia his sonne so neere, as hee forced
him to leaue the countrie, and to flie into Spaine, where addressing himselfe vnto
Cardinall Ximenes, and relating his miserie vnto him, he besought him that hee might
recouer his auncestors realme. The Cardinall hauing giuen him good hope, caused
men to bee leuied in Spaine, and galleys and ships to bee made ready to passe into
Afrike, against this Pyrat Barberousse: the charge of which army hee gaue to Diego Vera,
master of the ordnance, a rash and indiscreet man, but it was first refused by Ferdinand
Andrado, who excused himselfe, holding it perilous to lead new men and vnexperienced
(such as the Cardinall ment to send to the warre.) The army of Diego Vera,
being about eight thousand men, hauing weighed anchor they came neere vnto Alger
in October: The Moores being long before aduertised of this preparation which
was made against them, were ready to stop their landing, and at all euents had manned
the towne of Alger with good souldiers, both of horse and foot, among the which
there were sixe hundred Turkish archers, verie good souldiers, whome Horusco had
brought out of Asia for his ordinarie gard. Diego Vera approaching neere the towne,
he diuided his armie into foure parts, against the aduice of other Captaines, the which
was verie hurtful vnto him, for the Barbarians were in all places stronger than the Assayants,
either in assault, sallie or skirmish: so as the Christian army was chased and dispearst
with a horrible slaughter, Diego Vera hauing abandoned all, and hiding himselfe
with his sonne a good part of the day among the rocks, hee saued himselfe in the first
vessell that he found at anchor: and being returned into Spaine he was receiued of all
men with ^aunts and scoffes, the children singing songs in the streets, to his dishonour
and disgrace, saying, that Diego Vera was to weake to wrestle against Horusco, who had
but one arme, with such like. After which the Spaniards were neuer succesful in any enterprise
against Alger.
The newes of this rout was brought to Cardinall Ximenes, when as hee was disputing
in an assembly of Diuines: and they say, that hauing read the letters, hee shewed
no signe of heauines, but said onely, that the Spanish army had beene defeated in
Afrike, but God be thanked, the losse was not great: for Spaine by this meanes should
bee purged of a great number of lewd insolent companions, whom hee had sent in this
expedition, remembring what king Ferdinand was wont to say, that it was necessary
after a time to send men out of the countrie to some foreine warre: for it was like a
po^ion of Rubarbe to a mans body, which carried away all sharpe and cholericke humors
hindering the sweet harmony of the whole constitution: so did Pericles that famous
captaine of the Athenians vse to doe, and other men of worth: hee made the losse lesse in
certaine letters writen vnto the king, saying, that there were but a thousand of the whole
army slaine and taken prisoners, laying the whole blame vpon Diego Vera.
27 About that time and not farre from the warre of Alger,Edict against the Genouois traffiking into Spaine. there was a cruell edict
made against the Genouois trafiquing in the towns and ports of Spain, by the which
they were commanded to void the country within a short space, vpon pain of confiscation
of their goods and losse of their liues: the cause was the error and indiscretion of some,
aswell Spaniards, as Genouois, but the fault was chiefly in D. Berenguelo, lord of Muscot a

Cattellan commaunder of the Spanish gallies. And thus it was, there was a captaine of
a brigantine or foist,Cause of the Edict against the Genousois. named Iohn Riue, borne at Toledo, who being not imployed in the
kings seruice, did steale at sea both from friend and enemie; so as meeting on a time certaine
marchants ships of Genoua, hauing an aduantage ouer them in a calme, he had
put them to ransome: for the which the Genouois hauing made their complaints, being
friends to Spaine, they attended but an occasion to make Iohn Riue repaire this injurie,
and to punish him as he deserued. It happened that three great ships of Genoua, being
in the port of Carthagena, to carrie away wools, at the same time the commonweale of
Genoua had sent forth three gallies well furnished with men and ordnance, as well for
the safetie of those marchants ships, as to seeke out the pyrat Iohn Riue, who had spoyled
their companions: and as by chance all these vessels of Genoua were at Carthagena, behold
the Spanish armie arriues, being commaunded by D. Berenguelo, with whom Iohn
Riue was, who was presently knowne by the Genouois, and therefore they addrest themselues
to D. Berenguelo, intreating him to deliuer him vnto them, who had ransomed and
spoyled them, to the end they might represent him to the Iustice, or punish him themselues,
according to the league betwixt the deceased kings of Arragon and the commonweale
of Genoua. Whereof D. Berenguelo, through his arrogancie, and also for that he
was a Cattelan,Refusall of iustice cause of a great tumult in Spaine. and by consequence an enemie to the Genouois, made no reckoning.
Wherewith the Genouois being incensed, following after the foist of Iohn Riue, they did
so plie her with their canon, as they had almost sunke her. D. Berenguelo growing in a
rage for this fact, leauing the Genouois gallies which were armed, and had committed
the fault, he went against the Genouois ships which lay in the port, to assayle them, who
presently put their boa^s downe into the water with certaine peeces of ordnance, and
put themselues in defence. D. Berenguelo, when he saw them in fight, left them, and went
to land. There was a furious incounter betwixt the Genouois and the gallies of Spaine,
wanting their head; two of them were so ill handled with their great shot, as the one
sunke, and the other, being all broken, ran on ground, and was also lost. The towne (being
moued at this noyse, and solicited by the cries of D. Berenguelo, saying, That they
must not in any sort suffer so great an outrage, which was against the Maiestie of the king,
that strangers should presume to assaile his gallies in the port of Carthagena) was presently
all in armes: the fight grew so hot, as the towne against the Genouois gallies and
ships, and they against the towne, shot continually one at another, making a pitifull ruine
of buildings, and killing of men, vntill that night parted them. The cardinall tooke
this fact of the Genouois verie ill, as contemners of him and of the king his master; being
also displeased with D. Berenguelo, whereupon followed that edict. He also sought
by all meanes vnto the king, to haue D. Berenguelo depriued of the charge of the gallies,
shewing his vnworthinesse of such a commaunder, and the great fault which he had committed:
and also that the truce of an hundred yeares, concluded betwixt the kings of Arragon,
and the commonwele of Genoua being expired, it seemed they would reuiue with
great hatred, the old quarell for the island of Sardinia. D. Berenguelo, besides that hee
had friends and fauourers in the Court of Flanders, hee made the cardinals pursuit in
vaine,Victorie of D. Berenguelo against the Turks by a victorie which he got soone after against foure Turkish gallies, the fight continuing
almost a whole day, which was the onely remarkable thing hee did in six yeares
space, that he had beene generall of the gallies. The commonweale of Genoua sent embassadours
into Flanders, to king Charles, excusing themselues of this fact, and saying,
That it was the fault of priuat men, and not of the citie, against whom they had proceeded
by way of justice, condemning the commaunders and captaines to loose their liues,
and the souldiers and mariners to other punishments, according to their merits, as soone
as they should be returned home: But God preuented the execution of their decrees, for
these vessels being retired to the port of Vill^^^anche neere to Nice, they had by a sudden
whirlewind beene swallowed vp in the sea, with the losse of aboue three hundred
men. Wherefore they besought the king, seeing that these wicked breakers of the publike
league, were diuinely punished, that he would be pleased to grant a restitution of
their goods which had beene seised on in Spaine, and disannull that rigorous Edict. King
Charles pacified by this embassage, pardoned the offence, and reuoked the Edict, against

the cardinals will, who was verie obstinate in that which he had once conceiued, and did
still solicite the king to breed jealousies in his head against that commonweale,Cardinal Ximenes an enemie to the Genouois. and to
bring them into disgrace with him; saying, that they had intelligence with the French:
giuing infinit crosses to these poore Genouois. Yet in the end, by their diligence and perseuerance,Edict against the Genouois reuoked.
they justified themselues, and obtained restitution, and an abolition of the Edict,
the cardinall, their aduersarie (being somewhat pacified) consenting thereunto. He
opposed himselfe with great vehemencie, against the pursuits of the new Christians (as
they call them) in Court, that the judgements of the Inquisition might bee executed against
them, touching that which concernes witnesses, according to the forme of other
criminall causes; for the accused were not allowed to except against the witnesses, which
were not confronted against them,Proceeding vniust against the accused by the Inquisition. nor yet named: which gaue occasion and boldnesse
vnto judges, which were greedie of the bloud and wealth of these poore men, to commit
many cruelties and abuses in their charges. Finally, this cardinall did so labour with the
king and Pope, whereas they of Arragon were also sutors, as the lawes of the tribunall of
the Inquisition, practised in the time of king Ferdinand, remained firme.
29 About that time there fell out a great debate in the citie of Siguensa,Contention for the bishoprick of Siguensa. for the restitution
of the cardinall D. Bernardin of Caruajal, sometimes bishop of that sea, whereof
he had beene depriued by Pope Iulio, by reason of the Councell of Pisa. Cardinall Ximenes
fauouring his reintegration to his dignitie, goods, and honours, made by Pope Leo,
he had for opposite D. Frederic of Portugall, subrogated into that bishopricke, after the
deposition of D. Bernardin, who would not leaue (...) So as some holding with cardinall
Car^aial, and others with D. Frederic, the diocesse was diuided, and their contentions came
to armes. The place where the greatest excesse was committed, was Almazan, a towne of
the earle of Montagus jurisdiction, whither they were resolued to send an Alcayde of the
Court, to suppresse this tumult. This Alcaide called Ferdinand Calderon, shewed himself so
cruell in his proceedings against this poore people, as the earle their lord telling him, that
his too great seueritie should rather be called outrage then justice: and hauing by sundrie
messages aduertised the kings Councell, and besought them, to commaund Calderon to
retire: but seeing that they made no account of it, he came himselfe, well accompanied
to Almazan, and forced him to leaue the towne. Wherewith the Councell, especially
doctor Adrian, who was now a cardinall, and companion to cardinall Ximenes in the gouernement
of Castille, being incensed, sent a personall adjournement for the earle of
Montagu, and meant to make his processe, as hauing offended the kings Majestie. But cardinall
Ximenes opposed himselfe, shewing that he might lawfully doe that which he had
done, seeing that vpon his many complaints made vnto the Councell, against the excesse
of Ferdinand Calderon there was no order taken: and so he caused this pursuit to cease.
The difference for the bishopricke of Siguensa, ended in like maner, by the death of D.
Guttiere of Toledo, bishop of Plaisance: which place was giuen to the cardinall of Caruajal,
and D. Frederic left in the possession of Siguensa. And for that the gouernements of
cities and prouinces of Spaine, had beene for a long time distributed confusedly, and without
distinction of persons,Nobilitie instituted to commaund. whether noble or vnnoble, it was concluded to restore the ancient
custome, and conformable to nature, that nobilitie instituted to commaund, and to
exercise honourable charges, should be imployed: wherefore there were many changes
of old gouernours throughout all Spaine. True it is, that the Biscanes and they of Palence
had no gentlemen at that time, but two famous Lawyers for their gouernours, that is, Leon
and Gallego. In some places cardinall Ximenes was preuented by such as obtained them
by the kings fauour, and of the Flemish courteors; wherewith he was much discontented,
especially for the gouernement of Burgos, the which was giuen without his priuitie
to D. Pedro of Castille, who deliuered the fort of Lara into the hands of the Sherifes and
Comminaltie of the towne, and they gaue the gard thereof to I^ffrey of Conde, a Fleming,
who had beene marshall of the lodging to the deceased king Philip, an inconstant
man, and a prater, and therefore much hated by cardinall Ximenes. Of this and of many
other things done by D. Pedro,Cardinal Ximenes impatient of iniuries, by reason of (...). he made sundrie complaints vnto the king. So impatient
he was of any injurie, as ^e thought that whatsoeuer king Charles ordained, touching the
affaires of Spaine, if it came not from him, and his aduertisements and counsels, it was

done in contempt of him, condemning it as pernitious, and as subiects of seditions; accusing
the noblemen and counsellors of Flander of rashnesse, who being ignorant of
the lawes and maners of the Spaniards, medled with the disposition of the gouernments
of Spaine, the which did wholly depend of the Viceroyes authoritie and reputation, and
of the kings councell which was in the countrey. He did honour and cherish doctor
Adrian Florent verie much, for that he yeelded vnto him: He procured him the bishopricke
of Tortosa, the which made his way to a cardinals hat, and afterwards to the Papacie.
He sought also by all meanes to procure him the dignitie of Inquisitor generall of
Arragon, as he himselfe had that of Castille; but he could not. The secretarie Mote of
Burgos, a diuine, was verie deere vnto him, whom he made bishop of Badajos, and would
haue made him cardinall, and Archbishop of Toledo, had not the cardinall died so soone,
which hindered him from enjoying of those dignities whereof he held himselfe sure, but
he was deceiued. Mote had beene preacher to king Philip, after whose decease he would
haue retired into Flanders, for that in hatred of the king D. Ferdinand, he and all the seruants
of the deceased, sought to draw the Emperour Maximilian into Spaine, to contend
for the gouernement of those realmes, for prince Charles his grand child. To haue
the better accesse vnto the young princes court, he begged letters of fauour almost from
all the chiefe noblemen of Spaine. King Ferdinand knowing that this preacher was full
of spleene against him, yet would he not hinder his voyage for Flanders, shewing therein
a generous mind: but he gaue order, that when he should be readie to depart, all his letters
of recommendation should be stol^e from him; the which was cunningly performed
by the care of D. Bernardin of Velasco, the kings sonne in law, who had great meanes in
that citie to doe it. Mote not discouering what was done, goes on his way, and being arriued
in Flanders, where they were alreadie aduertised that he should come, accompanied
with many letters of fauour, when he opened his male he found not any, whereat he
was much abashed, and therefore for a time was held of all those courteors for a man of a
shallow braine. Notwithstanding his vertue and eloquence made him a way to king
Charles his fauour, and aduanced him to honour, by the meanes of cardinall Ximenes: who
also procured honours and titles to many others, whose qualities and behauiour were
pleasing vnto him, as to D. Iohn Pacheco, sonne to the earle of Escalona, the title of earle
of Saint Stephen; to D. William Peres of Ajala, that of earle of Gomera, which is one of the
islands of the Canaries, which he obtained of the king for him. Such was the gouernement
and carriage of cardinall Ximenes, who was feared and respected both of great and
small in Castille.





@THE 27 BOOKE OF THE
Historie of Spaine.

The Contents.
1 DIsagreement betwixt cardinall Ximenes and the noblemen of Flanders. Three gouernors
in Castille.
2 Seditions in Castille, vnder pretext of the Flemings greedinesse.
3 Exactions of the Pope hindered by cardinall Ximenes.
4 Processe ambitiously ended by cardinall Ximenes, among the great men. Contempt of iustice,
rebellions, and other insolencies supprest by him.
5 Profanation of the order of cardinals by Pope Leo.
6 Cardinall Francis Ximenes poysoned, by his enemies.
7 Reformation of the house of the Infant D. Ferdinand, brother to king Charles of Austria,
by cardinall Ximenes.
8 Arriuall of king Charles of Austria in Spaine. Disgrace, discharge, and death of cardinall
Ximenes.
9 Behauiour and qualities of cardinall Ximenes.
10 Bible printed in Spaine in many languages, by the diligence of cardinall Ximenes.
11 Buildings made by this cardinall.
12 Estates at Vailledolit. Crowning of Charles of Austria king of Castille.
13 Election of Charles of Austria to be Emperour: his departure out of Spaine.
14 Sedition in Castille against cardinall Adrian and the gouernors.
15 Enterprise of king Henrie of Albret, for the recouerie of his realme of Nauarre. The taking
of Pampelone.
16 The beginning and progresse of the Iesuites.
17 Sect of Theatines differing from the Iesuites.
18 Vnfortunate exploits of the lord of Asperraut in Nauarre.
19 Another expedition of the French into Guipuscoa, vnder the lord of Boniuet: and the taking
of Fontarrabie.
20 Adrian Pope. Continuance of the warre of Nauarre. The Emperours returne into Spaine.
21 Fontarraby recouered by the Spaniards. The gouernors of that fort successiuely vnto our time
22 Taking of king Francis at Pauis.
23 Mariage of the Emperour Charles the fift.
24 Rome sackt by the Spaniards.
25 Mariage of king Henrie of Albret with Marguerite of France.
26 Nauigation of Ferdinand Magellanes to the South.
27 Mariage of duke Charles of Sauoy, and D. Beatrix of Portugall.
28 D* Iohn the third of that name, and 15 king of Portugall.
29 Continuation of the nauigation to the East, and the wonderfull voyage of Iohn Sebastian
del Cano.
30 Mariage of D. Iohn king of Portugal, with D. Katherine, sister to the Emperour Charles.

31 Vnprofitable voyage of the Castillans to the Mol^cques.
32 Treatie of Cambray.
33 Coronation of the Emperor at Bolonia.
34 Peru discouered.
35 Muley Hascen, king of Tunes, expelled by Barberousse, and restored by the Emperour.
36 Voyage of Prouence by the Emperour.
37 Portugals assailed by the Turkes in the East.
38 Enteruiew of Pope, Emperour, and French king, at Nice.
39 Troubles for the impost in diuers places.
40 Emperours voyage to Algier.
41 Warre betwixt the Emperour and French king, and then a peace concluded.
42 Muley Hascen, king of Tunes, againe dispossest.

For the continuance of the royall lines of Spaine
in this seuen and twentieth Booke, mention is made for
CASTILLE, of LEON, ARRAGON, NAVARRE.23 D. Charles 1.--44 the same 1.--21 the same 1.--37 the same 4.
THe seueritie and integritie of cardinall Ximenes, in the gouernement
of affaires, could not be long supportable to the Spaniards, who are
hautie and proud, and accustomed to serue their kings being present;
and much lesse to the Flemings, who were neere vnto king
Charles, who desirous to make vse of their credit and authoritie, did
still busie themselues with the great affaires of Spaine, and made
their profit, to the cardinals great griefe, he opposing himself against
them in all he could: so as all things tended to confusion, as well among the Spaniards,
who desired the comming of their prince into the countrey, the which might quench
many quarels, and content those that did enuie the cardinals greatnesse, as with the noblemen
Flemings, who entertained the king in Flanders, vpon diuers colours, thinking
it a fit meanes to compasse their designes, if he did not vndertake this voyage; and in
truth these had the aduantage, the king being in their power. And to take some course
for the mischiefes which he feared might happen in Spaine, by reason of the kings absence,The lord of Chaux third gouernor in Spain by the procurement of doctor Adrian.
it was concluded to send the lord of Chaux thither, who had beene much fauoured
by king Philip, and was chamberlaine to Charles his sonne; a man fitter to entertaine
a prince with pleasant discourse, and to keep him companie, than to manage the great affaires
of a kingdome. To him was giuen the third place in the gouernement of Castille,
with cardinall Ximenes, and doctor Adrian, who had procured the comming of this third,
writing into Flanders, That he was not sufficient to resist cardinall Ximenes, a hautie man,
who (not able to endure a companion) did manage all things at his pleasure. The comming
of Chaux was verie pleasing to the noblemen, and to the people of Spaine, who
were discontented with the cardinall, and he was receiued with all royall honours, against
the which the cardinall did not in any sort oppose himselfe, shewing therein, as in all other
things, a great magnanimitie and constancie, although he knew that he was sent to check
his authoritie and greatnesse. All the great noblemen of Spaine, without attending any
commaundement from cardinall Ximenes the Viceroy, went to meet him, being accompanied
with great numbers of their friends and vassals: and comming neere to Madrid,
there went forth to incounter him, doctor Adrian, accompanied with two of the Popes
Nonces, the bishop of Burgos, D. Anthonie Fonseca, his brother, and by the commanders
of the militarie orders, hauing with them a great traine of commaunders of euerie order,
the Rector or gouernour of the towne, the Sherifes and most apparent burgesses, the
embassadours or deputies of Arragon, the royall Councell, the Inquisition, the chamber
of accounts, and other officers of the kings house, euerie one going in his ranke and order,
with whom there joyned the bishop of Auila, with the cardinals traine: And of noblemen,

the marquesse of Villena, the earle of Vregna, the marquesse of Comares and
Aguilar, D. Bertrand de la Cueua, eldest sonne to the duke of Alb^querque, the earle of
Orepesa, and others. Such as were not there were kept backe by a disease which did run
generally ouer all Spaine. Cardinall Ximenes, in regard of his place of Viceroy, stayed in
the palace, and receiued monsieur de Chaux, at the entrie of the great chamber of the lodging,
which was prepared for him, and that night he feasted him with great state, and entertained
him with much pleasant discourse, lodging him for that time in the chamber
where the bishop of Auila was accustomed to lodge, for that the Infant D. Ferdinand, the
widow queene Germaine, and the cardinall, were commonly lodged in the castle, and
held a great part of it. Thus was this nobleman receiued and honoured, being the first
that was sent into Spaine with authoritie, since that Charles of Austria tooke vpon him
the title of king. The great lords of Spaine came to visit monsieur de Chaux, and courted
him: but the cardinall had no great care to impart the affaires vnto him, nor to call
him, vnlesse he came of himselfe, yet holding still the first place in all expeditions, the
which he made knowne to him and doctor Adrian; who hauing on a time signed some
dispatches,Cardinall Xi^^enes mainetaines his authoritie resolutely. leauing a place for the cardinall to signe vnder them, being presented vnto
him thus signed, he tare them in peeces, and caused others to be made, and signed them
aboue, the which were of as great effect* And thus he continued vntill the kings comming,
although before he would haue doctor Adrian signe all things with him.
1 The Flemish nobilitie being aduertised of this harsh proceeding, it made them
thinke, that this cardinall would one day trouble both them and the king: wherefore to
abate (as they thought) his greatnesse, they procured to haue a fourth sent into Spaine,
vnder colour of some priuat businesse, with equall authoritie to the rest. This was Ar^astof,
a man that was some what graue: yet they might say, that of all that companie
the cardinall was most judicious, and continued his accustomed course, notwithstanding
any thing that they could doe. But they stayed not here, for they often resolued in Flanders,
to send some great prince to gouerne Spaine, to whom the cardinall should be forced
to yeeld; or some other of judgement and vnderstanding, to oppose him against this
great spirit. Some were of opinion to intreat the Emperour Maximilian to take vpon
him this charge; others, Lewis, co^t Palatin, allied to the king; and some, to giue the authoritie
to the Infant D. Ferdinand: many gaue their voyces to the Chancellor Sau^age.
As for Maximilian, he was ingaged in the warres of Italie: to aduance Ferdinand, that was
not safe nor conuenient, and it had beene alwayes their care, which loued the peace and
vnion of these two brethren, that the Infant should be neerely lookt vnto, least that mutines
should make him their shield. The cont Palatin was held fit, yea to take charge of
the Infant, the which did not altogether displease the cardinall; for he had desired euer
since the death of the Catholike king, to remoue such from about him, as, in his opinion,
had bred him vp ill, yet he desired rather not to obey any one; to which end he writ to
the king,Cardinall Ximenes cannot endure a companion in the gouernment of Castille. beseeching him, not to send any into Spaine, with whom he must alwayes quarell,
but rather to giue him leaue to retire to his diocesse, where hee would looke to his
owne priuat affaires, and liue religiously in rest: for he did foresee, that the enuie of some,
and the couetousnesse of many, would alwayes seeke to crosse his good designes and resolutions
to serue the commonweale, they tending to no other end, but to cause some
great tumult in Spaine, wherein he desired not to be ingaged, but rather to looke on a
farre off: aduertising him, that the onely remedie of these inconueniences was, to commit
the affaires to his tried faith, and to relie onely vpon him, not suffering any Fleming,
nor any of his Councell a farre off (no not himselfe vntill he were at age) to meddle in
Spaine with the prouision of Estates, and order of justice, with gouernments of prouinces,
leuying of the kings money, nor with garrisons of frontires, and their commaunders:
but onely retaine vnto himselfe the disposition of bishoprickes being void, commaunderies,
and benefices of knights of militarie orders, and to vse his royall bountie with good
measure:Cardinall Ximenes will diuide the royall authoritie betwixt the king and himselfe. his cardinall diuiding betwixt the king and him the royall soueraigntie, the
which euerie man of judgement thought expedient, considering his constant resolution
to maintaine justice and right in all things; adding still this concluding reason, For that,
said he, the Flemings vnderstand nothing in our affaires in Spaine, and that the king by

reason of his tender age, cannot vndergoe so great a burthen, full of care and trouble:
By reason whereof he caused himselfe to be so hated, as many Councels were held against
him, and without doubt his dayes were shortened. The courteors dissembled,
expecting but an opportunitie to tumble him from this high degree, in the which hee
maintained himselfe inuincible, against their wills, who writ vnto him, That hee
should continue to doe well, assuring him that they would assist him with all their
meanes, and solicite the kings passage into Spaine; aduising him, for the effecting thereof,
to send a good armie of ships well furnished into Flanders.
This voyage was much prest by the Emperour Maximilian, as most necessarie, and
therefore he came to Br^ssels to see the king, and to conferre with him, fearing least his
long stay there would cause some alteration in the State; comparing those people, being
moued, to a colt, which being stung with a hornet, kickes at euerie one, sparing not
his owne damme. This conference put the cardinall into a jealousie, writing to monsieur
de Cheures, That the enteruiew of great men, did neuer bring profit neither to
themselues, nor to their affaires, prouing it by many examples and great reasons. The
Spaniards seeing that the time past away in vaine hopes of their princes comming, they
began to make conuenticles, and to runne into the course (but by another way) of
former seditions: For, sayed they, the Flemings not able to forbeare to meddle with
the affayres of Spaine, whereof they had made shew not to care, they leaue vs not 
any estate,Greedinesse of the Flemings gouerning king Charles. charge, nor benefice, but it is sold to them that will giue most, and prophaned
by vnworthie men: The great treasures of the realme gathered together, and religiously
preserued by cardinall Ximenes, for the kings comming, are spoyled by strangers,
and transported out of Spaine, the which is not tollerable to a free nation, well
affected to the honour and greatnesse of their prince, and to the publicke good. They of
Burgos, Leon, Vailledolit, and all that countrey of Spaine, being incensed with these
complaints and quarels, they appointed a day to resolue on some remedies for these
great disorders, or how they might withstand the greedinesse of the Flemish courteors.
Many thought it fit to persuade the king to chase all Flemings from about him, and
to take Spaniards in their places, such as were vnderstanding men, to counsell him. Others
sayed, That besides the difficultie to obtaine it, it was to bee feared the Spaine would
in short time be as corrupt as the rest, and more cunning in their villanies; holding, that
the best course to restraine the couetousnesse of courteors, by a publike decree, by the
which power should be taken from the king, to giue the estates, offices, or benefices of
Spaine to strangers.Demaunds of the townes of Spaine. That there should be no readie money c^rried out of the countrey
without great cause, and that no necessarie money for the kings house, should be sent by
cardinall Ximenes, without consent of the townes. Many other things of this kind were
then propounded, profitable, in truth, for the publike, but derogating somewhat from
the authoritie and Maiestie royall: for thereby they did open a gate vnto the people to
commit great insolencies, the which they found by experience, after the death of cardinal
Ximenes, who moderating what he could the peoples heat, could not preuent the decrees
of these assemblies for the publike good, some gouernors consenting thereunto, and signing
them, as D. Pedro of Castille, at Burgos, and others: yet the Leonnois could neuer
induce D. Frederic of Zamora, their gouernour, to consent vnto such decrees, whereof
the towne and Comminalties did afterwards aduertise the cardinall and the kings Councell,
sending deputies to treat with them of the affaires of the commonweale afflicted;
and to intreat them to appoint a place and time for a generall assemblie to that end. The
cardinall and the Councell knew well, that the desire of the townes was just, yet they
sought to moderate them,Cardinall and Councell fauour the Spaniards demaunds against the Flemings. fearing some popular tumults, persuading them to forbeare
an assemblie, vntill they had more certaine newes of the kings comming, who they vnderstood
made preparation to imbarke speedily. In the meane time they did aduertise
the king of all that had past, excusing the Spaniards, for that they did not in any sort
doubt of the kings good will, and judgement to know, that all the admonitions and counsels
which they gaue him, were holy and just, but they complained of the Flemings that
were about his person, who could make their diligences vaine, and get vnto themselues,
both before the kings comming and after, the riches of Spaine without measure: so as it

was thought the Chancellor Sauuage had gotten for his part in lesse than foure moneths,
aboue fiue hundred thousand crownes:Ropacity of the Flemings. and if we will conjecture how monsieur de Cheures
and the rest profited, we cannot imagine what great summes these thefts amounted
vnto.Spaniards demaund the Estates. The Spaniards seeing the kings comming to be daily delayed, the cardinall and
the Councell were againe importuned for a generall assemblie of the Estates, where
they promised not to treat of any thing, but to solicite the king to come into Spaine,
to maintaine the lawes and rights of the countrey; to suppresse the couetousnesse of
courteors, and the ambition of suters for estates and offices: else, the people did protest,
that they would send embassadours vnto the king, and prouide that the commonweale
should take no harme, by such meanes as God should put into their hands. The
cardinall not able with reason to denie their just demaund, he appointed an assemblie in
the next moneth of September 1517, protracting it of purpose to Autumne, beleeuing
that about that time the king might arriue in Spaine; and in the meane time he prepared
a fleet of ships for his voyage, the which he sent him, posts running continually
from Spaine to Flanders, and back againe, to aduance this comming, without the which
they saw no meanes to maintaine the realme in peace: the cardinall holding (and rightly)
it to be a pernitious thing, when as the people, hauing cause of grieuance, presumes^to
complaine publikely: for when as they haue once lost the reuerence which they
owe vnto the superiour, there is no more any restraint; and popular complaints and
quarels are easily receiued and beleeued, by such as haue a desire to trouble the State,
whereof the number is alwayes great in great realmes. The place assigned for the assemblie,
was at Madrid, the Viceroyes and the Councels place of residence. Many slanderous
libels were at that time cast abroad,Libels cast abroad. euerie man censuring the cardinals actions according
to his owne conceits: and seeing it was now a time of back-biting, and that some
one had begun, doctor Adrian, monsieuer de Cheures, Francis Ruis, monsieur de Chaux,
and others, were not spared. But cardinall Ximenes contemned these things, with a
manly courage; saying, That they must leaue this solace to the multitude, to moderate
their afflictions, which they could not otherwise reuenge; whereas the Flemings,
who were not accustomed to this stinging, seemed to be much discontented:
so as it is no wonder if Adrian comming to bee Pope, caused the statues of Marforio
and Pasquil to be cast into the riuer of Tiber, whom they made to carrie the libels that
were set vp in Rome: whereupon, they say, that the Spanish embassadour which was
then in Rome, said vnto him, That it was to be feared, by this drowning the frogs would
presently learne to sing bad songs.
3 The cardinall being come to Toledo, to visit (attending the kings comming)
his diocesse, and the monasteries of Nunnes which he caused to be built, as well in
that citie as at Illesca, being accompanied by doctor Adrian, he heard the complaints
of the Clergie, for that Pope Leo, by vertue of the last decree of the Councell of Latran,
demaunded the tenth of the reuenues of all their benefices, vpon colour to defend
the Christian religion against Infidels; for that Selim Emperour of the Turkes,
hauing vanquished the Sultan of Aegypt,Exactions of Pope Leo hindered by cardinall Ximenes. did threaten Christendome, and namely Italie:
Wherefore he not onely sent this yeare into Spaine, but into all others regions of
Europe, whereas the Popes name and authoritie was reuerenced, to exact this money
for three yeares, with many Indulgences and pardons to them that should contribute
money willingly, and extraordinarily, whereof there followed great troubles
in Christendome, yet with a lightning of the Gospell.
Cardinall Ximenes, whose authoritie was great with the Pope, was solicited not
onely by the Clergie of Castille, but also by that of Arragon (where they doe all
by an auncient right enjoy great priuiledges and liberties) to take this cause in hand,
and to bee a mediator vnto the Pope, that the Clergie of Spaine might not bee
made tributarie. The cardinall did willingly offer to take vpon him the protection
of this order, but hee did admonish them, not to make any assemblies to that end,
but when hee should commaund them.Clergie of Spain free from the exaction of the tenth penie of their benefices. In the meane time hee did manage this
businesse so politikely at Rome, by the ministerie of Artega, his Agent, as hee
kept Spaine free from this exaction, but in case of great necessitie: and hauing

after the manner of auncient kings, called the deputies of the Clergie to the Court at
Madrid, he gaue them this good newes, and attended willingly their resolution, which
was, not to contribute any thing. They say, that this tenth penie for three yeres, was duly
leuied in Italie, in the territories of the Church, and no where else, but his Bulls of Indulgences,
and the preaching of the Croisado, was generall.
4 There were many great suits in Spaine, which through the fraud and tergiuersation
of parties, and their counsels, were delayed and drawne into length, the which the cardinall
desired to haue determined before the kings comming, but he was suspected: Wherfore
three of the greatest noblemen of Spaine, in a manner at one instant, as it were conspiring
together, did greatly crosse him, that is, the duke of the Infantazgo, chiefe of
the house of Mendosa, D. Frederic of Toledo, duke of Alua, and the earle of Vregna,
Giron. The duke of the Infantazgo remembred how that the cardinall had hindered the
mariage betwixt D. Pedro Gonsales of Mendosa, his nephew, and D. Ioane of Cisneros,
the cardinals neece: wherefore being incensed against him, he thought there was some
indirect dealing with his aduerse partie, the earle of Castro, against whom hee had his
suit, for the place of Belenna, neere vnto Guadalajara; by reason whereof he desired to
prolong the cause vntill the kings comming, of whom hauing obtained letters for his
part, and the cardinall also for his part others of a contrarie tenour, to haue the cause judged
by the kings councell; in the end the cardinall obtained that which he pretended,
and a sentence was giuen in fauour of the earle: about which time there comming a promoter
from Alcala of Henares, for the cardinall, touching some proceedings at Guadalajara,
the duke of the Infantazgo caused him to be chased away with cudgels,Excesse committed by the duke of Infantazgo. threatening
to hang this poore petie-fogger, if he returned any more; saying, That he did incroach
vpon the jurisdiction of his brother D. Bernardin, archdeacon of Guadalajara.
For which excesse the cardinall gaue it out, that he would be reuenged of the duke, and
that he would call him in question, for that religion was violated, in that they had wronged
an officer which did belong vnto the Church, and also for that the fact was against
the publike peace, and that he would abate his greatnesse. The duke being incensed,
and desirous to braue the cardinall, he sent a chaplaine of his vnto him, to deliuer him a
message full of disgrace and threatning. This poore priest being forced to goe to Alcala
of Henares, whereas the cardinall was, hee fell on his knees before him, and craued
leaue to doe his message. They were nothing but reproaches of his base condition,
growne proud to see himselfe so highly aduanced, adding some vaine threats, the which
did little moue the cardinall,Magnani^itie of cardinall Ximenes who hauing heard all that hee would say with a constant
countenance, he answered him quietly: Goe backe vnto thy master, whom thou shalt
find repenting the foolish words which thou hast deliuered me: and in truth before the
priest returned, the dukes choler being past, he would haue giuen much that he had not
sent him, blaming all his familiar friends and houshold seruants, that they had not pacified
his rage, yea hee was displeased with the chaplaine, for that hee was so readie to
obey him. This question, and all the spleene which the cardinall had against the duke,
was afterwards pacified by the constable D. Inigo Fernandes of Velasco,Reconciliation of cardinall Ximenes and the duke of Infantazgo. who made them
dine together at Fontcarillo, whereas the duke made so many excuses vnto the cardinall,
as he remained satisfied. They say, that after the ceremonie of their reconciliation
was ended, the lodging wherein they were was presently enuironed by Iohn de Spinosa,
captaine of the Viceroyes gard,Policie of cardinall Ximenes to keepe the noblemen in feare. with his archers and light horse, the which did amaze
the noblemen that were there assembled, thinking that it was a plot layed by the cardinall,
but hee assured them that it was the importune diligence of Spinosa, who was come
thither without any commission, for the which, he said, hee was much offended with
him.
The earle of Vregnaes quarell was more daungerous, and harder to be reconciled,
the which did produce many violent effects. This earle soone after the decease of king Ferdinand,
had also shewed himselfe opposite to cardinall Ximenes, and had assisted D. Pedro
his sonne in the tumult of Medina Sidonia, whom he should rather haue admonished to
proceed by way of justice. Certaine officers comming to execute a sentence of the Chancerie
of Granado, and to recouer certaine of the kings customes of Osona, he had sent them

away beaten and wounded, notwithstanding that they shewed him letters from cardinall
Ximenes,Outrage committed by the earle of Vregna who being busied in other affairs, dissembled these things, vntil some fitter opportunitie,
the which was offered, when as the cardinall, according to his resolution to end
all old suits, would haue the cause judged, which depended betwixt the earle of Vregna
and D. Guttiere of Quixada, in the court of Chancerie at Vailledolit, for the towne of Villefratre
neere vnto Vailledolit, whereof the earle kept forcible possession, Quixada pursuing
the restitution, the which he obtained, whereat the earle being incensed, he complained,
that the sentence was vniust. By vertue whereof an vsher and other ministers of justice
comming to Villefratre, to put Quixada in possession, they were outragiously intreated,
and beaten by D. Roderigo Giron,Court of parliament violated. the earles sonne, D. Bernardin of Velasco, the constables
sonne, D. Bertrand de la ^ueua, son to the duke of Albuquerque, D. Ferdinand Henriques,
sonne to the Admirall, and other young and ill aduised noblemen, who were there
present: Whereof complaint being made vnto the Court, the President D. Diego Ramires
of Villascusan, bishop of Malaga, notwithstanding that he was a verie mild man, yet
moued with the foulenesse of the fact, he commaunded some legionarie souldiers in Vailledolit,
and the neighbour places, to arme, to assist justice, to execute the sentence of the
court, and to punish those rebels, going himselfe in person towards Villefratre. The
constable, who was wise, knowing the danger into the which these young men did runne,
posted thither, before that the President went to field, and made them abandon the
place, and giue way to the execution of the sentence of the court: whereupon the bishop
of Malaga dismist his souldiers, and thanked the constable for this good office, and so remained
satisfied without any further proceeding. But the cardinall, who was not of so
tractable a nature, was much offended at this fact, adding this to other quarels he had against
the earle of Vregna and his house;Pursuits of the cardinall against them that had violated Iustice. wherefore he sent out warrant to apprehend
them that had resisted the justice, and Sarmiento the Prouost of the court, to ruine Villefratre,
and to make the processe of such as had committed this contempt. The young
noblemen, who had left the place by the constables persuasion, seeing that they proceeded
criminally against them, they returned vnto their old frenzie, and put themselues againe
into Villefratre, with some troupes of souldiers raised at Villapando, a place belonging
to the constable, being resolued to keepe it in despight of cardinall Ximenes. This
businesse tended to sedition and great trouble, and many there were which did much
blame the cardinals seueritie and obstinacie, to haue pursued these noblemen, after so
good an office done by the constable, and their obedience, yea he might assure himselfe
that the dukes of the Infantazgo and Alba, would bandie themselues against him,
whereby the whole realme, by reason of their great alliances and power, would bee
drawne into confusion: But the cardinall was well pleased to oppose himselfe against
great men, searching such occasions ambitiously, to shew his magnanimitie, dexteritie,
and constancie to maintaine justice. Finally, they proceeded by the course of justice
against the aboue named, whose names were proclaimed, and they summoned
to appeare at Madrid and at Vailledolit, and giue an account for violating the lawes
and offending the Majestie: and there were declarations set vp, according to the solemnities
of justice, obserued in Spaine in such affaires, vpon paine to bee held conuicted
of those crimes, condemned and punished according vnto law: The which
did much grieue the fathers of these young noblemen, who assembled at Tudela, to
consult what was to be done, or, as some write, at Portillo; namely, the earle of Benauent,
the constable, the dukes of Alba and Albuquerque, and a deputie for the duke
of the Infantazgo, who knowing the cardinals power, and austere disposition, resolued
to proceed in this businesse with all quiet and peaceable meanes: wherefore they sent
vnto him, to desire him to haue regard vnto the youth of their children; but on the other
side they did write vnto the king, complaining of the cardinals sowre disposition, whereby
Spaine was opprest, and filled full of troubles. The cardinall in like maner did not faile to
aduertise the king of what had past at Villefratre, and of the rashnesse, disobedience, and
contempt of these noblemen, omitting nothing of the rigor of justice in this action: wherfore
there was apparence of some great tumult, for these nobleme^ made many assemblies,
and the bishop of Zamora was already come to Vailledolit (who was afterwards strangled

in the castle of Aquila) and the earle of Alba de Lista, with troupes of men, in fauour of
the earle of Vregna, who notwithstanding were forced to depart the towne, by the aduice
of them of the Chauncerie, for that they did solicite the people to sedition. They
did also surprise a packet of the constables, directed to the earle of Vregna, to whom he
promised to rayse all the countrey of Burgos, and that of the mountaines: whereby it
appeared* that the demonstrations he made to pacifie things, and to bee a neuter in this
businesse, were but fained. On the other side, the duke of Alba, a secret enemie to the
cardinall, by reason of the commission which he, in his opinion, had purchased, to depriue
his sonne of the priorie of Saint Iohn, he offered all his power and meanes to the
duke of Albuquerque, against the cardinall. In the meane time the Alcayde proceeded
against them that were within Villefratre, who to omit nothing that might make
their cause odious, had made an image attired like a cardinall, the which they caused
to be dragd vp and downe the towne, in derision of cardinall Ximenes: but in the end
these vaine young lords finding that their forces might not equall the Viceroyes power,
they dislodged by night, and left the place. Then Sarmiento proceeding in the processe,
pronounced sentence,Sentence against the town of Villefratre, and the execution thereof. by the which the towne of Villefratre was condemned to
be burnt to ashes, and the ground of it to be sowne with salt, and neuer more to be built,
for that the ministers of royall justice had beene outraged there, and the decrees of the
court of Vailledolit contemned: the earle of Vregna, Rodrigo his sonne, and their other
confederats and adherents, conuicted of high treason, and condemned to Guttiere of
Quixade, in his charges, dammage, and interest. This sentence was presently put in execution,
the towne was reduced to powder, first with the canon, and then with fire: seuen
of the inhabitants which had outraged the vsher, when they did beat him, and cried out,
That they knew no other lord but the earle of Vregna, were publikely whipt: a seruant of
the Admirals being accused to haue leuied men secretly in fauour of the rebels, was also
condemned by Sarmiento to be whipt. This sentence was executed vpon a festiuall day, against
custome and al example. Which rigorous acts did much afflict all the great noblemen
of Spaine, among the which the duke of Escalona, who was then at Madrid, kept his
chamber six dayes for griefe, and would not speake to any man; and then being visited by
D. Francis Ruis,Complain^s against cardinall Ximenes. bishop of Auila, he complained much of the cardinals rough and inexorable
seueritie, a man without friendship or humanitie, to haue so vilely intreated the earle
of Vregna, his kinsman, whereby he would tread vnder his feet the dignitie of great and
famous houses of Spaine, and shew himselfe an enemie to nobilitie. The constable, with
the duke of the Infantazgo, and other noblemen, gaue the cardinall to vnderstand, That
seeing he had proceeded so furiously against Villefratre, to the great contempt and prejudice
of the earle of Vregna, he should doe well to satisfie himselfe, and not pursue the
house of Giron any farther. But the Admirall Henriques, who had neuer shewed himselfe
an open enemie to the cardinall, being come to Madrid, spake vnto him with great mildnesse
and modestie, shewing him the wrong he did vnto himselfe, as well as to the whole
realme (holding the ranke of Archbishop of Toledo, and primat) so to blemish the honor
of the great houses of Spaine, so well deseruing of their kings, not onely in these publike
executions, but by accusations and reports written vnto the king, whereof they were
well aduertised,Admonition of the Admirall of Castille to cardinall Ximenes. and other bad offices. Wherefore he admonished him, That if he loued
the quiet of the realme, and desired to doe the king seruice, he should moderate his
austere behauiour, and intreat men and their affaires with more equitie, and lesse choler.
Whereunto the cardinall,Answer of cardinall Ximenes to the Admirall of Castille. with a setled spirit, answered, That he intreated him to thinke,
that he was neuer any of those, which sought to win the fauour of kings, or to maintaine
their reputation in the world by crueltie, or doing injurie to any other: but he had endeuoured
to acquit himselfe duly of that great charge which had bin committed vnto him,
to gouerne the realm. And if they would inquire of that which he had written, and of the
offices which he had done with the king, they should find he had not bin so inciuile as they
thought, and as euery one did publish, according to his passions. As for the processe of Giron,
matters were proceeded so far,Proceedings of the cardinall allowed by the king. as the king himselfe did set downe an order. Thus matters
remained in suspence, vntil the king had signified his pleasure, who did approue al the
cardinal and justice had done, referring the rest to his judgeme^t: the which the duke of Escalona,

with the other friends, kinsmen, and allies of the earle of Vregna, seeing they knew
not what to resolue, but to pacifie the cardinall, seeking by all meanes to haue his fauour:
by which meanes they obtained, that the earle representing himselfe in justice, and suomitting
himselfe thereunto, all offences were pardoned, D. Francis Ruis, bishop of Auila, presiding
in counsell, and pronouncing the sentence.
The discontentment which D. Frederie of Toledo,Causes of the duke of Albaes discontentment. duke of Alba, had against the cardinall,
grew for the priorie of S. Iohn of Ierusalem, of the knights of Rhodes, the which D.
Diego his third son held then, and had enioyed it six yeres. This dignitie is esteemed among
the greatest of Spaine, whereof the prior Valenzuela had beene depriued in the life of king
Ferdinand, for his ill deseruings, and D. Aluaro of Estuniga canonically aduanced, who
had resigned it vnto his newphew D. Anthonie of Estuniga, with the consent of king Philip,
and confirmation of Pope Leo: but king Ferdinand, after the death of Philip, returning to
the gouernment of Castille, and desirous to gratifie the duke of Alba, from whom he had
drawne many good seruices, he tooke this priorie from D. Anthonie, and did inuest the aboue
named D. Diego of Toledo, against the auncient order, and against the lawes and
customes of Spaine, begging therein the authoritie of the great master of Rhodes, who
was discontented that the Pope should take vpon him to conferre that priorie to D. Anthonie
of Estuniga, causing the grant of the order to be brought expresly from Rhodes to
that end, D. Anthonie complaining in vaine to the Pope, both of the king and great
master, who for his last refuge retired into Flanders, to king Charles, beseeching him to
confirme and maintaine that which his father Philip had done: the which hee obtained,
when as he was aduertised of the death of king Ferdinand; for king Charles did write in
his fauour vnto the Pope. And so D. Diego of Toledo, and D. Anthonie of Estuniga, began
to fall to suit for this priorie, at Rome, where D. Anthonie did win his cause, and got
letters of execution from the Pope, with the which, and the Popes fauourable letters, he
came vnto king Charles, who sent him into Spaine to cardinall Ximenes, whom he commaunded
to take into his hands all the places of the priorie, admonishing the duke of Alba
and his son, to retire their men, and to referre the controuersie to him to compromise:
and if the duke of Alba should refuse, he should then cause the kings letters and sentence
to be executed, forcing them to obey that should oppose themselues, notwithstanding any
oppositions. The duke of Bejar, with his brother D. Anthonie of Estuniga, presented
these letters and commaundement from the king to the cardinall: the which the duke of
Alba vnderstanding, being out of hope to procure any delay from the cardinall (for hee
was well acquainted with the nature of the man, and knew well that he desired to see this
processe, in the which there had past many threats and injurious words, ended) hee
resolued to oppose himselfe, and to crosse his proceedings by force. He had of his part the
duke of Escalona, and many other noblemen, the which did trouble his aduerse partie. At
that time the cardinall was troubled with a tertian ague, the which did animate the duke
of Alba and his partie, and gaue them hope to prolong the processe, and to keepe the possession
vntill that the king (said they) were better informed. But being somewhat recouered
of his sicknesse, he called both parties, and enioyned them to lay aside armes, vntill he
were better informed of the right. The cardinall would haue the places sequestred, according
to the kings letters, wherein seeing great difficultie by the practises and force vsed on
the duke of Albaes part, in the end he propounded to execute the kings letters, brought
by D. Anthonie of Estuniga: wherein there was a diuision among the counsellors, some
holding that the duke of Albaes cause was more just; and for that, said they, there was
some obscuritie in the letters, not being certaine, whether the duke of Alba referring the
matter to the kings arbitrement, might still hold the possession, as depositarie, vntill the
cause were ended, or else vntil the king shold name another depositarie, into whose hands
the places and the priorie should be deliuered, they thought it therefore necessarie to haue
another warrant, of which aduice were doctor Adrian and the seignior of Chaux. The cardinall
banding himself against all these difficulties, he brought all the councel to that point,
as they concluded the kings letters should be executed. The duke of Alba forgetting nothing
that might helpe his cause, imploied in his fauor queene Germaine, the French king,
and the king of England, by whose meanes king Charles was not so resolute to restore

D. Anthonie of Estuniga to his Priory: whereof the Cardinall being aduertised, hee
wrote letters of complaint vnto the king, to the Lord of Cheu^es, and to the whole
councell of Flanders, shewing them how necessarie constancie and perseuerance were in
such like ordinances and decree: then hee thought it good to call the duke of Alba vnto
him,Speech of Cardinall Ximenes to the duke of Alba. to whome in the presence of the councell, and the earle of Osor^o, hee said friendly,
that he should temper the heat which hee saw in him in the pursute of his rights, and that
there would be meanes, if he himself did not hinde^it, to reconcile all things without tumult
or armes: wherefore he did aduise him to put the priory into the kings hands, to dispose
according vnto right and justice, assuring him that if hee did it willingly, hee would
mitigate much of the rigour of the commandement which hee had receiued from the
king, and that hee would deliuer the Priorie into the hands of D. Pedro Bazan, who
hee knew was much affected to his house, and hee should keepe it vntill the kings
comming: promising moreouer that he would then cause the deliuerie of it to D. Anthonie
to bee staied for three moneths, that in the meane time hee might worke his
best meanes. These conditions were contemned by the Duke of Alba, who departed,
saying, that the Cardinall might doe better if hee list, and not derogate any thing
from the kings authority: and going from Madrid with this discontent, bee went to
his kinsmen and friends, to conferre with them of the enterprize which hee had in
his braine, all dissuading him, from opposing himselfe against the Cardinall, witnes
the calamity of them of Villefratre and of the earle of Vregna, for the which they
gaue him such reasons, as at that time hee yeelded to their counsels. But falling afterwards
into furie, the Cardinal was forced to come to the last remedy, calling together
his Legionary companies, both horse and foot, as well to gard and fortifie the councell
and justice,Defeat of the duke of Albas men by the Cardinals companies. as to suppresse the mutines, and keepe them from ioyning together:
which forces did incounter and put to rout about a thousand foote and some horse
of the duke of Albas, and stript them in the diocesse of Toledo. After which rout
the duke comming to himselfe, hee imployed the fauour of Queene Germaine and
doctor Adrian, and came to Madrid, where hee was so tractable, as hee yeelded the
Priorie at the Cardinals discretion, for hee shewed him with what vprightnesse he proceeded
in this businesse,Duke of Alba submits himself to Cardinall Ximenes. and let him read the originall letters hee had receiued of the
kings commandement, to the end hee might know it was no cause that hee did affect
and seeke, adding that hee should consider with himselfe wherein hee might assist him
preseruing his honour, and the king his masters seruice, assuring him that hee would
not faile him: to whome the duke made answere, that hee would not intreat any other
thing of him, but after that his sonne should be depriued of the priory, the king
would remember that their house had alwaies been affectionat to the crowne, and haue
regard vnto it: and for that hee had vnderstood that he would leaue the priory in deposito
in the hands of D. Ferdinand Andrada who had married D. Francis of Estuniga, kinswoman
to his aduerse party, he desired it might be giuen to some other, to the end that
his enemies might haue no subiect to scorne at his calamity. The Cardinall who was
alwaies vanquished by them that yeelded vnto, him said, that it was reasonable, ordaining
that the Priory should be deliuered into the hands of D. Ferdinand Andrada, and he should
instantly redeliuer it to D. Anthonie of Cordo^a, brother to the earle of Cabra. These
things concluded at Madrid, the duke sent letters to D. Diega his son, to leaue the priory,
and by the Cardinal to D. Ferdinand of Andrada, to cease from all acts of hostilitie. Thus
the quarrel for the priorie of S. Iohn was ended, the which notwithsta^ding after the death
of Cardinal Ximenes, D. Diego recouered, and enioyed partly with the consent, and partly
against the wil of k. Charles himselfe, who decreed that D. Diego of Toledo, and D. Anthonie
of Estuniga, should enioy it in common: but D. Anthonie dying at Perpignan, he left the
whole possession to his competitor.
There remained another cause to determine, which the Cardinal did affect: it was the
processe of the earle of Ribadeo in Gallicia,Controuersie for the earledome of Ribadeo. of a small circuit, but good, fertile and pleasant;
The earle of which place hath this priuiledge, that on twelfe day he di^es at the king
of Castilles table, and hath the roabe that he weares that day. This earledome had been held
by D. Rodrigo of Villandradra, who hauing married two lawfull wiues, and those put aaway

for barrennesse, had in the end taken to wife a slaue of his made free, called Leonora
by whom he had D. Roderigo his sonne and only presumtiue heire to whom the admiral
had giuen a base daughter of his to wibe. Against this D. Roderigo, there contented for
the succession, D. Maria of Volloa, maried to the earle of Salines, who was ne^ce to the old
earle of Villindrada, daughter to his sister, saying, that D. Roderigo was not lawfull; which
sute had beene commenced long before the death of king Ferdinand. Cardinall Ximenes
fauoured D. Roderigos cause: but as many of the Councell inclined more to
the reasons of D. Maria, the cause was sent to the Chancerie of Vailledoli^: yea, D.
Maria had such fauour in court,Authority of Cardinall Ximenes vanquished by a woma^ as the title and right was granted vnto her sonne
by the kings letters, the which did much trouble the Cardinall, seeing himselfe vanquished
by a woman; he that had gouerned the greatest Lords of Spaine at his pleasure.
5 This yeare one thousand fiue hundred and seuenteene, Pope Leo created one and
thirty Cardinals, among which Doctor Adrian Flor^nt was one, for the which he was
much blamed,(...) of the Cardinals order by Pope Leo. against the which Cardinall de Monre, vncle to Pope Iulio the third, and
others, opposed themselues, saying, that to make so many at one time, was to profane
that sacred order. He had almost made Raphael of Vrbin, an excellent painter, Cardinal,
to free himselfe by a hat of a great sum of money which he ought him for pictures;
with which hope being fed, he deferred to marrie with the Neece of the Cardinall of
Bibiena, which was offred him, but his sodaine death depriued the painter both of the one
and other.
Cardinall Ximenes being solicited by the king and the Flemish Lords, to send a fleet into
Flanders,Nauie sent into Flanders for K. Charles. to conduct him, he rigged out a good number of ships, where Gomes of Buytron
was admirall, causing the ports of Biscay, Asturia, and Galicia, to be visited, for that
it was bruted the plague was in many places, appointing victuals and other necessaries to
be carried to refresh and ease the court, wheresoeuer the fleet should arriue: himselfe in
the meane time leauing Madrid, went towards Aranda of Duero, where hee resolued
to attend the kings comming, that aboade seeming vnto him verie healthfull and pleasant,
and by reason of the conuent of Franciscane friers, situated in the next village of
Aguilera: in passing hee made his last visit of Tordelaguna, the place of his birth.
6 There were in his company, the Infant D. Ferdinand, doctor Adrian now
made Cardinall, and Armastof: from Tordelaguna he came to Bozeguillas, a borough
in the mountaine,Cardinall Ximenes poisoned. where dyning they did verily beleeue that hee was poisoned,
which made him fall into a lingring consumption, till hee dyed of it: for hauing dyned
hee found himselfe verie ill, after which there came bloud out at his eares, and
at the ioyning of his nayles, the suspition of poison was augmented by a certaine horseman
vnknowen, who that morning hauing met neere vnto Bozeguillas the Prouinciall
Marquine, with other monkes that went vnto the Cardinall, hee willed them to
make hast to be there before he sat downe to dinner: and to aduise him not to eate
of a great trout which should bee set before him, for without doubt it was poisoned:
If you arriue said hee, too late, care then for the health of his soule, for his body will bee
past helpe. This speech was deliuered by Marquine, but late vnto the Cardinall, who
gaue little credit, saying, that if his infirmitie came of poison, hee thought it came
from Flaunders, and that hee had beene infected at Madrid, by the eyes, in reading
of a letter which was brought out of that countrey, since which time hee had not
beene well; whatsoeuer it were, hee was ready to goe when God should call him,
who sends infirmities, and takes them away at his pleasure.
They obserue that hee said often to the Phisitians, that hee should die by the treachery
and wickednes of traitors; and it was commonly reported that Francis Carillo, who was
sewer to the Cardinall, hauing eaten of this trout, was verie sick; and they did vndoubtedly
beleeue that the Flemings sought his death: for they had discouered by his letters, that
his intent was to procure the king to dismisse them all, and send them home to their houses,
and to be serued by Spaniards in their places. The blame of this vild act was laid vpon
Baracaldo, one of his secretaries, who had done other treacheries to the Cardinall his master;
yet the Cardinall did still vse his seruice vnto his dying day: which breeds some
doubt whether it were he or some other that committed this crime, whereof there were

many contrarie arguments. Cardinall Ximenes caused himselfe to bee carried to Aranda,
whereas whilst he striues against his infirmitie,Tumult of Vailledolit. the towne of Vailledolit fell into new tumults,
vpon a conceit the people had, that the bru^e of the kings comming was but counterfeit,
and that this great preparation was to send the infant D. Ferdinand into Flanders:
So as Spaine remaining destitute of her princes, being in the hands of an old Monke,
halfe rotten, and neere his end, must of necessity bee ruined by intestine seditions,
or be a prey to forein nations. To pacifie this mutiny, and to certifie them of the truth of
the kings comming, the Cardinall sent vnto them, and satisfied them.
7 Hee had yet one exploit to doe which hee thought expedient and necessarie,Reformation ^ the Infant D. Ferdinands house by the Cardinall.
yet full of enuie, which was to reforme the Infant D. Ferdinands house, and to take from
him those that had bred him vp and serued him, especially D. Pedro Nagnes, of Guzman
treasurer of the Cala^^ua, his gouernor, and D. Aluaro Osorio, a Iacobin, bishop of Astorga
his schoolemaster: D. Pedro had neuer beene allowed by the Cardinall, in that charge,
and he had often sought to crosse him, whereupon there grew great hatred betwixt them,
the which Osorio had entertained and increased, as well for some ambition, wherein hee
saw himselfe hindered by the Cardinall, as through emulation which hath beene
long betwixt those two orders,Franciscan^ and Iacobins inue^erate enemies. the bishop being a Iacobin, and the Cardinall a Franciscaine.
It was commonly bruted, and euery man did beleeue it, that Osorio had beene
the cause and breeder of seditions at Vailledolit, and Cardinall Ximenes knewe that
hee did continually maligne him to the Flemish lords: that hee sought to insinuate
himselfe into the fauour of the emperour Maximilian, and that hee had treated of
a marriage betwixt the emperour and Queene Germaine: And many held opinion
that D. Pedro Nugnes of Guzman, had had a conceit to carrie the Infant D. Ferdinand
into Arragon, with an intent and hope to make him king of that country, whereunto
the people would easily haue consented for the memorie and name of then deceaceased
king D. Ferdinand, who had loued the Infant dearely, and other things ^ some
true, some false) which were spoken in Spaine: whatsoeuer was the cause D. Pedro
Nugnes and the bishop of Astorga were in no grace with the Cardinall; wherefore
hee did write often to the king, and caused the lords of the councell to be delt withall,
to haue them discharged: so as a little before king Charles his domming into
Spaine, there was a dispatch sent by the king, by the which the Cardinall was commanded
to discharge D. Pedro Nugnes of Guzman gouernour, D. Aluaro Osorio
Schoole-master; D. Gon^alo of Guzman, Chamberlaine, and Sancho de Paredes, steward
to the Infant, and send them home to their houses, letting them know that the
king was verie well satisfied with their good seruices, but their ages did now require
rest, and that hee would haue regard vnto their merits, and remember them: as
for the rest of the Infants house, hee left it to the Cardinall, to dispose as he should
think fit. This packet by the Post-masters fault came not to the Cardinals hands before all
the contents were diuulged, which caused the more difficultie in the execution of the
kings will, for the Post-master thinking it to be newes how that the king was imbarkt
to come into Spaine, he kept the packet fiue daies, before he deliuered it to the Cardinall,
to whome it was directed, and in the meane time sent this good news to the noblemen, to
draw presents from them: then Cardinall Ximenes being ill disposed of his person in the
conuent of Aguilera, this Post-master thought it indifferent to giue the packet to Cardinall
Adrian or to him, the which he did: Adrian, whether through curiositie or otherwise,
opened it, and finding letters directed to the Infant, hee gaue him them, without any further
apprehension,Secrets of Cardinall Ximenes discouered. who by this meanes vnderstood what was ordained of him, and of
his seruants, and of the change of his house, whereof hee did presently aduertise them, before
the Cardinal had seen the kings letters: wherwith they being wonderfully disconte^ted,
and seeing no other remedy they implored the Infants aide, which was of no great
moment, beseeching him to remember their fidelity and good seruices, letting him vnderstand
that all this was done to debase him, and keep him vnder, at the Cardinals pleasure,
who had procured and practised this alteration.
The Infant beeing persuaded by his Masters, came the next day in great
choler to the Conuent of Aguilera, hauing in his companye the Bishoppe OOsorio,

(for D. Pero Nugnes was sick:) and doctor Adrian by reason of the error which he had
committed in opening the pacquet, and giuing the letters to the Infant, before he had imparted
them to Cardinall Ximenes, durst not shew himselfe.
Being come vnto the Cardinall, he complained greatly (and with teares in his eyes) of
the wrong he did him,Intreaty of the infant D. Ferdinand to the Cardinall. in seeking to depriue him without any lawfull cause, of so good and
faithfull seruants, the which he would neuer haue beleeued of him, whom hee held to
be his deare friend: and thereupon he intreated him, and coniured him by the memorie
of Queene Isabell, and the great aduancement* hee had receiued from her, not to suffer
this indignity to be done vnto him, to take from him so worthy a person as his gouernour,
so fit a Schoole-master as the bishop Osorio, so many seruants which had attended
him faithfully, and with whome hee had beene nourished and bred vp with great
content; and that hee would not suffer him to receiue, that displeasure, to see them
ignominiously and wrongfully disgraced.Cardinall Ximenes inexorable. The Cardinall sought by mild words to
pacifie the incensed courage of this Prince, laying before him the king his brothers
pleasure, assuring him that all those things tended to his aduancement, so as hee
would shew himselfe obedient and tractable. As for the iniurie whereof hee complained,
hee intreated him to thinke it was otherwise, and to beleeue that hee was a man
of yeares and experience, and that hee loued him dearely; hee confessed that hee
ought to haue a care of the honour and good of his seruants, but hee must withall
thinke that the king his brother was dearer vnto him: And therefore hee exhorted
him that leauing these passions which his seruants had bred in him, he should wholy
adhere to him; who was the greatest king in Christendome against whose will it
were neither safe nor conuenient for him to oppose himselfe; and if hee did persist
to complaine, and to shew a discontentment for that which the king commanded
to bee done, hee should bee assured that hee would bring himselfe, his affaires, and
his seruants into great danger. For all this the Infant D. Ferdinand, (being young
and incensed) was not satisfied, but answering the Cardinall, I haue, said hee, tasted
of your friendship in many occasion, but now it failes mee at my greatest need,
neither doe I know which way it is fled: but seeing that I find that you are resolued to
ruine mee and mine, whome you may ease and comfort much with a small delay,
I must of necessitie find meanes to defend and preserue our selues.
At these words the Cardinall finding himselfe toucht, Do (said he) what you please,
but I sweare vnto you by the life of king Charles your brother,Speech of Cardinall Ximenes to the Infant D. Ferdinand. that to morrow shall
not passe before his commandements bee executed, the which it behooues you to
obey before all others, yea though all Spaine had conspired to hinder it. This made
the Infant take vnto him a manly courage, and to lay aside or dissemble his childish affections:
wherefore hee departed from the Cardinall with a setled countenance, and
without any shew of perturbation, and so returned to Aranda, where before his
arriuall,Diligence of Cardinall Ximenes to execute his desires. hee found himselfe garded, with the towne and all the approaches, by the
souldiers of Caba^ille, and Espinola, captaines of the guard, who were sent and instructed
by the Cardinall, who knew how to execute their charge, and keepe the
Infant or any of his house from attempting anything. All that night was spent in complaints
in the Infants lodging, who slept not; hee would say often that hee would bee
reuenged of the Cardinall, and when they asked him what hee would doe against a
man so well garded, and who had all the forces of Spaine at his command: well, I
will make shew to goe and visit my mother, and then will I goe where I please, and
the first that shall offer to hinder mee, let him assure himselfe I will kill him, with other
such speeches of a yong man.
Day being come, the Infant by the aduice of his seruants, sent to intreat the kings
councell, and the Popes two Noncios to come vnto him, to whome hee said: That
the king his brother had sent commandment to take his seruants from him, the
which was grieuous vnto him, but hee would obey, yet hee intreated them to doe
one good Office for an Infant of the house of Castille, to complaine vnto the king
by their letters, of the great wrong was done him, seeing they knewe well that
they had bred him vp, serued and accompained him faithfully and honestly: the which

they promised to doe. Cardinall Ximenes by the meanes of Cardinall Adrian, drew
D. Pedro Nugnes of Guzman, D. Aluaro Osorio, and Gonsall de Guzman, to come
vnto him vnto the Conuent of Aguilera, to heare the reasons why they were discharged,
and to answere the complaints they made of him, who hauing heard
what hee would say vnto them, answered and replyed, in the end they saide that
they were ready to doe that which hee should commaund them; but they intreated
him to persuade the king, (with whome they knew hee had grace and credit) to
haue regard vnto their honors and interests, and they did wisely to answere so, and
shew themselues obedient: for if they had done otherwise, hee would not haue suffered
them to returne to Aranda, but would haue stayed them prisoners vntill the
kings comming; attending the which the charge of the Infant D. Ferdinand was giuen
to the Marquesse of Aguilar, in the absence of D. Alfonso Telles, whome the king
had appointed to that place. There were eight and twentie of the Infants seruants
discharged, in whose places there were subrogated men of base condition, and obscure
families,Seuerity of Cardinall Ximenes. to cut off all occasions to vndertake great enterprises, and this Cardinall
was so seuere as hee would not suffer the Infant to haue the young Vicont
of Altamire, whome he loued dearely for his dexterity and good fashion, for that hee was
nephew to D. Aluaro Osorio: There remained onely of all the old Seruants of that
house Alfonso Castilege, for that being giuen to musicke and poetrie, hee seemed to bee
free from ambition, or any desire of alteration. These things thus done, being vnderstood
at Court, the lords of the Councell sent letters from the king to the Cardinall
for the Marquesse of Astorga, and the earle of Lemos, kinsman to D. Pedro Nugnes
of Guzman, and to D. Aluaro Osorio, admonishing them not to oppose themselues
to any act done by him, but hee did not vouchsafe to giue them these letters; so
confident hee was in the authority which hee held, representing the kings person,
and so hee had often done, not caring much for that which the Spaniards suspected
or feared.Marques of Aguilar gouernour to the Infant D. Ferdinand.
The Marquesse of Aguila^ gouerned himselfe so well with his master, as hee himselfe
did write vnto the king his brother, and besought him not to giue that charge
vnto any other: the which had beene appointed for D. Alfonso Telles.
There was a brute throughout Spaine, that the Cardinals infirmity had so weakened
him, as leauing all affaires, hee liued retyred in his Conuent of friers, not seeing
any man, and in effect the bloud came more aboundantly out at his eares than
before, and hee was much tormented in his body, and as in old men all remedies
are difficult and of small effect,D. Pedro Giron causeth new troubles. they knew not what to hope of him: wherefore
D. Pedro Giron watching for all occasions to mutine, went to Armes, to inuade the
countrie of Medina Sidonia, and the Moores also hearing these newes, did molest
the coast of Granado, making spoile of all they incountred, for the which the Cardinall
prouided notwithstanding his infimitie, for against D. Pedro hee opposed the
earle of Luna, who kept him in awe, being assisted by D. Anna of Arragon, wife to
the duke of Medina, who gaue him her jewels for the charges of the warre. The
earle of Vergna his father, remembring the error committed at Villefratre, which
was not yet forgotten, hee besought the Cardinall, not to impute these new broiles
to him, promising that hee would cause his sonne D. Pedro to lay aside armes, and
so hee did: yet the Cardinall did write letters vnto the king full of accusations against
these Girons, persuading him so to punish them once for all, as they should haue
no more desire to fall into such errors, and others might take example by them.
About that time the Turkes who had newly seazed vpon Alger, vnder Horusco
Barberousse, meant to make an enterprise vpon Oran, which was the Cardinalls conquest,
and therefore hee did much affect it, and the king being then at Sea, had news
of it, the which did trouble them much, holding it a great losse if this landing place in
Afrik were taken from the Christians. But God prouided for it, for the Mores and Arabian
Africans iealous that the Turkes should settle themselues in their countrie, assembled
in great multitudes, and incountred them, which came against Oran, and defeated
them, freeing the Spaniards, who attended a siege, from that paine and care.

8 King Charles hauing taken ship in Flanders about the beginning of September,
hee came in the end of that month to the most vneasie coast of all the Asturies,Ariuall of king Charles at the Asturies. about
Tazane, a place full of rocks, and not frequented by seafaring men, not farre from Villeuicieuse.
The mountaine people of that countrie not knowing what they were which
landed vpon their coast, hauing put their wiues and children into the most inaccessible
places of the mountaines, they betooke them to armes, and ranne in troups to the Sea
shoare, thinking they had beene French-men or some other enemies, which came to
spoyle the countrie: the which they perceiuing which were yet at sea, and the king himselfe,
hee commanded to display the royall standard, that hee might bee knowne. The
Asturians discouering the Lions and Castles, knew that it was their king, and laying
downe their armes, they came to salute him vpon their knees, accompaning him to
Villeuicieuse, the which by a good equiuocation they called Villadichosa, which signifies
a happy Towne, which sight was most pleasing vnto the king: there hee rested himselfe
after his sea trauell, being accompained by his sister D. Leonora then Queene of Portugall.
There were with him the lord of Cheures, the Chancellor Saunage, Charles of Lanoy, and
other Flemish lords: and in a short time there came many noblemen of Spaine vnto him,
among which were D. Inigo Fernandes of Velasco the Constable, a man of great possessions,
in that barren countrey, being accompained with 700 horse, all his kinsmen, friends,
and vassals, who had giuen order that store of victuals should be broght vnto them as they
past: there came other noblemen to kisse their princes hand, and then they returned presently,
that they might not inco^modate his houshold and train in the streits of the mountaines,
vntill that he were come into a more open country, and better prouided. The Cardinal
who lay in his Conuent, scarce able to breath, was so glad at the news of the kings ariuall,
as he left his bed, sung masse, and eat in the Refectorie among the friers, the which
did much discontent the Flemish Courtiers, who desired that hee had beene dead before
that the king should conferre with him; for they were well aduertised that hee sought to
chase them from the councell, and from all affaires, whereof hee had often treated by his
letters and agents with the king wherfore they informed themselues curiously of his phisitions,
how long he would liue, thinking that his death was neer, and therefore they staied
the king as long as they could vpon the way,Practises of the Flemish courtiers to keepe the king from seeing of the Cardinall desiring much that he were dead before the
king should see him. Some councelled the king to goe first and visit the realme of Arragon,
before he staied in Castille, the which the Cardinall hindred all he could, informing
him of many inconueniences which would happen by that councell: and beseeching him
most humbly not to determine anything touching his publike or priuate affaires, before
hee had giuen him a full information of the estate of his realme: hee did also councel
him to send the infant D. Ferdinand his brother, as soone as might bee into Germany,
to the emperour his grandfather, thinking that hee could not take a better resolution,
neither for his owne affaires, nor for the good of the Infant, then to send him
thither, and to bee a meanes that all, or a good part of Maximilians succession might
come vnto him, seeing that by the grace of God, he was king and lord of so many realmes
and rich estates.
This councell was followed after the Cardinals death, not at the Flemings sute, who
it may bee had other designes, for the lord of Cheures desired to keep him vnder, and soon
after would haue had him giue water vnto the king his brother: who, being discontented
to see his brother so abase himself, said, that Ximenes councel was better. Wherupon he ordained
that the Infant should be conducted into Germany. The king being come to Saint
Vincent of Barquera, D. Anthony of Rojas, Bishop of Granado, President of the Councell
royall (who had beene alwaies opposit to the Cardinall) went from Aranda with all the
Councell, not making him acquainted therewith, to go and mee^ with the king; and the
better to excuse their fact, they would haue carried with them the Infant D. Ferdinand,
if the Marquesse of Aguilar had not hindred it. The Cardinall finding himselfe wronged
heerewith, sent two of the kings letters to the President; by the which hee and the
whole councell were commanded not to depart without him; but they staied not for all
that, thinking that the Cardinals authority was much decai ed: but hee mooued with this

contempt, sent to the king, complaining of D. Antonie de Roias, and of the councells departure,
in contempt of his letters, terming the^ forsakers of the commonweale, and of the affaires
of estate, protesting, that if before his comming they had presumed to doe such a thing, he
would haue punished them in such sort, as within 3 dayes both the president and the councell
had bin renued, and had depriued the^ of their dignities with disgrace: wherfore he besought
him to obserue the honor and dignity of his councel of Spain, and to cause them to returne, to
the end they might all togither go to meer him, as it was fit: the which was done to the presidents
great discontent and shame, who returned with al his train to Aranda. The masters of
accounts did not abandon the cardinall: to whom the admirall Henriques an dother noblemen,
who were ready to go and meet the K. offred to go in his company, but he thinking that
there were other considerations in these noblemen than in the Senat he gaue them thanks,
intreating them to goe before and without him. Winter which comes sooner, and is more
sharp in the region beyond the mountains, than in other parts of Spaine, prest the cardinall
to leaue the conuent of Aguilera which place was too moist for his health: wherfore he remoued
to Roa a towne in the county of Siruelas, where he had learned his first letters in his
infancie, causing himselfe to be caried thither in a close litter, and clad in furs: carrying with
him the infant D. Ferdinand Roa is ^6 leagues neerer to Vailledolit than Aranda, and it is a
co^modious place to take the way to Vailedolit or to Segobia, as if it had bin don of purpose.
For his part hee desired the court should rather go to Segobia than to Vailled o^it, whereas
the K. night consult of his affairs, and assemble the states, the which he dissuaded much at this
his first ariual,Assembly of the Estates disliked by the cardinal Ximenes at the kings arriuall. saying, that their spirits were yet inflamed with the forepassed mutinies, doubting
not but there would be many rash and impertinent articles preferred, wherefore it was
expedie^t to deferre it for a time, and to suffer those humors to settle: being of great importa^ce,
that the people should meet and see their prince at the first with all humility, obedience and
feare, which aduice was contemned, to the great preiudice and danger of the realme.
In the mean time there came deputies from Toledo to the king, beseeching him to chuse
that citie, which was great, spacious and healthfull, and situated in a fertile countrey, for his
first abode, the which would haue bin very pleasing to the cardinall who was archbishop of
Toledo: but the Flemish courtiers took no delight to be so far from the sea: wherefore the
king hauing giuen good reception to the deputies, he sent them back, making choice rather
of the towne of Vailledolit;Enter^iew betwixt K. Charles and his mother vnnecessary. but before his comming thither, he would go visite his mother
D. Ioane at Tordefillas, writing the causes vnto the Cardinall, and to his brother D. Ferdinand,
which had moued him thereunto: his resolution seemed full of pietie, but considering
the indisposition of this princesse, it was not needfull to conferre so long with her of affaires,
as he did. During the Kings abode at Tordesillas, the lodgings were made at Vailledolit,
where the Cardinall beganne to find that the Flemings could doe more than he in Spaine,
for his seruants demanding the lodging of doctor Bernardin for him,Signe of the Cardinalls disgrace. being in a wholesome
place, and fit for his infirmity, the harbenger Terremonde refused it him, hauing marked it
for Queene Germaine, wherein the Cardinall had infinite troublesome difficulties, being not
accustomed to intreate, although he obtained it: (it was knowen afterwards, that the duke
of Alba had beene the motiue of this vnworthy vsage of a man of so great authority:) but as
for his traine it was lodged in a village without the towne: and yet he must haue patience, it
auailed him nothing to complayne of this contempt and disgrace, which he had neuer tried
being in a meaner estate, no not when the kings D. Ferdinand, and D. Philippe were together
in that towne, with a great traine of noblemen and knights, and all their ordinary gards,
saying, that it was a poore recompence, after so much toyle and sweat, to receiue a wrong
in the place of a reward, whereof he blamed the K. officers who were strangers and ignorant of
the customs of Spaine.Letter of discharge from the Cardinal to the King. But the worst was, when he receiued letters from the K. by the which
he was commanded to attend him at Mojados vpon the way to Tordesillas, where he desired
to confer with him, and to haue his councell in affaires both of his realme and house, to
thend he might discharge him of so great a burthen, and suffer him to retire to his own house,
to liue in rest, where God would co^fort and recompence him, for so many good offices which
he had done for the realm, seeing he thought it was not in the power of any man to do it, and
that for his part hee would euer remember it, and honour and reuerence him as his father.
These letters were written at the persuasion of Mote Bish. of Badajos, an affectionat seruant

to the L. of Cheures, and yet much bound to the Cardinall, who hauing receiued them, conceiued
so great a griefe to see himselfe put backe, as within few hours after he died, his feuer
encreasing which he had gotten the day before these strange news:Death of the Cardinall frier Franc^^ Ximenes of Cisneros. feeling his end to draw
neer, he had some little co^ference with some of his people of the mercy of God, and of the vanity
of this world, and forgetting no ceremonies which his order and profession required, he reco^mended
his soul to God and to al the Saints, namely, to the virgin Mary, to S. Peter, S Paul,
S. Iaques, and S. Michael, but especially to S. Francis, vnder whose rule he had liued, and to the
protectors and patrons of his church of Toledo, S. Eugenius, and Idelfonse or Alphonso. Being
thus prouided, and with the praiers and suffrages of some priests which assisted him, he ended
his dais, leauing a great griefe to many, but it may be the number of those that were glad of
it exceeded. He was no sooner dead, but 2 Spanish captaines Vadillo and Collozo, going out of
the Antichamber into the chamber where he died, began to lay hand vpon some plate and
other things, thinking that all was to be sackt, but they were balmed by the colonel Spinosa,
D. Alphonso of Areillan erle of Aguilar, and other noblemen, who were better taught. His body
was imbalmed, and being attired in his pontificall robes, he was ^aid for a time bare faced
vpon a rich bed, whereas euery man came and kist his hands, being muited thereunto by the
sound of a trumpet, with promise of pardon for their sins: Then according to his wil, he was
carried to Alcala of Henares, where he was founder of that goodly Vniuersitie, and there
with great honour and funerall pomp, he was interred in the church of S. Idelfonse, as he had
ordained, where his tombe is to be seene of white marble, with his Image in his archbishops
weed,Cardinall Ximenes little respected by the people and vniuersitie of Alcala. excellently well cut, enuironed with a grate of yron, whereas are 16 spaces, representing
the deeds of this Prelate, artificially grauen. The people of Alcala shewed him small reuerence,
for presently after his funerall they went and beat downe and rased the houses and
farmes, which he had caused to be built without the towne for Benedict his nephew: and they
of the vniuersity and colledge of S. Idelfonse disannulled many things which he had brought
 in, and chased away the chanon Cardegna, who was treasurer and superintendent of that colledge.Disposition ef Cardinall Ximenes.
Such was the end of this cardinall, a famous man for his great wisdome and iudgement
in the gouernment of the affaires of state, constancie in his resolutions, and magnanimitie in
the execution of his enterprises, seuere, rigorous, and inexorable: a terror to great men, not
yielding to force nor flattery, being exceeding ambitious and desirous of honor, the which he
shewed in his sower disposition, fit for them that gouerne great Estates. His constitution of
body did represent the qualities of his mind, for he was of a great stature, strong and lustie: his
pace was graue, his voice strong and firm, his face long and drie, a large forehead without any
wrinckles, reasonable big eies, hollow, but quicke sighted, and alwayes moist, long nosed and
crooked like an Egle; his great teeth stucke out, so as some called him Elephant, and thick lipt.
His skull being found in the yere 1565 in the vault where it had bin laied, seemed to be all of
one peece without any seame: he deliuered his conceptions in few words, and neuer straid fro^
the purpose, no not in his greatest choler: if he promised to do any man good, he always performed
more than he spake: he did seldome vse to iest, yet he took delight to heare them that
were quick conceited, and would laugh at them that were plesant in their speeches: he kept a
mad man, who somtimes had bin learned and a diuine, and was delighted to heare him rehe^se
many passages which he had retained, the which he repeated without any reason, and yet somtimes
not ill applied: he would be pleasant with a Spanish captaine called Maderol, who had
made many promises, but done little good in all his life, counselling him to become a monk
to do penance for his sins: and in these things he recreated his spirits, being charged with great
affairs. Finally, he loued learning, and to heare the disputations of learned men, and oftentimes
of yong scholers. This prelat being well informed of the great profit which the world might
draw from the knowledge of tongs he did intertain men that were learned in them: and to imploy
the^ in matters fit for his religious profession,Bible printed in many tongues. and to the end the studious of the holy scripture
might taft the word of God fro^ the original springs, he caused the bible to be printed in
many tongs: that is, the book of the old testament distinguished into 3 parts, whereof the first
contained the Heb^ue text, the second the co^mon translation into Latin which we vse: and the
third the Greeke of the 70 Interpretors, with his translation in Latin. As for the new Testament
it contained the Greek text, and the common translation in Latin, very well corrected:
and in the end of the volume, a dictionary of Hebrew words interpreted, very ample and copious;

a worke of great labour, sumptuous and stately, witnessing the greatnes of this cardinalls
courage, who was not danted with any difficulty. Herein he vsed the care, learning, and
iudgement of Demetrius Can^diot, Iohn of Vergara,Men imployed to peruse the Bible. Anthony Nebri^encis, Lopes of Estun^ga,
Fernand of Vailledo^t, worthy professors in the Greek and Latin tongs; Alphonso of Alcala
a phisition, Paul Cornel, and Alphonso Zamora, learned men in the Hebrew tong. These
men were very careful to examine the old volumes that were most correct and approued
of both testaments, wherein they had no small help and ease by the library of the Vatican
at Rome, through the bounty of Pope Leo, who refused not any thing to cardinall Ximenes.
The Latin explication of the translation of the 70 Interpreters, was the worke of Demetrius,
of Fernand of Vailledoli^, and of Alphonso of Estuniga, assisted by some of their
disciples learned men, Iohn Vergara was also inuited and called by them to take part of
this charge, who interpreted some of those bookes which he was wont to call Sapientiales:
as Ecclesiasticus, the which he could not finish as he desired, by reason of his indisposition;
for hee had an intent to make large Annotations. The Bible was begun by these
men in the yeare 1502, who spent 15 whole yeares, with great care and toile to turne ouer
infinite volumes and copies, gathered together from many parts of the world, with
wonderful charge, for proofe wherof Gometius saies, that he had often heard Alphonso Zamora,
professor in the Hebrew tongue, affirme, that for 7 Hebrew copies which are kept
in the Vniuersitie of Alcala of Henares, were payed 4000 crownes of gold. Being ended
by Iohn Brocario of Alcala, it was dedicated to pope Leo, whereof the world hath receiued
great profit.Cardinall Ximenes opprest with mela^choly This Cardinall hauing his mind continually attentiue to great matters, was
somtimes opprest with melancholy, which made him to vndertake things rather through
furie than councell, but very seldome, as the conuersion of the Moores of Granado, and
the enterprises of Afrike, atte^pted with too great affection and zeale without any ground.
The quarrels which he had with great me^ with such obstinatio^ as we haue said, proceeded
fro^ the loue of Iustice,A louer of iustice. magnanimity and vertue: for he would teach them to liue according
to equity. The chanons of Toledo were his chiefe councellors, without whose aduice he
would neuer attempt any thing of importa^ce:Execution must be speedie after mature deliberation. he would, as it was fit, that whatsoeuer had
bin decreed after mature deliberation, should be instantly put in execution: he censured
of mens errors, not by the effect, but by the intent. Although in publike affaires, he were
impatient of al reply, and bold speech, yet in that which concerned himselfe, he often indured
the liberty of another mans tong: the which he shewed to Contrera the preacher, who
blaming him one day in his presence, for that he being a frier did often weare fables and other
rich furres, he was inuited to dine with him, where he commended his preaching, but
he excused that which he did reprehend in him, saying, that men aduanced to dignity and
great charges,Cardinall Ximenes, though a frier, yet be we^t richly apparelled. had need of precious ornaments, and rich attire, as well on their persons as
in their houses, for that doth breed maiesty in him, and causeth reuerence in subiects.
They write that these ornaments were vsed superficially by the Cardinal, for as for his
vnder habit and his sleeping, he alwayes carried himselfe according to the Order of Saint
Francis: he daily said his prayers, either alone, or accompanied, the doore being shut, that
he might not be diuerted. He had great compassion of great persons vnworthily afflicted,
and did releeue them with mony, as to D. Gu^^mar of Castro duchesse of Nagera, being
chased from her house by her husband, whom he did nourish and comfort in the city of
Toledo with as great honor, as the duke himselfe could haue done her, blaming his churlishnes
the more, for that he had bin made duke by king Henry the fourth in fauor of this
woman, with whom, as we haue said, he seemed to be in loue.
When there was any great benefice void in the church of Toledo,Discretion in giuing of benefices. hee gaue it either
to the sonne of some prince o^ great nobleman, or to some one of the learnedest men of
Spaine; saying, That nobility gaue fauour, and learning authority to the clergie: finally,
hee was liberall, and very charitable to the poore, and careful of his houshold seruants.
He spent a good part of his reuenues in religious buildings, which preserue his 
memorie:Buildings made at the charge of Cardinall Ximenes. as at Tordelaguna, where hee was borne the conuent of Franciscan friers, intitled
of the virgine Mary, a goodly and stately worke: at Toledo the conuent of Saint
Iohn penitent: and one of the like title at Alcala of Henares* two Conuent* one of
Franciscans, and the other of Iacobins, in the city of O^an: but aboue all, the building

of the colledge of Saint Idelfonse or Alphonso,1518 in the vniuersitie of Alcala of Henares is
most famous, and the institution of the company, which should be all Diuines. This man
was so seuere, as he had attempted to reduce all the Orders of monkes to their ancient and
first simplicitie and puritie. After this prelats death, D. Alphonso of Arragon archbish^^
of Saragosse, base sonne to the deceased king D. Ferdinand, came to Tordesillas, to salute
the king his nephew, and also to get the archbishopricke of Toledo, if he might;
but the lord of Cheures, who would haue it for William of Crouy his nephew, stayed his
comming, so as this prince was forced to go to Vailledolit, there to attend the King, who
hauing seen him, and complayning to all the noblemen of Spaine, of the wrong the lord
of Cheures had done him, he returnd into Arragon, frustrate of that which he pretended.
12 The king hauing caused the Estates of Castille to assemble at Vailledolit, in September
1518, he was declared king of Castille, Toledo, Granado, and other dependances
in Spaine;Coronation of King Charles the first of that name. hee receiued and tooke the othe after the accustomed manner: wherein
there was some difficultie made by some great noblemen, for that Queene Ioane his mother
did yet liue; notwithstanding it past: and hauing there ordayned many things touching
the gouernement of Castille, he past into Arragon, to haue alike assembly and solemnity,
in regard of those realmes and the lands depending. Being in Arragon he was
solicited to send embassadors to Mompellier, to conferre with the deputies of the French
king, and of Henrie of Albret, touching the rights of the realme of Nauarre, held and enioyed
by him, in the name of D. Ioane his mother, and his owne, by hereditary title, whereof
there had bin another parliament held at Noion: whither were sent the lord of Cheures,
the chancellor Iohn Sauuage,Conference of deputies touching the realme of Nauarre. who was of Bruges, D. Ant. of Estuniga one of the priors
of S Iohn, the great commander of Castille, doctor Caruaial, with other knights and
learned men: but all this conference was to no effect, for he that was in possession, would
hold it: besides Arthur Goiffier, L. of Boissi dying, was a hinderance to it. At that time D.
Ant. Manriques duke of Nagera was viceroy of Nauarre, hauing for assistant D. Roderigo of
Mercado bishop of Auila, at which time the new king Charles had caused the marshall D.
Pedro of Nauarre to be deliuered out of prison, being in the castle of Atiensa, and prest him
much to take the othe, and to do him homage, as to his king; but he who bare an affection
to his master, refused it: by reason wherof he ended his dais in the prison of Simancas. The
K. being at Barcelone he had news of his election to the empire of Germany: wherefore
he went towards Vailledolit, to make preparation for his iorny, and order for the affaires of
Castille, which were very confused. But hee was forced to make hast, and to leaue many
 things vndecided, being aduertised of the conspiracies and leagues betwixt the towns and
great lords of the realme,Charles chosen emperour of Germany. for the defence of the priuiledges and liberties of the countrey,
against the greedines and vsurpations of the Flemish councelors, who gouerned this yong
prince: among the which the chiefe was, as we haue said, the L. of Cheurs. The K. for that
he would not be ingaged in these Spanish mutinies, with whose humours he was not acquainted,
he parted as it were flying away, and imbarked at the Groin, a famous port in Galicia,
leauing for gouernors cardinal Adrian, and the constable. D. Inigo Fernandes of Velasco,
to whom he afterwards ioyned D. Frederic Henriques, great admirall of Castille. Being
landed in the low countries, he went presently to Aix^a Chapelle, where he receiued the
imperiall crowne,Departure of the emperour Charles out of Castille forced. in the yere 1520, being 20 yeres old. The first Acts of his gouernment,
were to suppres by mild and quiet means the doctrine preached by Luther, which increased
much in Germany. To this end, and for some other matters of importance concerning the
empire, he caused the princes and estates to assemble at Worms, wheras Luther appeared
hauing a pasport, and was ^eard disputing against doctor Ectius and others, but there came
no fruits of it. But in Spaine there grew great seditions and tumults, in the towns and prouinces
of Castille, many townes and noblemen complaining of the breach of the lawes and
 priuiledges of the realme, and of the bad gouernment of the Flemish lords,Ciuile warre in Castille. who by their
great couetousnes, had drawne vnto them great sums of mony, vnder the kings authority,
vsurped the estates, offices, and benefices of the realme, and caused a profanation in a manner
of all things, as if they had bin in a country of conquest: so as the people being moued
vpon so apparent occasions, the excesse and troubles which ciuile dissentions are accustomed
to produce, followed soone after.

Cardinall Adrian and the constable thinking to suppresse this mischiefe in the breeding,1519
made the fire greater; for hauing sent against the^ of Segobia, Ronquillo Alcaide or prouost
of the court,Excesse of Ronquillo prouost of the Court. a man of a sower disposition, rigorous in his executions, and proud and insole^t
i^ his threats, hauing made the summations and solemnities required in Iustice, he began to
burne, ruine, cut and pul vp, take and kil al that he found about Segobia: whereat the inhabitants
of Toledo being incensed, they took armes and went to field chasing away this prouost.
They being once armed in one place,Townes conspired. the sedition grew generall: Burgos, Vailledolit,
Salama^ca, Auila, Zamora, Leon, Toro, and other chiefe places rebelled openly, and had
many noblemen and knights of their faction, yet they were more led by their owne priuate
interests then the publike good. The deputies of all these cities thus mutined came to Auila,
where they made a league with the noblemen, the principall whereof were D. Iohn de
Padilla of Toledo, D. Anthony d' Acugna bishop of Zamora, D. Pedro Giron, of whom mention
hath bin often made. Cardinall Adrian had bin already forced to flie from Vailledolit,
by the help of a priest,Insolencie against the Cardinalls and the Kings officers. who conueied him away by night, breaking a piece of the towne
wall, notwithstanding that D. Pedro Giron and D. Iohn de Padilla had assured him that there
was nothing intended against him, and that his innocencie was well knowen. The president
and councellors of the Audience and Chancery were in like maner fled, of the which doctor
Vargas escaped by a sinke. The people being masters in all the towns made choice of
captains of their owne sort, smiths, belfounders, skinners, tailers and such like, who forgat
nothing to make them detestable, in all couetousnesse, cruelty, and other wicked actions.
At Segobia they did hang the rector betwixt 2 sergeants, thinking to aduise them something
for the good of the publike peace: they of Auila did rase the house of Pedro Ponce,
for that he would not signe the league with the rest. The constable was chased from Burgos,
who with the earle of Alua de Lista and others were pursued by the conspirators with
publike Edicts, who had sommoned with solemnities and order of iustice, all the princes
and great noblemen of the realme to ioyne with them, for the defence, said they, of the
lawes and liberties of Spaine: in default wherof to proceed against them as traitors to their
country. The gouernors seeing this great reuolt, furnished themselues with armes and all
other means to defend themselues and to suppresse the rebells. Anthony Fonseca being sent
Medina del Campo, with a good number of horse, to bring the artilery which was kept in
the storehouse of that town, he found such resistance, as he was forced, partly through
choler, and partly by a stratagem of war, to set fire in diuers parts of the town, to the end he
might draw the people (who were earnest to defend the artillery) to go and saue their houses
which were on fire: but their obstinacie was such as they had rather suffer their goods
to be burnt, then aba^don the artillery to Fonseca, who was forced to returne without it: so
vpon this occasion they of Medina ioyned with the league: In which towne there was
great store of mercha^dise of all sorts, mouables and other riches of inestimable value burnt.
The conspirators hauing put their army of field seised vpon Tordesillas, where Q. Ioane (being
distract) kept,Tordesillas taken by the conspirator^. her they saluted for their Q. and gaue her a gard of 300 priests, leuied by
the Bish. of Zamora in his dioces, whom he commanded to sweare and renounce God, and
to looke like souldiers: and if hee did see any one that did handle his portaise, hee would
beate him with a cudgell. The emperor being aduertised of all these miseries, hee wrote
vnto the Admirall D. Frederic Henriques, which was then in Cattelogne, to take the
charge of gouernor with the rest, and to seek by all means to pacifie those troubles. D. Frederic
ioyned with the gouernors with equall ^uthority and did what he could to pacifie al,
notwithstanding that the Confederats had taken and spoiled Vruegna, Tordehumes,
and Villabrassica, lands belonging vnto him, and had sackt his brothers palace, and committed
other indignities in contempt of him, and to his preiudice, yet notwithstanding hee
went and sent diuers times to the rebells: but the disease required a sharper remedy: for
in trueth there was no more any question to reforme abuses, and correct the faults of the
common weale: all were now growen into a furie to ouerthrow the estate. As for the
noblemen and knights their owne greedy desires had thrust them into armes. D. Pedro
Giron would be duke of Medina Sidonia, and win his cause by the sword, D. Iohn de Padilla
promised to himselfe the mastership of S. Iaques, others hauing priuat quarrelles, would
be reuenged and spoyle their enemies: and as for the Townes, if their first motion had

some lawfull cause,1520 their manner of proceeding, and their forme of demaunding, had
spoyled all, and made them and their cause odious: wherefore the war beganne to grow
hote: Iohn de Padilla, and Iohn Bra^o being come to Villapanda, with part of the forces of
the League, it seemed to the emperors captaines that an opportunitie was offered, to recouer
Todesillas, and to deliuer Queene Ioane, who was held as a prisoner by the rebels:
the which succeeded well without anie great losse or difficultie,Tordesill as recouered. for the place was not
strong: There were many of the seditious taken there: Tordesillas was sackt, yea the
Queene and her seruants lodgings, yet all was restored vnto them againe. It is written,
that when they battred the towne, a priest of the bishop of Zamoras being behind a loop
hole slew 11 men with his peece; and to discharge himselfe somewhat of this guilt, or to
giue some ease to his soule at whom he aimd, at euery shot he made a crosse with his harquebuze:
In the end this priest was slaine with an arrow. After this prize the Constable
and the Admirall who were commaunders for the emperour, marched against the enemies,
who went towards Toro, with an intent to ioyne with their other confederats, who
had gathered togither a rable of 8000 rascalls out of the townes and diocesse of Zamora,Battell of Villa Lara, and defeat of the rebells.
but they were ouertaken neere vnto Villa Lara, and fought with: where notwithstanding
that they had great numbers of men, and that Padilla and Brauo performed the parts
of valiant and hardy captaines, yet they were defeated and taken. This defeat pacified
all tumults, and made them all more quiet. The confederate cities laboured euery one
apart to returne into fauour, and did easily obtayne pardon, yea the city of Burgos before
this rout had left the societie of the rest. The bishop of Zamora hearing of the defeat of
his companions,Punishment of rebells. thought to escape, but he was staied in Nauarre, and afterwards strangled.
D. Iohn of Padilla and Iohn Brauo were condemned to loose their heads: D. Maria
wife to Iohn of Padilla, fell into the like miserie, a woman of a great courage, but deceiued
by the false predictions of diuines and sorcerers, whom she beleeued: their palace at
Toledo, by the same sentence was ruined, and the soyle sowen with salt, and therein a
pillar erected, for a perpetuall memorie of their rebellion: D. Pedro Giron who had left
the other conspirators, by the persuasion of his friends and kinsmen (whereof the Constable
was the chiefe) was confined to Oran, with many other knights. Many men of
lesse note felt the rigor of Iustice; and many also were pardoned. Thus ended the ciuile
warre and sedition in Spaine, which grew by reason of the excesse and violent gouernement
of the Flemings, who suffered the Spaniards to end it, whilest that they were Iudges
of their punishments and rewardes, for that the emperour was gouerned by their
councell.
15 Whenas this rebellion in Castille happened,Nauarre. the gouernours finding themselues
weake and ill prouided of many things, they were forced to vse the souldiers which were
in the garrisons of Nauarre, and to draw many peeces of ordonance, out of Pampelone,
and places of that realme, which gaue occasion to some well affected to the house of
Albret and Foix, and to Henry of Albret the true heire of that realme, to haue secret intelligences,
in Bearn and in Fraunce, in whose fauour king Francis sent Andrew of Foix,
Lord of Asperraut, or Esparre yonger brother to Ode^ of Foix Lord of Lautrech, who
being receiued by them of the faction of Gramont tooke the castle of Saint Iohn de Pied de
Port:Pampelone abandoned by the Castillans. wherefore D. Anthonie Manrique Duke of Nagera finding himselfe surprized, the
city of Pampelone beginning also to mutine, he left it, and returned into Castille, abandoning
his house to the sacke of the people.
16 At that time there was in Nauarre following armes, Inigo of Loyola, the first author
of the Iesuits, an obstinate enemy to the house of Albret, who whenas the viceroy
Maurique dislodged,Beginning of the Iesuites. remained in the castle of Pampelone in garrison, with the other
souldiers of the emperour. It hapned that this castle being assailed by the people, there
was a canon shot made by them of the towne, at a certaine place, whereas this man had
both his feet so bruised with stones which the bullet had scattred, as hee fell from the top
of the castle to the bottome, but being ordained for an instrument to this new kinde of
plant in the church, he was taken vp, and his life preserued. He was sonne to Bertrand of
Loyola and Ognez in the prouince of Guipuscoa,Inigo of Loyola and his familie. in the iurisdiction of Aspeytia, which
in old time was called Miranda of Yraurgui. After this mischance he was carried to his fathers

house at Loyola,1521 which is in the middest of the prouince of Guipuscoa, where
seeing himselfe maimed and vnable euer after to beare armes, he changed his mind and
profession, and quitting the world, he gaue himselfe to spirituall things, following the direction
which he had, according to the religion which was then esteemed amongst men:
His first religious exploit was to goe and visit the place of Monserrat, where hee spent
nine days; then he gaue all his goods vnto the poore, and retired himselfe into the mountaines
of Manresa, where hee began to lead a solitarie life, for the space of seuen months.
Afterwards he went to Barcelona, from whence he past by sea to Venice, and finding the
pilgrims ship ready to depart, he put himselfe into it, and went to Palestina to seek the places
of that land whereof mention is made in the holy Scripture: but the father gardian of
the Franciscans of mount Sion forced him to returne:Studies of Inigo of Loyola. and for that hee was but ignorant,
he began to study his Grammar at Barcelona, after which he frequented the vniuersitie
of Alcala of Henares, going always bare footed, although he were lame, which maner of
liuing many did interpret to be very superstition: wherefore he was apprehended, and let
goe againe by the iudgement of doctor Iohn of Figueroa, with charge that he should goe
no more bare footed: this made him leaue Alcala and goe to Salamanca, where he was
more derided: wherfore seeing himselfe crost in his studies by these persecutions, he left
Spaine and came to Paris, where he heard master Peter Faber, and there he remained not
long, being vext by some and supported by others, in the end allowed by master Or^, they
held an opinion that he was a holy man, and of a scholer he became a master, hauing for
his followers his master Peter Faber,First Iesuits. Diego Laynes, Iohn Coduri, Claude Gay, Pasqual Brouet,
Francis Xauierre, Alphonso Sameron, Simon Rodrigues, and Nicholas of Bouadilla, students
in diuinitie, all which submitted themselues to an Order set downe by Inigo, and did vow
perpetuall pouertie and chastitie. Hauing wrought this in France, he returned into Spaine,
honored with the degree of Master in the vniuersitie of Paris, and retired himselfe to the
place of his birth, not to his fathers house of Loyola, but to the hospitall of Aspeytia,
and would not be knowne: there he began to preach, as well in the church of Saint Sebastian
of Soreasu, as in other places of that countrey, with so great a concourse and repution,
as it was (said they) wonderfull, so as in the end being discouered by a clerke of
Nauarre, who had studied at Paris, he was made knowne vnto his parents, who sought
by all means possible to retire him from that begging kind of life, but in vaine. Hee had
concluded with his companions abouenamed, to make a voyage with them to the holie
Land, wherefore he went to meet them at Venice where the Rendez-vous was: from
whence they went to Rome, and stayed there all Lent in the yeare 1537, and obtayned
leaue of pope Paul the third to performe their pilgrimage: whereupon they returned to
Venice, but finding that the passage was stopt by reason of the warre betwixt that commonweale
and the Turke, they were forced to stay there, and by that means the Iesuits
were first knowne in Italie, not without great crosses, from the which they were deliuered
by the iudgement of Gaspar of Ottis, who disputed in their cause. Desirous to be of
greater fame, they got leaue to heare in Confession, and some of them receiued Orders
to say masse; then they dispersed themselues in the Venetians terriorie, preaching and
doing other workes of their profession, purchasing great fame, especially with the ignorant,
so as in the yeare 1538 they came all to Rome, whereas they obtayned from pope
Paul confirmation and approbation of their maner of liuing,Sect of Iesuits confirmed at Rome. and of the statutes and orders
of their ^ect, by the aid and fauor of cardinall Contareno, and they were receiued vnder
the protection of the sea of Rome, but only viuae voc^ or aculo, referring them for the expedition
of the perpetuation of their sect, to cardinall Guidiccion of Luca, the which was
effected with the more ease, forasmuch as there were at that time in Rome, doctor Iohn of
Figueroa, master Ori, and Gaspar of Ottis, who gaue ample information of the life, manners
and intention of Inigo of Loyola, whom they had knowne at Alcala, Paris and Venice.
Cardinall Guidiccion, notwithstanding that hee had a little before set forth a booke
De non multiplicandis religionibus, not only imbraced and allowed them, but became the^^
solicitor:Cardinall Guidiccion first patron to the Iesuits. wherefore they were confirmed and allowed by letters and bulles, the first of
October 1540, giuen at Tiuoli, vnder the name and title of the company of Iesus, with
liberty to receiue into their company, being then but tenne, to the number of threescore,

by prouision. The eleuenth which was retayned into this Order was called Anthony of
Araos, borne at Vergara in Guipuscoa. D. Iohn the third king of Portugall, being aduertised
of this new brood, by his embassador D. Pedro Mazcaner as, desired to haue some
into his countrey: wherefore he caused suit to bee made vnto the Pope, to send some vnto
him: For this cause there were sent into Portugall, Francis Xauierre a Nauarrois, and
Simon Rodrigues a Portugall, brothers of this Company of Iesus: Simon Rodrigues remained
in Portugall, Xauierre past to the East Indies to preach, and there died. In the yeare
1543 they had leaue from pope Paul to increase their number as much as they would, and
to receiue all that would enter into the Order: and then in the yeare 1545 hee graunted
them all the priuiledges, faculties and graces which they now enioy. Afterwards Peter
Fabri and Anthony of Araos came into Castille, and consequently the rest, so as Spaine
hath neuer wanted of this brood. After the death of Paul the third, pope Iulio de Monte
his successor, did in a manner beginne the first Acts of his papacie, by a confirmation of
this Order in the yeare 1550.Duke of Gandie becomes a Iesuite. By the conuersation of doctor Anthony of Araos, D. Francisco
Borgia and of Arragon, Duke of Gandie and Marquesse of Lombay, conceiued a
great loue to this sect, in the which he was the more confirmed by the persuasion of his
wife D. Leonora de Castro, a Portugall, much deuoted to the Iesuits: so as D. Francisco
went out of Spaine with this doctor, who was the first Prouinciall of Castille, towards
Rome, where he resolued to make himselfe a Iesuite, and to leaue his temporall estates,
whereunto he was admitted by father Inigo of Loyola, author of that Order. The duke
and doctor Anthonie being returned into Spaine, the duke made renunciation of the duchie
of Gandie, and of his other lands, vnto his sonne D. Charles Borgia and of Arragon,
in the Iesuits College of Ognate, where he tooke the habite, and receiued all the Orders:
and soone after he would that his second sonne D. Iohn Borgia and of Arragon,
should marry D. Laurenc^ of Loyola and Ognez, daughter to D. Bertrand of Loyola nephew
to father Inigo, who with the aid and fauour of cardinall Iohn Mouron, did build
the Germane colledge at Rome, to instruct the youth of that nation against Luthers doctrine:
Before his death he saw sixeteene Prouincialls of his Institution and Order, and
aboue a hundred and seuentie colledges, the which since haue multiplied strangely. He
died at Rome in the yeare 1556 being threescore and one yeeres old, hee was buried in
the chiefe house, and head of that Order, called Sancta Maria de la Strada. We haue seen
the abouenamed D. Francisco Borgia d' Arragon generall of this Order in our time. There
are three sorts of religious in it, one of profest who can hold no goods, the other probationers,
 and the third collegialls, and it is lawfull for these two to possesse what they
will.Sect of Theatins differs from the Iesuites. The Iesuits are not Theatins: for they whom they called Theatins, had an other
beginning, and another kind of life; they were certaine gentlemen and others moued
with deuotion, who gaue themselues to prayers, singing, and other such works, and were
first called of the company of the loue of God, to whom there being ioyned Iohn Peter
Carrafa a Neapolitane, bishop of Chieti, and being reputed as a worthy man, the head
of those religious, they began to call them Chietins, and then corrupting the word Theatins.
These Chietins were in credit in the time of pope Clement the seuenth, who by reason
of the sacke of Rome, being retired to Ostia, and there finding certaine Venetian gallies,
they past to Venice, and there made their abode eleuen yeares, before that Inigo of
Loyola and his companions came there. The Iesuits comming afterwards from Venice
to Rome, for that they could not performe their voyage to the holy Land, the people
thought that they were the Chietins or Theatins which were returned, and confounded
these two Orders through ignorance, whereof there is great difference. This Iohn Peter
Carrafa came afterwards to be pope, and was called (...) the fourth. Of the Theatins
there are not many other colledges or houses to be found, but at Venice, Rome, Naples,
and Pauia. The Iesuits are also called in Arragon Iniguists, of the name of their author,
and in Portugall Apostles, but in all other places Iesuits, according to the Popes Bulles
and Briefes. This we find in the Spanish Histories of the Institution of the Iesuits, inserted
here of purpose, at the time of the reuolt at Pampelone, in the yeare 1521 where Inigo
of Loyola their first Institutor was. There was at that time an ample subiect prepared
for these Iesuites to practise their charities, and, withall, a fit and pleasing abode for

them, and other religious Spaniards, at the west Indies by Fernand Cortes, who hauing
runne along the coasts of the firme land at this new world, going vp Northward, and
there by sundry conquests hauing drawne vnto him many of those Indian people he entred
into the country, and assailed the city of Mexico, took it, and conquered that realme
with an incredible facilitie.Mexico at the Indies taken by the Christia^s. It is at this present called Noua Hispania. This great citie
which was one of the wonders of the world, by reason of the situation was taken in August
this yeare 1521, where the king Motezum^ was slaine, and aboue a hundred thousand
of his subiects.
Returning now to the historie of Nauarre, we say, that as soone as the duke of Nagera
was retired, they of Pampelone did choose the signior of Osoien for their captaine, who
had serued the catholike king, Monsieur Asperau^t pursuing his conquests was met in the
Pyrenee mountaines by some deputies of the valley of Roncal, who yeelded him obedience,
and gaue him aduertisement of the estate of the cou^trie, with whom hee past to
Pampelone,The lord of Asperaut makes himselfe master of Pampelone. and made himselfe master thereof in the name of king Henrie. D. Lewis of
Beaumo^t earle of Lerin desired to come to him, but they refused him a safeconduct for
his returne. The lord of Asperaut finding no resistance in the whole realme, he reduced it
in few days vnder the obedience of its naturall king: and making vse of the ciuile wars of
Castille, hauing good intelligence with the comminalties, he past the riuer of Ebro, and
laid siege to Logrogne,Logrogne besieged by the French. through a rash and ill digested councell. D. Pedro Velez of Gueuare
had put himselfe into the place, with some souldiers, who resisted the French armie
vertuously, they being much fauored by the victorie of Villa Laria, which the viceroys of
Castille had woon against the commons: by reason whereof the Victors aduanced with
the Duke of Nagera, who had leuied men from Burgos vnto the sea, making his sonne D.
Iohn Manrique de Lara colonell of the Guipuscoans, a yong Lord but fifteene yeares old:
and of the Biscains Gomes Gonsales de Butron,French retire from Logrogne. Lord of Muxica and of Butron: which forces
being great, forced the French to raise their siege, and repassing the riuer, to returne
into Nauarre, the Castillan army following them so neere, as whereas the French sup^,
the Castillans dined the next day. The armies beeing come neere vnto Pampelone, the
Lord of Asperraut being accompanied by many Nauarrois, was of opinion to turne
head, and to hazard a battell, but very inconsideratly: for at that time he was not strong
enough to incounter the power which came against him, neyther had he the patience to
attend some of his forces which were at Tafalla, with the seignior of Ollaoqui, and at
Pampelone, and a new Ieuie of sixe thousand Nauarrois, which might haue ioyned
with him the next day, or the day after, wherefore being neere one vnto another, after
that the artillery had played, when they came to ioyne, the French horsemen behaued
themselues woorthily:Rout of the lord of Aspera^t and the French army at Noayn. but the footemen, who were most part Gascoins, could not indure
the force of the Castillans, but were presently put to rout, which made them to
giue the field, and to leaue the victory vnto the viceroyes. In this battell which was giuen
neere vnto the borough of Noayn, and the port of Reniega, there died of French
and Nauarrois is neere fiue thousand, and amongst them D. Charles of Mauleon, and D.
Iohn of Saraza, captaine Martin, and Charles of Nauasques, or of Nouailles: the generall
also of the French armie being hurt by a man at armes of the company of the Earle
of Alba de Lista, yeelded to D. Francis of Beaumont: the Lord of Turnon was also taken,
D. Pedro of Nauarre sonne to the Marshall D. Pedro prisoner at Sim^nca, saued himselfe
in France, with D. Arnold of Gramont, D. Frederic of Nauarre, and others in great
numbers.Pampelone recouered by the Castillans. Through the fauour of this victorie Pampelone was recouered without anie
difficultie, by the Castillans: and after their example all the other places of the realme
yeelded, except some strong castles in the mountaynes. The Lord of Asperaut was blamed
to haue hazarded a battell, being weake and within the realme, without anie constraint,
but hee excused himselfe, for that hee had discouered a great disorder amongst
the enemies, which promised him an assured victory, but he was deceiued: it had beene
more safe for him to haue stood vpon his gard, contenting himselfe with that which
hee had wonne in so short a time, without striking stroake, and not to haue inuaded the
lands of Castille: a while after hee was set at libertie, paying tenne thousand crownes
raunsome, by D. Francis of Beaumont, against the willes of the Viceroys of Castille,

who made D. Francisco of Estuniga and Auillaneda earle of Miranda; viceroy of Nauarre,
in the place of the duke of Nagera.D. Francis of Estuniga earle of Miranda viceroy of Nauarre. This yeare the bishopricke of Pampelone was voide,
by the death of Cardinall Amand of Albret, and Cardinall Alexander Cesarin Ramain
was aduanced to that place.
19 King Francis discontented with the bad successe of the Lord of Asperauts armie,
hee resolued to inuade Spaine with a greater power by Guipuscoa,Admiral of Boniuet enters Guipuscoa. whither hee sent the
Lord of Boniue^, Admirall of Fraunce, who at his first entrance tooke the Castle of Beoyuia,
into the which he put captayne Beaufils in garrison: then leading his army against
Fontarrab^e,Fontarrab^ besieged and take^ by the French. he besieged it, and planted his battery in the most conuenient places: Diego
de Vera was gouernour within it, who either through negligence, or want of means,
had ill furnished it with victualles, so as the third day of the siege they beganne to want;
yet notwithstanding he made some resistance, and endured an assault: but seeing there
was no meanes to holde it, hee yeelded the place vpon composition, the souldiers departing
with their armes, and their colours flying. This yeelding fell out verie happily
for the French armie: for had it beene delayed but two dayes, they had beene forced to
dislodge, for that there fell such aboundaunce of raine, as the brookes beeing swelled
in those vallies, would haue carried away both men and baggage. The Admirall Boniuet
put a garrison of three thousand Ga^coines into Fontarrabie, vnder the commaund
of the Lord of Lude, hauing rampared vp the breaches, and furnished it well with victualls.
There was sent out of Spaine vnto that frontire, to make head against the French
D. Bertrand de la Cueua, sonne to the duke of Albuquerque, who prouided for the towne
of Saint Sebastian and other forts of that countrey. About that time the emperour sent
a commaundement from Brussells,Demolitions in Nauarre. to the earle of Miranda viceroy of Nauarre, to ruine
all the walles and forts of Nauarre to preuent another rebellion; all which was executed,
but at Pampelone, Lombier, Pont de la Roine, and at the castle of Estella. It was resolued
to fortifie Pampelone, and therefore the monasteries neere adioyning were ruined, and
the monks drawne into the towne.
20 Pope Leo dying this yeare 1521,Adrian chosen Pope. cardinal Adrian bishop of Tortosa, who was then
gouernor in Spaine, with the abouenamed viceroies, was chosen pope in the 62 yeare of
his age: and retayning his name, he was called Adrian the sixt. The newes of his election
was brought him to Victoria, where the viceroys were, full of care for the ^osse of Fontarraby:
passing from thence towards Arragon and Cattelogne, he imbarked, and left Spaine
to go to Rome to receiue the pontificall crowne, the which he enioyed but few daies.
The yeare following 1522 was taken the fort of Maja,1522 not far from Baione, by the diligence
of the earle of Miranda,(...) viceroy, and D. Lewis of Beaumont, earle of Lerin, the
which was defended by Iames Velez of Matran a Nauarrois, with others of the faction
of Gramon^, a place held impregnable for the situation, the which notwithstanding being
extraordinarily prest, was yeelded by the said Madran, who was led with his sonne prisoner
to Pampelone, where they died both within 14 dayes. By this prise king Henry was
quite spoyled of all that did belong to the realme of Nauarre towards Spaine.
The garrison of Gascoins which were within Fontarraby, was held very short, by them
that were at Yru^, Vransu in the valley of O^arcum, in the Renterie, and other neighbour
places. There was within the towne a captaine called Iohn of Aese, who was newly fled
out of Spaine vpon a quarrel which he had with Pedro of Vrdaniuia, seignior of the house
of Aranzate: This captaine being desirous to be reuenged of his enemie, vndertooke to
surprise him in his house, which he knew verie well, beeing of the countrey, where hee
had inioyed the seigniory of Ibarolle: wherefore going one night out of Fontarraby with
about six hundred men, he marched with great silence vnto a house called Vreder, where
the dogges hearing the noyse of them that past, beganne to bay, so as the master of the
house who was a farmer, comming forth in his shirt to see what it was, was taken, bound,
and carried so farre as Ojarcum, where before all things the souldiers tooke away the
clappers of the belles, lest being discouered they should giue an alarme. Then going to
the house of Pedro of Vrdaniuia, they did inuest it and se^ke to force it: but hee who was
valiant and resolute, and knowing the passages to saue himselfe, escaped. Captaine Iohn
of Aese and his souldiers seeing themselues frustrate of their pray, resolued before the alarme

were giuen in the Countrey, to returne as speedily as they might, and they had
beene wise if they could haue effected it: but beeing desirous of spoyle, they lingered
there about certayne packes of merchandize which were come thither from Lyon for
Medina del Campo, with a pasport, so as the people of those vallies beeing solicited by
the Lord Aranzate, with cries, and other such signes and aduertisements as hee could
giue them, assembled to the number of three hundred, whereof some following the
French behind, and some getting before them by vnknowne wayes, and cutting off
their passage, they fought with them in such sort as they put them to rout and slew aboue
halfe of them, and tooke many prisoners, they loosing but one man, and some hurt.
Iohn of Aese escaped by the mountaine of Iazquiuell, with few men, and got into Fontarrabit:
whose goods were confiscate by the Emperour, and giuen to captayne Ambulod^.
The Castle of Beoyuia, was of verie great importance for the French, that would
make warre in Spaine, for it is the onely passage by the which they may bring artillerie
into Guipuscoa; notwithstanding beeing very ill aduised, they resolued for the sparing
of men and money, to ruine it, which captaine Beaufils hauing begunne, by the commaundement
of the Earle of Lude, in few dayes hee sapt and vndermined the walles
at the foote, the which hee vnderpropt with piles, which were made hollow and filled
with poulder, with an intent to giue fire to it, and to ouerthrow all: the which he hauing
done very secretly, as he thought, it was notwithstanding discouered by one of his
owne gunners, called great Iohn of Liborne, who for some question hee had had with
a souldier, was retired to the Spaniards, and had reuealed this businesse to D. Lewis de
la Cuena,
brother to the generall D. Bertrand: wherefore a great number of men of those
vallies, being all souldiers, did presently assemble, and were sodainly led by the said commaunder
against this castle, euen as the French, hauing drawne forth their Artillerie,
and all that was within it,Beoyuia a ca^il^ of great importance abandoned by the French. did abandon it, and hauing already kindled certayne matches
to conduct the fire to the poulder and pillars which supported the walles, which the Spaniards
preuented with great diligence, quenching these matches, and so preserued the
Castle, whose walles they did repaire, rampire vp, and fortifie againe, and as a matter
of great moment could keepe it well. Ochus of Asua was made captayne of that Castle
with an hundred souldiers. The French finding their owne errour, sought afterwards
to recouer it, there beeing an enterprise made by some gentlemen of the Countrey of
Labbord, amongst which were the Lords of Ortubia and Semper, who hauing leuied
about a thousand men of that Countrey, and ioyned vnto them a regiment of Germans
old souldiers, which were in that frontire in the Kings pay, they led them to the passage
of the riuer of Bidaso, which diuides Fraunce and Spaine, where they were staied
by the resistaunce which they of the Castle made with their artillerie, and the Commons
of the Countrie: whereupon seeking an other foard, and other wayes by the
mountaines,
thinking to surprize the garrison, they found such resistance of all the Spanish
forces, which had beene drawne thither, as they were defeated, and in a maner all
slaine.Rout of Saint Martiall. This was called the rout of Saint Martial, for that it was giuen on Saint Martialls
day, the last of Iune, this yeare 1522. In the which the emperour Charles returned
into Spaine and landed at Saint Ander the fiue and twentieth of Iuly,Returne of the emperour into Spaine. from whence hee
passed to Vailledolit, where hee heard the embassadors of many princes, and also the deputies
of the realme of Valencia, who came to craue pardon, for that they had ioyned
in vnion with the rebells of Spaine, and were the last which submitted, whereof they excused
themselues vpon the hard vsage of their viceroy D. Iaques of Mendosa, whom hauing
fauourably heard, he comprehended them in the generall pardon, which he caused
to be published, himselfe being present, and sitting in his royall throne in view of all the
world: he depriued Mendosa of the gouernement of Valence, by meanes whereof all the
strong places and castles of the realme, were yeelded vnto him. In that of Xatiua there
had beene till that time detained D. Ferdinand of Arragon duke of Calabria, sonne to D.
Frederic the dispossessed king of Naples, who died afterwards in France: him he deliuered,
and kept him neere him, with honour and fit entertainment: commending him that hauing
bin solicited by the rebells to be their head, he had refused it: and in time he caused
him to marry Queene Germaine (who had beene wife to king Ferdinand his grandfather,

and was then married againe to the Marquesse of Brandeburgh, who died soone after) to
which Queene Germaine he gaue at that time the gouernement of Valencia.
Seeing the troubls ended vpon the firm land of Spain,Rebellion in (...). he had news that the city of Maiorca,
and the whole Iland were reuolted, at the instigation of a poore Artisan called Calon,
wherupon he speedily dispatcht the viceroy with some gallies: who thinking to reclaime
them by mildnes, was beaten back by them with their artillery, and forced to go out of the
hauen with his gallies, being incensed the more for that he had refused to shew them the
letters of pardon, which he said he brought them from the emperour, before they had
laid downe armes, and deliuered him the towne. And in this fury they began to fall vpon
them which aduised them to acknowledge their prince, and to yeelde vnto his mercie.
The Viceroy being fortified with more shipping, went to an other part of the Iland,
where hee landed his men^ there many of the Ilanders came vnto him, and offered him
seruice: hauing mustered his armie, he found that he had aboue tenne thousand fighting
men, with the which seeking to inuest and besiege the citie, the rebelles sallied couragiously
forth, and came twice to ha^dy stroakes, and were twice repulsed within their
walles, the which caused great trouble within the towne: for many fainting would
haue the gates opened, and make triall of the Emperours clemencie: but the greatest
and strongest part, being obstinately desperate, reiected this wholesome councell with
outrages, hanging and cruelly murthering those that were of this aduice, if they could
get them, setting their heads vpon the publique places and towers of the towne, a grieuous
and fearefull spectacle: And then they discharged their rage vpon the wiues, children,
goods and houses of them that were absent with all barbarous cruelty. Wherefore
they were besieged and ba^tered both by sea and land: so as seeing themselues forced, not
able long to hold out, and without hope of any succours, or meanes to escape after that
they had indured some assaults, and shewed that they had courage, they yeelded, vpon
condition that the people should be pardoned, yet there were twelue reserued at the
Viceroyes discretion, the which were deliuered vnto him: among them was Calon the
Author of the rebellion,Mai^rquins vanquished and punished. found in a priuie where hee was hidden, who being led so defiled
to his punishment vpon an Asse, and his companions following him on foot, they
were all pincht with hot yrons and quartered, and their heads set vpon the towers and
gates of the citie, which payed a certaine summe of money in consideration of a fine,
and for the charges of the warre. These troubles being thus supprest, the Emperour
spent some dayes in sports, and would himselfe runne at the tilt, to the great contentment
of the Spanish nobilitie, with whom hee got the reputation to bee a good man at
armes.
During the Emperours abode at Vailledolit,Combat betwixt two Arragonois he granted the combat to two gentlemen
of Arragon, and did see them fight with those ceremonies which were then vsed in
combats, both in Spaine and elsewhere: the report whereof it may be will not be vnpleasing
vnto the Reader; for that now they are left off, and they proceed after another
maner.
Peter Toreilla and Ierome Anca (for so the contendants were named) both borne at Saragosse,
great friends before and alied, yong and fierie, neither of them being yet fiue
and twenty yeares old: falling out at play, they had beene already in field, vnaccompanied
with their rapiers and cloakes, where it happened that after many thrusts and blows,
and neither hurt, either of them hauing very good knowledge in his weapon, Anca with
an ouerthwart blow strucke his aduersaries weapon out of his hand, who seeing himselfe
disarmed, confessed generously that he was vanquished. But he intreated Anca to do him
this curtesie, to rest satisfied with the victorie, and not to tell any one that they had bin in
field, as their quarrell was also secret, and no man had beene acquainted therewith, the
which he hauing promised they imbraced each other, and returned good friends to their
lodgings, thinking that not any one had seene them fight. Two or three dayes after Toreilla
vnderstood that all the court talked of this fact, whereat beeing much grieued, hee
blamed Ierosme Anca, saying, that hee had fayled of his promise, and that through vanitie,
and to dishonour him, he had published that which had passed betwixt them. Anca
protested that hee had neuer spoken of it, but one had told him that a Curate of the

next village, walking at the time of their fighting about a troup of his that was feeding,
had seen them fight, and had told it, for the which hee was sorry. The Curate being demanded
touching this matter, answered doubtfully and seemed to speake all in fauour of Ieros^
Anca, which did confirme the other in his opinion, that he had broken his faith: so as hee
told him resolutely, that he had done at act vnworthie of a knight of honour, and that he
must do him reason by arms: who admitting no excuse, he made his petition to the emperour,
that he would be pleased to graunt him the combate against his enemy, to make it
knowne that hee was a traitor, disloyall and vnworthy to beare the name of a gentleman,
and withall hee sent him a challenge. The emperour re^erred this difference to the iudgement
of his Constable D. Inigo Fernandes of Velasco, who did what hee could to reconcile
the^, but seeing there was no means, he put them into the field, with the formalties vsed in
those times. In the publike place at Vailledolit there was a plot measured out, which was
50 paces long, and 36 broad, and railed rou^d about. On either side lo^g waies without the lists
was a scaffold set vp, one on the one side for the emperor, and the other for the Constable,
either of them being couered with rich tapestrie, and in them chaires couered with cloth of
gold. At the other two ends were two other scaffolds built lower for the kinsemen and
friends of the co^batants, and ioyning to either of them was a pauilion in which the cha^pions
shold take their armes: the place had bin made very euen and couered with sand, that
they should not slip. About 11 of the clock the emperour came accompained with a great
nobility, the marshals of the field and his gards both of horse and foot. Being set in his seat
vnder a cloth of estate, they deliuered a golden rod into his hand, the which being cast by
him should part the combat. Soon after came the Constable with a graue and setled countenance,
being aboue 60 yeres old, he did weare a long roabe of cloth of golde, and was
mounted vpon a Genet of Spaine, richly furnished, hauing alighted from his horse, hee
came and past before the emperour, to whom he made a low obeysance, there marching
before him forty gentlemen and a Squire carrying the royall sword shethed as his Maiesties
lieutenant, and after him another Squire carrying the Constables armes and his coat of
armes. After whome came other gentlemen pages, or young Squires richly apparrelled
in blew satten imbrodered with gold and siluer. Hauing in this pompe gone about the
campe and viewed it, he went vnto his seat which was right against the emperour, whose
gards did presently compasse in the field without the lists. Then Toreilla the challenger
presented himselfe being accompained by his godfather, the duke of Beiar and Albuquerque,
the admirall of Castille, and many other noblemen and gentlemen: hee was attyred
in a short Iuppe of silke, imbrodered with gold, and furred with sables, before whom there
was carried a battle axe and a sword, a scutcheon with his armes, and a cassacke to weare vpon
his armes. Hauing presented himselfe in this manner before the emperour, hee made
him a low obeysance, and hauing done the like vnto the Constable, hee went to the pauilion
which was prepared for him. On the other side Ierome Anca entred the lists, accompaned
after the same maner, and with the like furniture, except his Iuppe, which was furred
with ermines; the Marquesse of Brandeburge was his godfather, and hee was followed
by the dukes of Nagera, of Alua, and of Benanent, the Marquesse of Aguilar, and of
other noblemen and knights, who hauing made the like submissions to the emperor
and Constable, hee went to the pauillion which was prepared for him; and the scutcheons
and coates of armes of both combatants were carried and planted before the
Constables scaffold. During these shewes, the ayre did eccho againe with the sound
of drummes and trumpets, the which being commanded to cease, the two knights
were brought by their Godfathers before the Constable, where a booke of the
Gospell and a Crucifix being presented vnto them, they putting their hands into a
priests hands did sweare that they came to this triall of armes, with an intent to defend
a iust quarrell, wherein they would behaue themselues like loyall knights, without fraud,
charms, or any inchanted sword, or without vsing the naturall vertue of any herbes,
stones, or any other thing, protesting to imploy only the force and dexterity of body and
mind, trusting only in God, S. George and the virgin Mary, and with the aduice and councell
of their godfathers, who caused a cofer to be broght before the co^stable, in the which were
the armes, wherwith the champions should fight, and be couered, the which were weighed

in his presence, according to the laws and customs of combats, by the which the weight
was limited to 90 pounds of the country, at the least. This done, they were chosen and carried
to either Pauillion, where the champions did arm themselues in the presence of some
that were appointed by the Constable, to witnes that there was no fraud; whilest they
were arming, the trumpets and drums sounding againe. The constable went from his seat
to dispose of that which was fit within the lists, the which he did with great grauitie and ceremonies:
Then he we^t and sat him down at one of the corners of the field, acco^pained with
12 knights, sending the like number to the other opposit corner, commanding them that
they shold not remoue fro^ thence before the end of the combat. To either of the other two
corners, he sent 3 noblemen of quality instructed in like maner. Then hauing commanded
silence, one of the marshals of the field cried out with a loud voice in the emperours name
going to euery one of the 4 corners, that it was forbidden vpon pain of death for any one
to make a noise whilest the champions did fight, nor to make any signe by deed, voice or
word, neither in spitting, coffing, blowing of the nose, neezing or whistling, nor by beating
of hands or feet, lifting vp of the hands, nor by shaking of the head, or any motion of the
bodie to giue them aduertisement, courage, feare or amazement, nor otherwise to instruct
them in what they haue to do, except their godfathers in their charge and duty: And
then the two kinghts entred the field in compleat armor, holding in their hands their battel
axes, and their swords by their sides: Peter Toreilla the first, (for that he was challenger)
accompained with his godfather, presented himself before the constable, who demanded
of him what he was, and for what cause he was entred so armed? hauing receiued his answer
he caused him to put off his head peece to know him, and then he caused him to put it on againe,
and sent him to one of the corners of the camp, where he was receiued by the three
noblemen, that were plast there. Then he past to the other corner opposit, and being set in
the midest of the 12 knights that were left there by him, he made the like demands and ceremonies
to Ierom Anca, who was also presented vnto him by his godfather, and from the^ce
sent to the other corner right against his aduersary, wher he was in like maner receiued by
3 noblemen. After al this the constable went to his first seat, and then the tru^pets did sound
again, which hauing done, the knights which shold fight, and their godfathers fel vpo^ their
knees and praied, which done, either of the godfathers hauing imbraced his cha^pion, and exhorted
him to fight valian^ly, he bad him farewel, and then they rerired into their Pauillio^s.
After which, one cried out that they shold let the good champions go. Then they came and
affronted one another couragiously, fighting a long time with their battel axes, somtimes
one reeling, somtimes another, vntil they had broken them in peeces. Being thus vnarmed
they had no leasure to draw their swords, they were so neere one vnto another, so as they
fell to handy gripes, one seeking to ouerthrow another: But the emperor who would not
lose the^, cast his rod, in sign that they shold part them, saying that they had done enough,
and that he held them both for good knights, wherupon all they that were set at the foure
corners, being 30 in al, ran, but they had great difficulty to part them, they wer so incensed
one against another, crying and contendi^g for honor and victorie, whereas either of them
thought he had the aduantage. In the end the respect of the emperour made them retire,
yet wold they not be friends, but threatned one another bitterly, contemning the constables
persuasions, who told them that they shold rest satisfied and reuerence the emperours
testimony, who had pronounced with his own mouth, that either of the^ had behaued him
self valiantly, and had done his duty, so as their honors were vntoucht. The emperor was co^strained
throgh their obstinacy to send them both to prison, fro^ whence they parted not,
vntil they were reo^ciled, at the least in shew, for they were neuer perfect friends. If of two
bad things we must chuse the one, as some think it necessary, the maner of co^bats practised
in the time of our predecessors, wold seem more tollerable then that which is vsed at this
day; for in that they made a certain kind of trial of doubtful things. The princes leue, or of
his lieutenants was required, who first of al took knowledge whether the cause did merit,
that two men of quality and honor shold hazard their liues who might serue the publike
in better affaies, or their Soueraigne, or their owne families. If after mature deliberation
they held it fit to grant the combate, they came vnto it with great ceremonies,
as we haue shewed, witnessing that in those times they made no little esteem of the life of

men. They did carefully procurea certain equality, preuenting surprises, by any adua^tage,
in armes, strength and dexterity of horse or otherwise: They made them sweare that there
was no ^lander in them, but that they came to fight for a iust quarel, and to defend their honors.
The point wherin it did confist in those daies, was to reuerence God, their princes, and
the lords of the ^ee,Point of honour of the ancients. and to be loyal and true to al men, curteous, (...) and modest amo^g friends
and valiant and couragious against their enemies in war. If it were known that in this point of
honor, any one were falsly blamed, or wronged by deed, with aduantage of time, place, or
company, with vnequall and extraordinary armes, or that hee had otherwise iust cause to
complaine, they caused speedy reparation to be done of the wrong, as the cause required,
either by the lawe, or militarie customes, which did neuer allow the combate when there
was any other remedy. Much les^e did they suffer a gentlema^ of honor to come to the vncertain
triall of armes, with one that was conuicted of rashnes or manifest slander. He that
was vanquished in the combat was held guilty of that wherof he was accused, or a slanderer
and alyar, and if he did liue he was punished ignominiously by degradation, and sometimes
by death. The combat was most co^monly continued or staied according to the pleasure of
the prince, or of iudges that were appointed, who most commonly did part the champions
before they came to the extremity, declaring them both vpon the place to be good and
hardie knights, which did also shew a wise affection to preserue the nobility to better vses.
If any were found so froward and disobedient, as, notable to get leaue to fight in the countrie
of their natural prince, should go vnto some other soueraign, neere or far off, to grant
them a place of combat; hauing fought, they were not to return into their country, for they
were held for mutins, yea felons, and guilty of high treason, and there was great difficulty to
obtain letters of abolitio^ for such offe^ces.Moderne combats and the Maximes of the point of honour at this day. But in our daies al this is out of vse, and their proceedings
in combats is very different. For if it happen that any man offend another without
cause or reason, the point of honor is, that he must maintaine his deed, and not giue any
excuse, nor confesse that he hath erred, for that were a signe of base cowardise: It were
better (saith the point of honour) to be insolent and rash, than to subiect himselfe to that
modestie which wold be taken for weaknes in a man that maketh profession of armes. An
other that hath taken iest for iniury, or is offended at a free word spoken by his friend, the
which in effect is not iniurious, will take it in so il maner as he will admit of no excuse nor
reparation: what? must he so little esteem honor? It were better (saith the point of honor)
to be quarrelous, froward and vnsociable, than to vse such facilitie, and base courtesie derogating
from cheualry: there is no friendship that binds, he must needs fight. If the prince or
some great officer wil heare, and end their quarell: they fear those Iudgements more than
lightning, they fly, they wilbe followed, and they fight in corners, whether it be that they are
ashamed to discouer the ground of their quarrell, which is most co^monly so foolish and impertinent,
as they would blush to speake of it; or that they are possest with a thirstlesse desire
to shed ma^s bloud, and with an appetite of reuenge, accompaned with pride and vanitie.
It were better (saith the point of honor) to be rebellious and vnciuil, then to submit himself
to that discipline; for they would say it were want of courage, and that he wold fly the lists.
And thereupon they conclude, according to the point of honor, that it is not in the king
to rule it, according to the limitations of his justice; and that gentlemen doe not know any
other justice or equity, than the custom of duels receiued among gentlemen, which giues
this prerogatiue, priuiledge and authority, to do all, and not to suffer any thing, and to maintein
themselues by the sword in this possession, although it be vniust, and vsurped but of late.
Thus they are easily drawen to the combat a this day, and they must not seeme to drawe
backe vpon any pretext whatsoeuer, neither of God, the king, nor his edicts: he must goe
being called, else he shalbe held base and ignoble, and thence forth shalbe exposed to the outrages
of him that did challenge him with such aduantage as he shal please: for it were better
(saith the point of honor) to be a murtherer, than to go to field with one that had refused
a challenge. Be they ready to fight; either wil make prouision of a long rapier, of an excellent
horse, with other such helps which shal be neither visited nor measured: for there
are neither godfathers nor witnesses in their combats. Euery one must looke to himselfe
(saith the point of honor) and it were better to exceed something in that respect, than to be
short; although we may iustly say afterwards, that the honor of the victiory belo^gs rather
to the armes and horse than to the knight. Yet they goe in their shirts, and the point of honor

wel obserued require, that they run one another throgh like boars, rather tha^ to slip a side,
when the thrust comes, or to seeke to auoid it by fensing, and it were better to die (saith the
point of honor) then to seem by any gesture or countena^ce to fear death. It is then a wonder
that these men ordained for murther and slaughter, who thinke they are not come into
the world but to kil or be (...), should vouchsafe to arm themselues, when they go to the
war, and they shold not impute it to want of corage to couer themselues with harnesse, like
vnto the Cimbrians and ancient gaules, for there is in a maner the like reason. But behold
the most subtill and very quintessence of the point of honour: It is lawful for them that
go to fight in duel, to (...) a second and a third if they wil, the which shalbe bound to fight
against the like number chosen by the other part, and kil them with whom they neuer had any
quarrel, yea, their deare friends, at it often happens: It is the law of duels; It were better
(saith the point of honor) to be a murtherer of his own soul, than to refuse a knight which
doth him the honor to intreate him to second him in his quarrel, bee it iust or vniust. If it
happen that the second kils him against whom he fights, he must come and succor his partner,
and help him to kill his enemy, although it seeme outrageous to fall two vpon one,
who it may be is also fore wounded. These are tollerated murthers; and it were better
(saith the point of honor) so to kill him who thou thinkest hath wronged thee, than to
leaue him his life, vnlesse he demand it of thee: For it is the fruit of duels, either to kil his
aduersarie, or to brag that he hath giuen him his life. Being returned from fighting, much
contented when they haue vanquished, they wil tel wonders of courtesies, done vnto him
whom they haue thus slaine: He is dead (wil they say) through his own folly, by his ouerweening,
by his ostinacie, wherein they cannot be gainsaied, for that they flie all witnesses
and Iudges.
If he that suruiues be wounded and dies soone after; he comforts himself in that point
of honor, that he hath done himself right by his sword, and that he hath caused his aduersarie
to die first. But for the health of their soules, they think they haue prouided sufficiently,
if going to the combat with an heart vlcered with a deadly hatred against their neighbour,
possest with a spirit of reuenge, and a vaine opinion of their excellency, dignitie, and
valour, they fall vpon their knees, entring into some Church or Chappell, and pray vnto
God heartily that hee will giue them the grace to kill their enemie, or to force him
to acknowledge his life from them. They will confesse themselues to a priest or some religious
man, they wil demaund absolution of the sinne which they are going to do, and will
giue money to haue masses said for him or them that shall die in this fight. Yet it is the
least of their cares: for if they meet with any church man that hath wit and conscience,
who seeks by holy admonitions to diuert them from this bad resolution, and refuseth to
absolue them, they will say that hee vnderstands not the point of honor, and will goe from
him in a rage or will mocke at him. It is not from God that these duellists haue learned or
wil learne that which doth truely honour Nobility: But they doe rather seeke to instruct
themselues in their false point of honor, by the precepts and suggestions of the enemy
of mankind, who was a murtherer from the beginning, and who is alwaies delighted in
murther and bloud. By the instigation and conduct of this godfather, we see them go cheerefully
to yeeld vp their cursed soules, most of this humor liuing without god, without king,
without law, without friendship, and without knowledge of ciuil vertues, hauing for their
sole vertue, a violence which they call courage, the which they haue common with brute
beasts. If there were euer barbarism like vnto this since the foundatio^ of the world was laid
they may iudge which be me^, hauing retained some light of reason, and may conclude pertinently,
that there is not any thing among human actio^s in this miserable age, that is more
repugna^t to the law of god, more absurd in nature, more preiudicial to good gouernme^t,
more in conte^pt of kings and magistrats, and to conclude more offensiue before God and man,
than these modern duels. Not that we should allow or giue place to the ancient maner of
co^bats, wheras there is a king, or some other soueraign power, who ought not to gra^t nor
suffer them according to the rules of justice wel administred: and without the authoritie of
which soueraigne power, it is not lawful for any whatsoeuer to draw his sword, according
to the laws of Christendome. Being most certain that combats, in the best form that they
were euer practised (if it be not against an enemy that prouokes in ope^ war) are the inuentions
of cruel and barbarous nations which are ignorant of piety, justice, and gouernment.

Returning to our Historie, wee find this yere 1522, Iames of Aillon, earle of Lude, gouernor
of Fontarraby, being so long disquieted by the enemy, and wanting things necessary
for the defence of a town of war, which attended a fiege hourly, he aduertised the French
king his master of his estate, intreating him to releeue him, and to send another gouernor:
the which the king performed aswel as he could, for he was otherwise busied, the war being
hot both in Italy, and Picardy, betwixt him and the emperor: The marshall of Chastillon
was sent thither, who dying at Dax, his charge was giue^ to the marshal Cha^anes, who
victualled Fontarrabie, in view of the enemy, and changed the garrison, drawing forth the
earle of Lude,Frauget gouernour of Fonta^rabie. and making captain Frauget gouernor in his place, who had alwaies had the
reputation of a good soldier, but he lost it in this charge. They of Fontarrabie hauing a little
before made a sally vpo^ the enemy which lay at Yrun, it had succeeded ill, in the which
they had lost the signior of Chanfarron, and many good soldiers; and after the comming of
captain Frauget, they made many skirmishes, most of them preiudiciall to the French.
In the yere 1523,1523 the marshall D. Pedro of Nauarre a prisoner in the fort of Symanca died,Death (...)
whose death was diuersly published: it is most certain that it was violently, and by the
sword; the Spaniards impute the fault to himself, saying, that being too much affected to
K. Henry of Albret his naturall Prince, and seeing himself so long detained in prison, for that
he would not swear to another, he fel into such despaire, as hee slue himselfe: hee left one
son of the same name, who did then serue the Fre^ch k. in Fo^tarrabie. At Rome Pope Adrian
also dyed, the 20 month of his raigne, in whose place Iulio de Medicis was chosen, and was
named Clement 7.Emperors (...) into Pampel^^^. The same yere the emperor entred into Pampelone, where prouiding
for the defence of his cou^trie of Guipuscoa, he sent the constable D. Inigo Ferna^des of Velasco,
with the prince of Orang, who led an army of about 24000 me^, by the pace of Beoyuia
into Bearn, and camped before Saluateria, the which yeelded, where staying, they made
shew that they would conquer the country of Bearn, or attempt Bayone, and so they held
the minds of men in suspe^ce.Exploits of the Spanish army in Bearn. The lord of Lautrec, gouernor of Guienne, gaue good order
both for Bayone and Fontarrabie, being doubtful what designe the enemy had, who hauing
remained 4 daies at Saluaterra, returned into Guipuscoa, hauing done nothing memorable
in that voyage, but taken the Castle of Vidaxone, belonging to the lord of Gramont:
a great part of this army died of cold and want in this voyage.
21 In the beginning of the yere 1524,1524 the emperour leauing Nauarre,Siege laid by the Spaniards to Fontarrabie. retyred to Victoria,
where he resolued of the siege of Fontarrabie, which was begun in the beginning
of February, the Constable of Castille being generall of the army, assisted by the prince
of Orange, and many other noblemen and knights of name, among which was William of
Roccandolphe Colonel of 3000 Germans: the batterie was planted towards Miranda, against
the queens bastion, and it was furious and continuall, yet they gaue not any assault, for
the Spaniards desired to take it by famin and without the losse of their men:Fontarrabie yeelded to the emperour. the place was
reasonably wel furnished to endure a long siege, yet captain Frauget yeelded it vpon composition,
to depart with their armes and baggage saued, and their colours flying, as the Spaniards
had done,Punishment of Captaine Frauget for the yeelding of Fontarrabie. Frauget excused himselfe, vpon the intelligences which D. Pedro of Nauarre
had with the enemies: notwithstanding he was degraded of his nobilitie, vpon a
scaffold in the citie of Lion. D. Pedro of Nauarre was sonne to the Marshall D. Pedro, who
died a prisoner in the Castle of Symanca, and was nephew to the Constable of Castille,
by whome being solicited, he went to emperors seruice. The place was found well furnished
of all things, whereunto hauing added other prouisions, the gard and defence thereof
was giuen to Sancho Martines de Leyua, brother to Anthony de Lyna, who was then reputed
a wise and discreet Captaine in the warres of Italie. Besides the gouernment of that
towne, Sancho Martines was corrector of the Prouince of Guipuscoa, the which hath not
hapned to any one, to haue had the charge of warre and of Iustice. Those which haue gouerned
in Fontarrabie, successiuely vnto our time, after Sancho Martines; were D. Sancho
de Leyua his son; then D. Diego of Caruajal lord of Xodar, and in our time D. Iohn d' Acugna.
In Nauarre the king appointed D. Diego of Auellaneda,Diego d' Auellaneda viceroy of Nauarre. bishop of Tuy, to bee
Viceroy, gouernor and reformer of the Iustice. And then the knights of the faction of Gramo^^,
which had followed the kings of the house of Albret, returned into their country, and
to the emperors seruice, to whom they did sweare, as to their king, namely D. Pedro of Nauarre,

who obtained the dignity of Marshall,1524 which his father had held, and the Marquisate
of Cortes,Gramontoies returne into Nauarre to the emperours seruice. Hee was descended from D. Lionell, sonne to king Charles, the second
of that name. As for the earle of Saint Stephens, when as he came to the emperors seruice
he had the title of Marquesse of Falses giuen him, and the office of high chamberlaine of
Nauarre, with other fauors; since which time that realme hath beene held by the house
of Castille, in peace, and without troubles.
22 On Saint Mathias day,Francis the French king taken at Pauia. being the 24 day of Februarie that yeare 1524, the computation
of the yeare beginning at our Lady day, was that memorable battaile of Pauia,
where the French were defeated, and king Francis taken prisoner by the imperials, whereof
the chiefe were Cont Charles of Launoy, viceroy of Naples. Ferdinand d'Aualos Marquesse
of Pescaire, and Charles duke of Bourbon, who forsome discontentment had left
France, and followed the emperours party. What were the causes of this great ouerthrow,
and what succeeded after, ye may read at large in the History of France, whereunto
I referre the Reader, to auoid needlesse repetitions. The emperor was aduertised of
this defeat and prision the tenth of March; the news were pleasing vnto him, as wee may
coniecture, yet he shewed himself verie modest, shewing no tokens of pride for this great
successe.Worthy Councel of the bishop of Osma. There were two opinions debated in his councel, the bishop of Osma was author
of the one, to suffer this great prisoner to depart freely, and to bind him vnto him by a frank
and brotherly deliuerance; the other was to keep him still, and to draw from him all the
profit and aduantages that might be. This last aduice proceeded from D. Frederic of Toledo
duke of Alua, and was followed by the emperor, wherefore there were certaine articles
drawn and sent with al speed vnto the king, by the lord of Reux, who reiected them, as vnreasonable.
Hereupon the Viceroy of Naples persuaded the king not to take it in ill part, if he were
led into Spain,1525 to treat himself with the emperour touching his libertie, assuring him that
he desired it, shewing him letters from his friends in court. But his intention was in the
meane time to led him to the castle of Naples, and there to attend the opportunitie of
a passage, for they were not strong enough at sea for the French, who had Andrew Dorias
Galleys at their deuotion; Neither did hee much trust his armie at land, which wanting
pay, hee feared would mutine; Besides, he was iealous of the Pope, Venetians and other
Potentates of Italie, who were discontented at the prosperitie of the emperour his maister,
wherefore being thus resolued, he conducted the king to Genoa, and from thence to
Porto Fino: whereas the marshall of Montmorency comming vnto him with sixe French
galleys,Passage of king Francis being Prisoner into Spaine. without any souldiers, by the commandement of the Queene Regent, the kings
mother, he changed his aduice, and hauing furnished those galleys with Spanish souldiers,
and ioyning them to those which he had, thinking that he might easily passe, whilest that
the French expected his going to Naples, he suddenly bent his course for Spain; and la^ded
the prisoner at Barcelona, before that it was known, or that he had aduertised the emperor
and from thence hee conducted him to Valencia: But passing by Tortosa, the king was in
great danger among the mutyned Spaniards, who pursued the Viceroy tumultuosly for
their pay, forcing him with their shot to escape ouer the top of his lodging, the bullets
flying nere vnto the kings person. The emperor hearing of his arriual, co^manded he shold
be put into the castle of Xatiua, a place ordained in old time to be a prison for great men:
but the viceroy obtained that he might liue in certain houses of pleasure, about Valencia
vntil that he had commandement to conduct him to Madrid. The emperor was resolued
not to see him before thee had concluded for his liberty, for the treating whereof, besides
the archbishop of Ambrun, who was afterwards Cardinal of Tournon, and Selua the first
President of Paris, he gaue a safe co^duct to Marguerite of France, duches of Alanson, who
arriued at Barcelona in September, and passing from thence by Saragosse shee came to Madrid,
whether she found the emperor was come to visit the king, who had bin brought almost
to deaths doore with a violent feuer.
This had a shew of charity, to comfort him, giuing hope that he should be soone set at
liberty, but it was rather a curiosity, that he might visibly see in what estate he was, fearing
to lose the fruits of his prize if he should die. It is said, that being in consultation whether
hee should see him or not, hee was dissuaded by his Chauncellour, who told him, that

if he saw him,1526 and did not set him freely at libertie, the world would thinke that hee had
been brought thither by couetousnesse,Gouernours counsell. thrust on with a mercinarie charitie, and a seruile
feare, to loose by the prisoners death the price of his ransome: a noble aduice, and worthie
to be obserued. But the duchesse of Alansons presence was the best remedie to recouer
the king, where she remained almost three moneths: what she effected, and vpon
what tearmes the king was deliuered, you may read in its proper historie.
23 These things past in the yeare 1526,Mariage of the Emperor Charls in the which the Emperour Charles maried D.
Isabella of Portugal, daughter to the king D. Manuel. D. Alphonso Fonseca, Archbishop
of Toledo, and primat of Spaine, with D. Ferdinand of Arragon, duke of Calabria,
were sent to receiue this princesse, who conducted her with great state to Seuile,
where the mariage was celebrated. Of this mariage was borne, the one and twentieth
day of May,1527 in the yeare 1527, D. Philip, who succeeded in all the realmes, lands, and
seigniories of the Emperour, as well hereditarie as conquered. A memorable yeare, for
that by the Emperours armie, consisting for the most part of Spaniards, whereof Charles
duke of Bourbon was generall,Rome taken and sackt. the citie of Rome was taken and sackt, and Pope Clement,
with many cardinals, ransomed, and hardly intreated; the greedie and insolent souldiers
not sparing the cardinals of their owne nation, prophaning by all acts of crueltie
and excesse, in their disordered appetites, the places and persons dedicated and vowed to
religion, notwithstanding that the prince, for whom they made warre, heire of the realms
of Spaine, carried the title of Catholike, purchased by his predecessors, for the good offices
they had done to Popes and to the sea of Rome. The same yeare king Francis being 
r^turned into his realme,Mariage of king Henry of Albre^ he caused the mariage to be accomplished betwixt D. Henrie of
Albret, and Marguerite of France, widow to the duke of Alanson, father and mother to
queene Ioane, heire to the realme of Nauarre.
King Francis being come from his imprisonment discontented, he entred willingly into
league with the Pope,League against the Emperor. the king of England, the Venetians and Florentines, for the libertie
of Italie: (...) when as he vnderstood the cruelties vsed by the Imperiall armie at
Rome, he allied himselfe more strictly with the king of England, vnder colour to free the
Pope and the territories of the Church; whereupon the lord of Lautrec was appointed
to lead an armie into Italie, at their common charge.
The Emperour being aduertised, that king Francis not onely refused to performe his
promise, but had also declared himselfe his enemie, he caused monsieur de Gramont, his
embassadour in Spaine, to be put in gard, and the French king did the like to Nicholas Perenot
of Granuelle. These kings sent two kings at Armes into Spaine, namely, Guienne
and Clarencious, to proclaime war against the Emperour, but before their arriuall the embassadors
were released. They proclaiming war against the emperour, and complaining
of the Popes imprisonment, receiued this answer, as some write.
That he might not proclaime warre against him,Answer made by the Emperor to the French king. being by right his prisoner, although
he were at libertie, hauing giuen his sonnes for hostages, that not obseruing his promise,
which he had solemnly sworne, for that he was hindered by his subiects, he should return
againe to prison, for that he could not by the law of nations, being not yet freed from his
oath, protest warre against him. But if he did repent him of this accord, he should returne
into his power, and breaking the first contract, the French should recouer that which they
had held. That he did wonder at the complaints of those kings touching the Popes affliction,
as if they were ignorant, that all had beene done without his priuitie, and that he
had long since giuen commaundement the Pope should bee set at libertie. Du Bellaie
writes,Speech of king Francis touching his promise to the Emperor. That king Francis talking to Perrenot, touching the Emperours speech, answered,
That he was not Charles his prisoner, neither had he euer giuen his faith, but had made a
promise by force, being depriued of his libertie: but being now free in his kingdome, he
did not know any man that could force him to keepe that promise, neither was he voluntarily
bound to obserue that which constraint and imprisonment had made him to
promise.
In Spaine the Infant D. Philip,Genealogie of Castille. being a yeare old, was sworne and declared Prince of
the Asturies, and heire of the realmes of Castille, and the dependances, with the lands
annexed, in the towne of Vailledolit: after which the Emperour Charles and D. Isabella

had another sonne named D. Ferdinand,1528 who liued little, and two daughters, D. Maria,
who was maried to Maximilian of Austria, her cousen german, sonne to Ferdinand, and
D. Ioane,Genealogie of Portugal. maried to D. Iohn of Portugall, grand child to the king D. Manuel: Wherefore
I haue thought it fit to returne vnto his actions, during the three yeares which hee liued
after his third mariage, which was in the yeare 1518, who begat of his wife D. Leonora the
Infant D. Charles, and D. Maria an after birth.
26 In the discourse of the raigne of D. Manuel,Portugal. we made mention of two of his discontented
subiects, D. Ferdinand of Magellanes, and Ruis Fallero, who had addrest themselues
vnto the Councell of the Indies in Castille, and demaunded leaue and meanes to
discouer the rich islands of the Molucques, the which they obtained at the comming of K.
Charl^s, who being at Barcelona, sent them with letters and necessarie prouisions, to Seuille,
there to prepare themselues for so long and so important a voyage.Voyage of Ferdinand Magellanes. Ferdinand Magellanes
maried in Seuille, with the the daughter of Edward Baruosa, captaine of the arcenall of
that citie; and for that Ruis Fallero, his companion, fell madde, he was forced to make
his preparation without him, hauing fiue ships, that is, the Victorie (the pilot whereof
was Iohn Sebastian del Cano, borne at Guetaria in Guipuscoa, he that in the same voyage
went about the world) S. Anthonie, S. Iames, the Conception, and the Trinitie; in which
ships were two hundred thirtie seuen men, souldiers and mariners, with the which he parted
in the yeare 1519, from the port of S. Lucar, and passing by the islands of the Canaries,
and Cape Verd, he sailed towards Saint Augustines cape, betwixt the South and the
West, vntill that he came three and twentie degrees beyond the Equinoctiall, where he
found a land whose inhabitants were wild Giants, and of so great a stature, as some were eleuen,Land of Giants who haue Winter when we haue Summer.
twelue, and thirteene spannes high: which countrey he called The land of Giants.
He stayed in it May, Iune, Iulie, and August, which is the Winter in those quarters. The
king D. Manuel was much discontented, that king Charles, his brother in law, had imployed
these Portugals, and attempted this voyage, to his great prejudice; yet he did comfort
himselfe with a conceit, that Magellanes could not performe what he had promised. This
voyage of Magellanes was verie difficult and full of lets, by reason of the discord betwixt
him and his companions; so as one of his ships, called S. Anthonie, returned into Spaine,
leauing the rest as farre as the strait or cape, called Eleuen thousand Virgines, fiftie
three degrees beyond the Equinoctiall, whereas the nights haue but six houres in the end
of October. And they so called this cape, for that they toucht there on Saint Vrsulaes
day, which is the one and twentieth of October. The same of the islands of the Molucques,
and others which were rich in spices, was so great, and of the profit which might
be made there, if they could find meanes to shorten their voyage, as not onely the Spa-Spaniards,
but other nations, sought out wayes for this traffique and negotiation. Paul
Centurion, a marchant of Genoua, going for this cause into Muscouie, gaue Basilius, prince
of that countrey, to vnderstand, that there was meanes to bring the spices into his countrey,
by diuers riuers which he declared vnto him; saying, That those which the Portugals
brought into Europe, were for the most part corrupted and falsified. The way which
he meant, was, to bring the marchandise vp the riuer of Indus, vnto Bater, from whence
they must carrie them by land to the riuer of Camu, and from thence by Citraca, and the
Caspian sea, to bring them into the riuers of Volga, Oeca, and Mosque. But this passage
had beene with greater charge, paine, and danger, than Centurion did conceiue, yea to distribute
them after they were come into Muscouie, by Liuonia, Polonia, Prussia, Saxonie,
and other parts of Germanie.
Ferdinand Magellanes, besides the ship which returned into Spaine, lost another in a
strome:Straits of Magellan. with the three others he past the strait which was called by him Magellan, the
which is aboue sixscore leagues long, and scarce two leagues broad, the entries of the
which from the North to the South seas, are about two and fiftie degrees from the Equinoctiall:
the waters are verie deepe, the shore full of high rockes, and barren, couered
continually with snow. In this passage, and for a great space in the South seas, they thought
to die of hunger: in the end they came to the island of Inuagaua, repassing the line eleuen
degrees, which they called Good signe, where they sound wherewithall to satisfie
their hunger; and from thence they came to the island of Sebut, where they past the feast

of Easter, in the yeare 1521, and persuaded the king of that countrey, called Hamabar, to
become a Christian, receiuing victuals and persents from him, with information of the
Molucques. In the same island there was another king, enemie to Hama^ar, called Calpulapo*Death of Ferdinand Ma^^llanes.
lord of Mautan, against whom Ferdinand Magellanes going to fight, was slaine there
in battell, the 27 of Aprill 1521. Iohn Serran, who was chiefe pilot of the armie, temaining
the chiefe, was soone after taken by king Hamab^r, who had been called Charles at his baptisme,
and put to death with seuentie other Spaniards. Wherefore the three ships parted
from thence, hauing but an hundred and fifteene men remaining, and came to Cohol,
where they burnt one of their ships: there they trimmed vp the two others, and then went
to Bornoy, where they were courteously intreated by the king Sir^pida, a great and mightie
lord, who releeued them with all necessaries: in which countrey they saw great riches
and deuises of gold and siluer. Then passing by the island of cinb^hon, they came to
the island of Tidore,Fiue islands of Molucques. which is one of the fiue of the Molucques, whereof the other foure
are, Terrenate, where, seuen monethes before this arriuall, died Francis Serran, a Portugal,
kinsman to Magellanes, who gaue him first knowledge of these islands, and incouraged him
to go thither, Mate, Matille, and Machian, which lye vnder the Equinoctiall, or thereabouts,
verie small, but abounding in riches, being distant from Spaine aboue an hundred
and seuentie degrees. The king of Tidore, called ab^ansor, although he were a Mahumetist,
suffered these Spaniards to traffique freely, and was pleased with their arriuall, and
with the friendship of the king of Castille. The discouerie of these islands in the time
of the king D. Manuel, did cause great controueries betwixt Castille and Portugal, the
Portugals pretending that they were thereby interessed, and hindered in their course assigned
for their nauigation: Yet the king D. Manuel moued no debate, for before that
the newes of this discouerie was knowne in Spaine, he ended his dayes, towards the end
whereof there happened a great plague, and famine, in Portugal. During which afflictions
the mariage was concluded betwixt the Infanta D. Beatrix, second daughter to the 
king D. Manuel,Mariage betwixt the duke of Sauoy and D. Beatrix of Portugal. and Charles duke of Sauoy, to whom she was sent this yeare 1521, with
a fleet of three and twentie saile, of the which D. Martin of Castiblanc, earle of Villanoua,
was generall, being accompanied by D. Martin of Acosta, bishop of Lisbone, with
other noblemen, and by D. Leonora de Sylua, and a daughter of the earle of Faro, with
many waiting women. The Infanta was then sixteene yeares old and seuen monethes.
After the returne of this fleet,Death of the king D. Manuel* about the end of the yeare, the king D. Manuel died, little
lamented by the Clergie of his countrey, of whom he had leuied new and vnaccustomed
subsidies, hauing raigned six and twentie yeares and three monethes, in the three
and fiftieth yeare of his age. He was buried in the monastetie of Belem, which he himselfe
had caused to be built.

D. Iohn, third of that name, fifteenth King
of Portugall.
28 HIs sonne D. Iohn succeeded him, the third of that name, at the solemnitie of whose
reception there were present some of the Infants his brethren, D. Iago duke of
Bragance, the master of S. Iames, the earle of Tentugal, the earle of Taroca, D. Iohn de Meneses,
prior of Saint Iohn, the great master, the marquesse of Tournouo, and Villa Real,
with other noblemen and gentlemen of the realme, and the cardinall D. Alphonso his brother,
in whose hands the oath was taken. This prince was fat and vnweldie, verie religious,Vniuersitie of Coimbra erected
and a louer of learned and valiant men. He was founder of the Vniuersitie of Coimbra,
and of the royall colledge of Saint Paul, the which he endowed with great reuenues,
and large stipends, for the Regents and Doctors: wherein hee was followed and
assisted by the cardinall D. Henrie,Colledge of Iesuites built at Ebora. his brother, who built in the citie of Ebora the colledge
of Iesuites, with professors in the tongues and sciences, both sacred and prophane.
The queene D. Leonora, widow to king Manuel, was in the yeare 1522, deliuered of an after
birth, named D. Maria, which was not maried.

This new king continued the nauigations begun by his predecessors with great affection,
and had great contention with the Emperour Charles, in regard of the Molucques,
whereas the ships of Castille had beene well entertained, as we haue said, by Almansor,
king of the island of Tidore, whereas the Castillans stayed fiue whole monethes, and
made a kind of bargaine, by the which king Almansor promised to giue so many cloues
for a certaine ^^sure of red cloth, blew cloth, orlinnen, and so proportionably of other
spices. The warshipe of Castille remaining of Ferdinand Magellanes armie, that is, the
Victorie and the Trinitie, diuided themselues, and disposed of their returne, so as the Trinitie
 should shape his course to Panama, vpon the coast of new Spaine,Voyage of Iohn Sebastian del Cano. which they held
to be but a short voyage; and Iohn Sebastian del Cano, with the Victorie following the Portugals
voyage should returne into Spaine, by the cap Bon Esperance. The Victorie then
parting from Tidore men of the island of Tidore, Aprill 1522, with fortie seuen Spaniards, and thirteene
in the moneth of, they came to Zumatra, in old time called Taprobana,
and the^^repassing vnder the Equinoctioll, and the Winter Tropike, they doubled the
cap of Bon Esperance, and arriued in the port of S. Lucar of Barameda, in September,
hauing beene about three yeares in his long and dangerous voyage, in the which it is
thought that this Iohn Sebastion del Cano, made aboue foureteene thousand leagues at sea.
The other ship, called the Trinitie, commaunded by a captaine called Spinosa, sayling towards
new Spaine, was put back by contrarie winds, to Tidore, whither Anthonio Brito,
a captain for the king D. Iohn, was come with fiue ships of Portugal, by whom the Castillans
were taken and spoyled, and carried, being fortie eight, to Malaca; so as of fiue ships
which parted with Fernando Magellanes, the Victorie onely returned into Spaine, besides
that of S. Anthonie which would not follow him.
The voyage of the East Indies hath alwayes beene more successfull for the Portugals
than Castillans: and at that time the king D. Iohn intreated the Emperour Charles, not to
suffer his subiects to goe to the Molucques, to auoid the ruine of armies, which are sent
to discouer those countries: wherunto he yeelded (not knowing what Anthonio Brito had
done to the Castillans that were in the Trinitie at Tidore) vntill that expert men in the
Mathematikes and Nauigation,Conference for the limits of the Nauigation betwixt Castile and Portugal. had decided it. This cause was debated in the yere 1524,
at Yelbes, whither came, for the king of Portugal, the Licentiate Anthonie of Azeuedo,
Cotigno, Diego Lopes of Sequeira, Pero Alphonso of Aguiar, Francisco de Melo, Simon of Tabira,
and others: and at Badajos, the Licentiats, Acugna, Barrientos, and Pedro Manuel, D.
Ferdinand Colombus, son to the Admirall Christopher Colombus, Iohn Sebastian del Cano, Pero
Ruis of Burgos, and others, for the Emperor. These deputies of either part hauing conferred
many dayes vpon a bridge on the riuer of Caja, which diuides Portugal from Castille,
they parted in greater disorder and confusion than before, the Castillans maintaining,
That the Molucques, yea, and the islands of Zumatra and Malaca, with a good part of
China, fell in their strait and Nauigation, according to the line drawne by Pope Alexander
the sixt, and the accord made betwixt king Iohn the second, and king Ferdinand the
fift, in the towne of Tordesillas: The Portugals affirming the contrarie, with their
reasons.
In the yeare 1525 died queene Leonora, widow to king Iohn the second, who was called
The mother of the poore, for her great charitie. She had the hospitall of las Caldas,
and the monasterie of the mother of God,Mariage of D. Iohn king of Portugal, and the Emperors sister. to be built. In which yeare king Iohn the third
then raigning, being two and twentie yeares old, maried D. Catherina, daughter to king
Philip of Austria, and sister to the Emperour Charles, being then eighteene yeares old:
which mariage was solemnized at Ebora. Of this mariage were borne the Infants following,
D. Alphonso, who liued little, D. Maria, borne at Coimbra, in the yeare 1526, she was
princesse of Castille, D. Catherina, who liued but a while, nor her sister D. Beatrix, D. Manuel,
who in like maner died soone, D. Philip, and D. Iohn, who were borne at Ebora, and
D. Anthonie at Lisbone.
31 The Emperour Charles,Castille. persuaded by them that had beene at Caja, betwixt Badajos
and Yelbes,Vnfortunat voiage of the Castillans to the Molucques. rigged out seuen ships of Biscaie at the Groine, to seeke a passage to the
Molucques, by the land of Bacalaos and Labrador towards the North, if they might find
any, meaning to make a storehouse for spices at the Groine, from whence they might be

distributed into Spaine, France, Flanders, Germanie, England, and other regions: from
the which D. Iohn king of Portugal sought to diuert him by intreaties and reasons, offering
to pay the charges of the armie, and to giue him many other gifts, which the Emperour
refused, persisting still in his resolution: Wherefore these seuen ships parted from
the Groine, being commaunded by Garci Geoffrey of Loaysa, borne at Cite Real, a knight
of S. Iohn, who had Iohn Sebastian del Cano for his lieutenant, who were all lost, or went astray,
except the Admirall, which came to Tidore, without her generall Garci Geoffrey,
who died at sea. D. Garcia Henriques of Ebora, was then generall for the king of Portugal
at the Molucques. In the yeare 1528 Fernando Cortez, gouernour and conqueror of
new Spaine, sent from the countries conquered by him, two ships, by the kings commandement,
wherof Aluaro of Sahauedra Ceron, was captaine, to seeke out the Molucques,
but he was as vnfortunat as the rest: which made the Emperour to yeeld more easily to
an agreement with king Iohn, his brother in law, being prest by other weightie affaires,
which called him into Italie, for the Crowne of the Empire, which hee should receiue
from the hands of Pope Clement; for which voyage the king of Portugal lent him three
hundred and fiftie thousand ducats, in consideration whereof the Emperour engaged, or
suspended* the controuersie for the Molucques; wherein the Licentiat, Anthonie of Azeuedo,
deputed by the king of Portugal, hauing negligently negotiated, and left the businesse
almost in the same tearmes as it was at the conference of Badajos and Yelbes, was
punished: whereby, in time, the quarell was reuiued betwixt the Portugals and Castillans.
In the yeare 1529 Lewis of Beaumont,1529 earle of Lerin, and constable of Nauarre, died
there, whom his son succeeded in all his lands and dignities, bearing the same name. The
Emperour Charles did alwayes honour him much, acknowledging him for his kinsman,
for that he was descended, by the mothers side, from D. Iohn king of Nauarre and Arragon.
32 The treatie of Cambray was concluded the yeare following 1530,1530 in the which
Louyse of Sauoy,Treatie of Cambray. mother to the French king, and Marguerite of Austria, the Emperours
aunt, had long laboured to reconcile these two princes: By the which the Infants of
France were deliuered, in regard of two millions and fiue hundred and fiftie thousand
crownes, payable at seuerall paiments, as well readie as otherwise, in discharge of the Emperour
to the king of England: and it was said, that the king should renounce the soueraigntie
of Flanders and Artois, and his pretensions to the duchie of Milan, and realme
of Naples. That he should marie the queene D. Leonora, and if there came a sonne of this
mariage, he should be duke of Bourgondie, with many other conditions, which are to be
seene in the said treatie, and here omitted, for that they did not hold. The articles of this
treatie being performed, as farre as might be at that time, the Emperour came to Barcelone,
from whence he past to Genoua, in Andrew Dorias gallies, who hauing a little before
left the French kings seruice, was come vnto the Emperours. From Genoua he went to 
Bolonia la Grasse,Coronation of the Emperour at Bolonia. whereas Pope Clement attended him, and there he receiued the Imperiall
Crownes, one of yron, which the Emperours haue beene accustomed to receiue at
Milan, and one of gold, which he should take at Rome; but the Romans had not yet forgotten
the sacke and spoyle which the Spaniards had made. This coronation, which was
performed on Saint Mathias day, verie happily for the Emperour, had beene purchased
of the Pope, with the price of the Florentines libertie, and the change of their commonweale
into a principalitie. After this solemnitie the Emperour hauing heard certaine
princes, and the embassadours of many Estates in Italie, he tooke his way to Trent, and
past into Germanie. Whilest that they were making preparation for the Emperours coronation
in Bolonia, he receiued aduertisement, That D. Isabella, his wife, was deliuered
of another sonne,Ferdinand Infant of Spaine borne. whom he would haue called Ferdinand, by his grandfathers name.
There was great joy and triumph for this birth both in Spaine and Italie, and especially in
Bolonia; but this joy was of small continuance, for he died within few monethes after his
birth.
At the Emperours passage into Italie,Roderigo Portundo defeated and slaine by pir^ts. to his coronation, hee had beene attended on
by the gallies of Spaine, of the which Roderigo Portundo was generall, who in his returne

backe, hearing that there were certain pyrats of Barbarie in those seas, the chiefe of which
was Haydin Rays of Smirna, called Chase-diuell, which spoyled all men, he resolued to defeat
them: wherefore hauing well furnished eight of his gallies, both with souldiers and
slaues, and leauing the other seuen in the island of Yuisa, he directed his course towards
Formentana, where he vnderstood the pyrats lay with certaine galliots and foists, but he
knew not their number. But as he was of an vndaunted courage, and discoursed with reason,
that those small barkes of the Barbarians, commaunded by diuers men, and for their
owne priuat interests, would rather flie than fight, he did not respect the number of his
enemies, but, after the Spartane maner, sought where they were. All which, it may be,
had succeeded happily, if he had not aduanced too hastily with his Admirall, the which
was boorded, and he slaine by the pirats, before the other gallies could succour him, the
which, as they aduanced one after another without any order, they were enuironed, and
fought withall by the enemies: so of the eight gallies onely one escaped by flight, the
rest were taken, and all the Christians slaine, or made slaues. Iohn the sonne of the generall
Portundo, was taken prisoner. With this noble spoyle Haydin Rays presented himselfe to
Haradin Barberousse, who by the death of Horusco his brother, remained king of Alger,
and head of all the pyrats of Barbarie: so as growne confident (being so fortified with
gallies and slaues) to be able to attempt some matter of importance; whereon whilest he
did meditate, he drew into his companie Siman Cefut of Smima, who was called the Iew,
a famous pyrat, who retired with his vessels to Gerbe. He called also another desperat pirat,
called Alicotto of Caramania, who scoured the seas with foure foists, and two gallies,
the which he had taken when Florence was besieged, at Montargentaro, where they had
laden certaine munition, conducted from Naples, for that enterprise. Barberousse hauing
at the least 60 vessels of warre, great and small, had resolued to surprise Cales in Spaine,
and to get a rich bootie, by reason of a Faire that was kept there. Whilest that he prepared
all things which he held necessarie, he commaunded Alicotto to goe and conduct bisket,
artillerie, and other necessaries, to the armie lying at Alger. During this preparation
in Africke, Andrew Doria went to sea with a great armie, desirous to purge that sea of pyrats,
and to reuenge the wrong and great losse which the Emperour had sustained by the
rashnesse of Portundo. Being therefore aduertised, that the Barbarians armie was diuided,
and where it lay, he went towards Cercelli, whereas Alicotto remained with 17 vessels;
where he arriued so suddenly, as the pyrat had not any time but to vnfurnish his vessels, to
chase the Christian slaues into a caue, or secret prison vnderground, and to retire himselfe
with his men into the castle, sending messengers with all speed vnto the Moores of the
neighbour mountaines,Andrew Doria takes many gallies of pyrats. to come and succour him. Doria being arriued, he became master
of the town without any difficultie, and of the port, where he tooke two gallies, and seuen
galliots, and burnt the rest. He caused a diligent search to be made for the slaues, and finding
them, he set aboue 1000 free. Notwithstanding the lost about 400 souldiers, who going
rashly to spoile the towne, were cut in peeces by the Moores which came, and by the
Turkes which sallied out of the castle with Alicotto, or else forced to run into the sea, Doria
hauing caused his gallies to go from the shore, to the end he might fight for his own safetie,
there were sixtie taken and made slaues, with George Palauicino, an Ensign. And this losse
which Alicotto made of gallies and galliots, was the safetie of Cales.
The yeare 1531 was memorable for the earthquake and inundations at sea,1531 which happened
as well in Spaine as in Africk and Flanders,Inundations. whereas many towns and buildings were
ruined, and much land drowned, and infinit numbers of ships swallowed vp by the wonderfull
spring tides, with the losse of a great number of men. This was at such time as the
Infant D. Ferdinand was chosen king of Romans at Coullen,Ferdinand chosen king of Romans. and that Germanie was threatened
extraordinarily by Solyman the Turke, who hauing raised a huge armie, entred soon
after into Hungarie, with an intent to besiege Vienna, the chiefe citie of Austria, and the
rampar of Christendome on that side: to withstand whose power the Emperor, being assisted
by the princes of Germanie, went thither in person, which disappointed the designs
of that great enemie.1532 He being retired, the Emperor returned into Italie, whereas Pope
Clement andLeague betwixt the Pope and Emperour. he had an enteruiew at Bolonia, in shew to treat of a general Councell, which
was not verie pleasing vnto the Pope, although he made shew to inuite all princes: but

the chiefe end of this enteruiew,1533 was to make a league betwixt them, and the other Potentates
of of Italie, for the assurance of their estates against the enterprises of the French:
Which done, the king returned to Genoua, where he imbarked in Februarie, in the yeare.
1533, and past into Spaine.
34 During these affaires the Castillans continued with great vehemencie,Peru discouered. their discouerie
of new lands, whereas Francis Picarro, borne at Trugillo, who had liued long at the
Indies, discouered the countrey of Peru, from whence such aboundance of treasure hath
come: by reason whereof the Emperour made him marquesse of Atauilles. He had some
time before discouered an island, and in it a iowne, which he called Saint Iago, Continuing
his course, he coasted along the firme land of Peru, and there planted a colonie, which
he named Saint Michael:Colonie of S. Michael. then entring farre into the countrey, he found a fit opportunitie
to doe his businesse, in a warre which fell out betwixt two brethren, contending for the
realme of Cusco; whereof the one was called Guascar, and the other Atabalipa. Guascar
finding himselfe the weaker, had recourse vnto Picarro and the Spaniards, who promised
to succour him; but it was with an intent to ruine them both. Ferdinand Picarro was happily
come to the Indies at that time, with new forces from Spain, who hauing joined with
the forces of his brother Francis, and the Indians of Guascar, they made a strong armie, sufficient
to assaile Atabalipa. He for his part attentiue to all occasions of warre, did not stay
vntill the enemie came vnto him, but went to meet them, hauing in his armie aboue sixscore
thousand Indians, and gaue them battell about the towne of Caxamalean yet (as
some wtite) within the circuit of the same towne, which was verie great, into the which
Picarro had put himselfe, finding it without dwellers, and was there entertained at that
time by the Barbarian king, vnder colour of treating friendship with him; but they
could not agree. The Spanish captaine had caused Atabalipa to be summoned, and solicited,
That he should not disdaine to submit himselfe to the Emperour Charles, as his
vassall, and to pay him tribute; and moreouer, to make himselfe a Christian: else they
threatened him, that the Pope would depriue him of his realme, and would giue it
wholly vnto the Emperour: the which he might well doe (sayed they) for hee was
Gods lieutenant on earth, of God, who had made all the world of nothing, and who to
deliuer and saue men from the slauerie of the euill spirit, had made himselfe man, had died
vpon the crosse, and was called Christ Iesus. Father Vincent, a Iacobine Monke, was
messenger of this summons. To whom Atabalipa answered, That hee did much esteeme
and desire the Emperours friendship, and would send him presents, as to his friend;
but to pay him tribute, he would not doe it, the kings of Cusco being accustomed to
make others tributarie. That as for the Pope, whose power hee did alledge, hee held
him for some madde man, seeing he presumed to giue vnto another that which was
not in his power, and where he had no right. And in regard of Iesus Christ, and of his
seruice, he saied, that he had no knowledge of it, and therefore he would not leaue the
auncient gods of Cusco, and especially for that he vnderstood by him, that Christ was
alreadie dead. He would therefore adhere rather to the Sonne and the Moone, which died
not. And touching that which he did assure him, that the Christians God had made
heauen and earth of nothing, and finally all the world, he demaunded of him where he
had learned it; for he thought that the world had euer beene, or at the least many thousands
of yeares: wondering much, that the Monke, who was not yet much aduanced in
the first hundred of the course of his life, did speake so confidently of such ancient things.
Frier Vincent replied, That the Emperour Charles was a great Monarch, whom many
kings, as mightie as the king of Cusco, obeyed, and therefore he should not make triall of
his force, nor compare himselfe vnto him: and holding in the one had a Crucifix, and
in the other a Bible, he told Atabalipa, that that Image had instructed him what the creation
of the world had beene, and the booke contained the certaine historie. The king taking
this booke in his hand, opened it, and turned it ouer, he smelt to it, and layed his eare
to it, hearkening if it spake any thing vnto him; but seeing there was no feeling in it, and
that it spake not any thing, he cast it to the ground, saying, That both the booke and
Monke mockt him. Wherefore Frier Vincent hauing taken vp his booke, returned to Picarro,
to whom hauing related all, he persuaded him to take some cruell reuenge of the impietie

of that Infidell king. The two armies therefore being so neere, as one might say,
they were mingled within the circuit of the great citie of Caxamalcan, the Spaniards ran
vpon the Indians with a great thunder of muskets and artillerie, and the sound of drums
and trumpets: wherewith the Indians being not acquainted, were daunted and confounded:
Atabalipa himselfe was so amazed, as forgetting the duetie of a generall, not giuing
them any signe, nor commaunding to fight, he saw them slaine by heapes, neere vnto
the place where he was set vpon an high seat of gold, carried on his gards shoulders,
who sought to retire him out of the prease,Atabalipa defeated and taken and to flie away with him; but they were staied,
and their king ouerthrowne and taken, being abandoned by all his people, most of
them escaping by flight.
By this victorie, and the taking of the king of Cusco, the Spaniards made themselues,
easily, masters of all the townes of that great and rich kingdome, and the souldiers were
instantly made rich with the spoyle of the kings mouables, and of the noblemen of his
traine, with a wonderfull quantitie of gold, siluer, and slaues, among the which there
were found fiue hundred maids and wiues, which did serue king Atabalipa, who for
a time was honourably garded, in hope to be set at libertie, for the which he promised
to glut the couetousnesse of the Spaniards, whom he saw to be verie greedie after gold
and siluer; yea he offered to goe into Spaine, or whereas the Emperour should be, and
was persuaded to be baptised. But notwithstanding all this, they strangled him cruelly,
and hauing halfe burnt him, they caused his bodie to be laid in a chappell built to that end
in the market place of Caximalcan, for that they would haue all men honor his funerall,
excusing themselues of the execution, vnder colour of justice; for that (said they) hee had
treacherously made secret leuies of souldiers in the realme of Quito, to surprise the Spaniards,
and to free himselfe by force out of their hands: and also, for that he had put his
brother Guascar to death, after the same maner, being their allie. The which he dissembled
not, for that (said he) he had attempted to take away his life, to raigne. In the place of him
that was dead, there was set vp by Francis Picarro the gouernor, for a shew, another brother
of his, called Mangan (others name him also Atabalipa) who discouered vnto them
part of the treasures: so as the present fruits of this victorie amounted to many millions,
drawne as well out of the kings houses, as out of the Indians tombes, being accustomed
to burie with the dead bodie, the most precious things they had: and in like maner from
their temples in the towne of Pauca Canu, and in that of Cusco, which is the chiefe of the
realme. This great citie of Cusco is situated 17 degrees beyond the Equinoctiall line, towards
the South sea, in a temperat region, yet their Winters are somewhat sharp in their
season, that is, when we haue Summer, for those people are almost Antipodes to vs, and the
cold continues, and is the greater, for that the high mountaines of that countrey, are most
part of the yeare couered with snow. Soone after this conquest of Picarro, Iames of Almagra,
who had a good share in the honor thereof, went and inuaded the region of Chile, or
Chiliane, but he found more difficultie than he expected: for besides that his men were
in daunger of death through cold, hee found stronger resistance, the people being
more warlike than they of Cusco;Discipline of them of Peru at the warre. whom notwithstanding the Spaniards do not represent
vnto vs, without dexteritie, or martial discipline: for they witnes, that in their armies they
did obserue a foreward, a battel, and a rereward; that they had scours, and forlorne hopes,
which were excellent casters in slings, as in old time they of Majorca were, who furiously
began the fight, casting a showre of hard polished stones, as big as an egge, and carrying a
a targuet on the left arme. Their chiefe battalion where their king was, did consist of men
richly armed, with cuerasses quilted with cotton, and bonets of the same, reasonably strong
to resist a handie stroke, enriched with plates and threds of gold and siluer: and for offensiue
armes, some had clubs about foure foot long, and the heads as big as two fists, hauing
fiue or six sharpe pikes of mettall; others carried hatchets like vnto our halbeards, which
they could handle well. As for their rereward or subsidiarie squadrons, to releue the rest,
they were all pikes, whose heads were better armed than ours bee. Frauncis Picarro
found the Indians of Peru in this equipage to resist him, it may bee (say they
that haue written of his enterprises) to make his conquests more admirable vnto
vs: For not confessing that either he or any one of his captaines made any account

of the Indians of the countrey, whom they had drawne vnto their partie, and joyned
with them in the aboue mentioned combat of Caxamalcan and others, they vaunt, that this
great king Atabalipa, was vanquished with all that great multitude of men of war which
did accompanie him, by lesse than fiue hundred foot, and an hundred and twentie horse of
the Spanish nation, whereof most of the footmen were crossebowes, hauing few harquebuses:
yet they confesse that they had some peeces of ordnance, whereunto they attribute
some part of their victories, saying, That the Indians were almost dead for feare, seeing
these engines spit fire, and hearing the noyse thereof, wherewith they had neuer been
acquainted; the which hath some likelyhood.
Atabalipa was sonne to a warlike and valiant prince,Beginning of Atabalipa. called Cusco, who comming out of
the prouince of Quito, which is directly vnder the Equinoctiall line, towards the South
sea, had conquered by armes from many other kings and lords, those ample regions wherof
his sonne was in an instant dispossest, at the comming of these Spaniards: and hauing
there built the citie of Cusco, had called it by his owne name, and made it the seat of his
empire, which was aboue three hundred leagues long and broad, stretching from the
South to the West. At his death he left an hundred children, males and females, most of
which liued when Atabalipa was defeated and taken. To Guescar (whom some also cal Cusco)
he had left the greatest part of his conquered countries, and had giuen to Atabalipa the
realme of Quito, where he was borne. But Guescar, not satisfied vnlesse he might haue all,
did first moue war to dispossesse his brother, wherein he was vnfortunat: for after many
vnhappie incounters, he was quite defeated, and taken, by Chilicuchima, lieutenant to Atabalipa,
by whose commandement, although he were a prisoner in the Spaniards hands, he
was strangled: the which did so displease the gouernor Francis Picarro, as he conceiued a
mortall hatred against the king and his lieutenant, not ceasing vntill he had put them to
death; yet after that he had discouered, by their meanes, the treasures of the realme, had
seised of a good part of them, and was assured the rest could not escape him. In the distribution
of which treasure he did afterwards shew himselfe verie vniust and false, as well
towards his souldiers, as to the Emperor his master, whom he did frustrate of a good part
of his right of the fifts. It seemed that God, by this sudden and easie conquest, had prepared
a fit subiect for the Emperor Charles to settle a perfect estate at Peru; but his ministers did
corrupt it. All things were there according to a mans desire, to execute a great and memorable
designe: the which had bin admirable to posteritie, were it in regard of the glorie
of God, or temporall commodities, in regard of the riches, and all sorts of blessings, the
which heauen and all the elements doe powre downe aboundantly vpon that region, but
especially for the aptnesse of the people,Maners of the people of Peru. who were found ciuile and capable of reason,
much more than they that had bin first discouered at the islands, or vpon the continent of
those Westerne Indies towards the North sea. They did not find them naked, and without
shame, but apparelled, both men and women, handsome in their garments, industrious
in their buildings, and in all other arts and workes; tillers of the ground, feeders of
pastures, marchants, sociable and courteous, as wel among themselues as to strangers, and
religious also, although it were after the Pagan maner: whose imperfections should not
be censured with rigor, but excused, with an intention to reforme them in time, by good
examples of pietie and charitie, and by justice well and duely ministred: considering that
in their religion and maners, they were not more sauage and barbarous than the first auncient
Spaniards, before they were ciuilized and instructed, of whom we haue made mention
in the beginning of this historie. They did beleeue the immortalitie of the soule, and the
resurrection of the body, and therefore they buried their dead with honour, and did graue
markes vpon their tombs, which did shew the forepassed life of the deceased: into whose
tombs they did cast precious jewels, and brought meat and drinke thither, and many
times their wiues and seruants did shut them in there, and did willingly statue themselues.
They did punish adulterie with death, and did put out the eyes of theeues. Their childrens
children, or some other of their bloud, did inherit their goods, and not their
owne children, except those of kings. Men might take as many wiues as they would,
and did often marie thier owne sisters. Thus among the seedes of pietie, humanitie,
and policie, they had errours and blemishes, like sensuall people, which knew not

the true God nor his justice. The which they did not measure by the perfect rule of nature,
but according to their corrupt imaginations and their breeding, destitute of light
and good gouernement. Through this defect they did worship the starres as gods, and
especially an Idoll, which had its temple in the citie of Pancacami, who spake Oracles
vnto them, and from whom they attended all their prosperities. It is the vsuall course of
the Gentiles, to whom the mysteries of saluation are not reuealed, which are speciall graces.
And had not these poore Perusians, vices in that regard, which were common with
the auncient Aegyptians, Grecians, Romans, and other such famous nations, who haue
beene happily drawne from Paganisme to Christianitie, among whom the world hath
seene so many goodly Churches to flourish, by the bountie of kings and Emperours,
and by the doctrine, diligence, and exemplarie life of good bishops? But the Spaniards
nor their commaunders had no such intent, as their actions written doe witnesse.
It was sufficient for them to commaund these ignorant people proudly, to make profession
of Christians, in assisting at the ceremonies, vpon paine of death, or seruitude.
And it fell out often, I know not through what charitie, that many which for feare had
caused themselues to be baptised, were by them instantly slaine, that they might haue no
leasure to denie it: And thus, they sayed, they procured their soules health. These
courses, which could not bee pleasing vnto God, drew his warth vpon the heads of
the Picarres, and their companions, who made miserable ends: for it was not long before
Francis Picarro, and Iames of Almagra, fell into a great quarell for the gouernement
of Peru, and so to ciuile warre, whereof followed their punishment and ruine: A
worthie reward for their cruelties and rapes, as wee will hereafter shew. These two
men haue beene the chiefe leaders and conducters of the enterprise of Peru, both souldiers,
but of obscure and base families: for Francis Picarro was a bastard, borne of an
vnchast woman, who had left him at the doore of a church at Trugillo, from whence a
captaine,Beginning of Francis Picarro and Iames of Almagra. called Gonsal of Nauarre, caused him to be taken, and to be bred vp at a farme
of his in the countrey, like a clowne: But being growne great, he ran away to Seuile,
and so past to the Indies, where he got reputation: and being held for the sonne of
the foresayd captaine, there came vnto him three of his brethren, by the fathers side, Ferdinand
Gonsaluo, and Iohn Picarro, and a brother by the mothers side, called Francis Martin
of Alcantara. As for Iames of Almagra, he was borne at Almagra, but of so obscure
a father, as no man euer could learne his name. He was in like manner valiant, but hee
and Picarro were both grosse witted, and so ignorant, as they could neither read nor
write; fit men to conquer and destroy, but not to edifie and preserue, ambitious, and
without gouernement, as they did testifie by their actions. Simon of Alcasaua, a fugitiue
of Portugal, was also sent to the Molucques by the Castillans; but through his
owne importunities hee was slaine by his men, before hee came to the strait of Magellan.
35 The Emperour being in Spaine,1534 he was solicited by Muley Hascen, king of Tunes,
who had beene dispossest by Haradin Barberousse,Muley Hascen king of Tunes dispossest by Barberousse, and restored by the Emperour. to restore him to his realme, promising
to hold it of the Crowne of Spaine. This occasion was willingly inbraced, as necessarie
for the good of Christendome, and verie honourable for the Emperour in particular: for
Haradin hauing succeeded his brother Horusco in the realme of Alger, he was growne
into great fauour with Solyman the great Turke, who had made him generall of his gallies,
and with whose forces he had seised vpon Tunes, threatning all the Princes and Potentates
about the Mediterranean sea, both Christians and Mahometists. Although we
haue formerly made some mention of these two famous pyrats, yet, in my opinion, it will
not be impertinent, if we relate more particularly what they were, and by what meanes
they came to that greatnesse wherein our fathers haue seene them: reporting, vpon
this occasion,Vertue fittest to aduance a man. some of their desperate enterprises, vpon the coast of Africke, where they
began first to appeare; to the end that by this notable example they which haue fame for
their onely obiect, may know, that neither the nobilitie of the race, nor the vertue of
predecessors, nor wealth, nor the seruices of Court, can bring men to great and eminent
honours, but their owne industrie and valour. Horusco then, and Haradin, brethren,
surnamed Barberousse,Barberousses brethren. were borne in the countrey of Turkie, or Turcomania, which the

auncients called Cilicia, or Tarsis: Some say, they were borne in the towne of Metelin,
in the island of Lesbes, whose father was a Christian, but he did not continue in it; a
poore pyrat, or theefe robbing at sea: Their mother was a Spaniard, of the towne of Marchena,
taken by this pyrat at sea, who held her for his lawfull wife. Their first institution
and breeding was in their fathers trade, vnder a pyrat called Camal, and afterwards they
put themselues in pay with the Emperour of the Turkes, which was Selim, father to great
Solyman. Being sent for a conuoy to a Treasurer, who went to pay the garrisons of Coron
and Modon, townes of Morea, they stript him, and fled with the money: with
which money hauing armed out a foist, or brigantine, they joyned with Crocut, being
then pursued by Selim his brother. He being dead, they fled for feare of punishment,
and went to sea: Their first prey was of two marchants ships of Siracusa in Sicile; with
which bootie hauing furnished themselues better, it happened, that theeuing with too
great assurance, they were taken by Peter Victorie, captaine of the Popes gallies; but
through bad gard, this taker was himselfe taken, and lost two gallies. Being thus fortified,
and growne more cunning, they got such reputation, as in a short time Horusco, who
was the elder, was acknowledged for head and conducter of all the pyrats vpon the coast
of Barbarie, hauing for his lieutenants Haradin, his younger brother, and Scanderraiz,
their brother in law. In this fauour hee presumed to surprise the citie of Bugia, one of
the best peopled in Africke, the which was then vnder the protection of the kings D.
Ferdinand and D. Isabella, of Castille, and garded by a strong garrison of Spaniards: but
his enterprise succeeded not; for being master of one of the three castles, or towers,
which are in that citie, as he fought for the rest, he was repulst, and forced to leaue his
prey, with the losse of an arme, so as euer after he wore one of siluer. Hauing fayled in
this enterprise, he retired to Alger, the lord whereof was called Celim Beni Tumi, whom
he succoured, in shew, against a brother of his, who made warre against him, and then
hee slue him in treason, vnder colour of friendship, making himselfe Lord of the
towne.
This was no act of vertue, but of hardinesse and policie, the which is much esteemed
in this later age. Hauing gotten Alger, he seised vpon the towne of Circele, by the
like meanes, the which is the auncient Carcena. Into this he put Scanderraiz for gouernour,
and left the gard of Alger to Haradin his brother, and continuing to molest the
world, he did also seise vpon the rich towne of Tunes, situated betwixt Alger and Oran,
the lord whereof hauing fled into Spaine, hee had persuaded cardinall Ximenes to
send armie of Spaniards into Africke, against this theese, vnder Diego de Vera, who
was defeated there, and lost about eight thousand men, as we haue noted in the precedent
booke.
Horusco being pust vp with these good haps, he aspired to greater matters, and to make
himselfe king of Tremessen,Moores superstitious. a great and mightie citie, and the chiefe in all Mauritania,
sometimes called Cesariensis. To attaine vnto the which, he thought to helpe himselfe
with superstition, to the which the Moores and Arabians are more giuen than all the
people of the earth, procuring certaine Morabites (which are religious hermits of Mahomets
sect) who (to bring the king of Tremessen in Hatred of his subiects) gaue them
to vnderstand,Religion a cloke for tyra^ts. That he had secret acquaintance with the Christians, and that they
should be all damned if they did not chase him away: the which they did, with the
helpe which Horusco Barberousse gaue them. To couer his designe, which was, to subdue
them, he counselled them to draw a nephew of the kings (whom they had chased
away) out of prison, hauing beene long kept in yrons by him, and to make him king;
the which they had a will to effect: But this tyrant, seeing them to proceed slowly,
and hee impatient and blinded with ambition, slue this young prince, and sought to
seise vpon the citie, in despight of the inhabitants, whereof he slue many of the principals,
which was his ruine: for the dispossessed king was called home, and had meanes to
recouer his kingdome, with the forces of Spaine, which he obtained easily. He pursued
his aduersarie so, as he forced him to flie into the mountaine of Abez, vpon the confines
of Bugia, and to shut himselfe in a castle, where being besieged, necessitie forced him forth
to fight, where he was vanquished and slain, and his head caried to Tremessen and fro^ thence

into Spaine to the great contentment of the Moores and Spaniards, for he was a subtile
and dangerous enemie: Pride growing through prosperitie ruined him: But Haradin gouerned
himselfe more discreetly, and did manage his fortune with more honour. Thus
we see, that those which hazard themselues in daungerous enterprises, doe most commonly
miscarrie, and make such as follow after them wise by their rashnesse, to whom
they haue made the way.
Haradin, by the death of his brother, remaining lord of Alger, one of the best ports
of all Africke, he was no more held a pyrat, but a prince, and withall a great captaine at
sea: so as Sultan Solyman, Emperour of Constantinople, made his Bassa and his Admirall,
with whose incomparable forces he made himselfe a terrour to all the countries of
Europe, Asia, and Africke, which lay vpon the sea; where hauing taken infinit booties,
and spoyled many townes, in the end he made himselfe master of the citie and realme
of Tunes, in the yeare 1535, by this occasion.
A little before there had raigned in Tunes Mahomet,Abdul Hedi stemme of the last king of Tunes. descended from Abdul Hedi,
who was a Moore of Andaluzia, borne at Seuile; he was wise and discreet: and being
made by the king of Marroc gouernour of the citie of Tunes, which had rebelled, and had
beene taken againe and punished, he following the example of many others, had made
himselfe lord of his gouernement, when as after the battell of Muradat in Spaine, woon
by the Christians, there was a generall reuolt in Africke, against the Almohades, Emperours,
and great Miralmumins of the Moores, and Alarabes at Marroc. This Mahomet,
issued from this race, had had many children by many wiues, who seeing himselfe old,
and desirous to prouide a successor to his realme after his owne humor, for certaine considerations,
he made choyce of the youngest of all, called Hascen, whom hee had by an
Arabian woman, called Gezia, and would haue him succeed him to the Crowne. It
is this Muley Hascen for whose restitution the Emperour was persuaded to lead an armie
into Africke. This jealous prince was no sooner seated in the royall throne, but
he put Mamon, his elder brother, to death, and after dispatcht all his other brethren
and kinsmen: (these be the fruits of Polygamie, in the followers of Mahomet their Prophet)
Arraxide onely escaped, and fled to Bixacara, a towne of Numidia, where, with
the aid of certaine Xecques, or lords Numidians, hee gathered some forces together,
to inuade Muley Hascen; but it was in vaine: wherefore he had recourse to Haradin
Barberousse, king of Alger, who hauing receiued him courteously, aduised him to go
with him to Constantinople, to informe the great Turke of his misfortunes; promising
to present him vnto him, and to doe him all fauour and good offices. Being
come to Solymans Court, Barberousse was presently dispatcht with a good number
of gallies, well furnished with souldiers, to come to Tunes, giuing it out, that hee
carried backe Arraxide, to make him king, who notwithstanding was stayed at Constantinople.
Muley Hascen, a paracide, couetous, voluptuous, iniurious, and a coward, amazed at
this great preparation of armes, which came to assayle him, staied not, but fled to his kinsmen
by the mothers side, Ismael and Dorar Alarabas, of the linage of Vled Aixa, which are
a member of Vled Yahaya, of those which led a vagabond life in the plaines and desarts of
Africke and Numidia: a mightie people, but disloyall, and of no friendship. Finding not
such succours there as he expected, he followed the aduice of a Genouois renegado, called
Ximaa, which was, to imploreayd of the Emperor Charles: and this Genouois was he
which made a voyage into Spaine, who could so persuade the Emperour, and season his
request with liuelie reasons, and infinit promises, as he obtained that which he pretended,
which was, To persuade the Emperor and his counsel, that it was both profitable and necessarie
for him to restore Muley Hascen to his realm: Euery one weighing the importance
of this businesse, and foreseeing how it might prejudice Italie and Spaine, if the Turkes,
which did alreadie hold many ports vpon the coast of Barbarie, should set footing into
Tunes, a great and mightie citie, fit for the situation (which is neere vnto the ruines of
old Carthage, sometimes concurring in power with the Romans) to make ordinarie
and prejudiciall impressions in that State. Barberousse, who had found the place void
of souldiers, or Commander, did easily seise vpon the towne, castle, and fort of Goulette,

which stands on the entrie of the lake which the Sea makes there.1535 But hee did not
thinke the Christians had taken this so ill, as hee found by experience, and therefore hee
was not so carefull to prouide all things necessarie to preserue such a conquest, against
the power which the emperor brought: who as soone as this honorable enterprise was
concluded, hee did aduertise all Christian princes, and inuited them to contribute men,
money, and ships to this warre, whether hee would goe in person. The rendes^vous was
appointed at the port of Cailleri in Sardynia,Forces of the Emperour at his going to Tunes. whether the emperour came with the galleys
of Spain, those of Genoua, and the particular galleys of Andrew Doria. D. Iohn king of
Portugal sent him twenty galleys, and one great gallion, vnder the command of D. Lewis
his Brother.
The Pope armed nine galleys at Genoua, at his owne charge, of the which Paul Iustinian
had the command, and Virgilio Vrsino, earle of Anguilare had the leading of the soldiers
that were in them: And hee suffered him to leuie the tenths of the Clergie of Spaine.
The knights of Malta sent foure galleys. All which ioyned at Cailleri, where (before the
emperors comming) there arriued the royall galleys of Naples and Sicile, with many
galliots and foists, armed by the noblemen of Naples and Sicile, at their owne charge, in
which the Marques of Guast was tra^sported with the old Spanish souldiers which he had
drawne out of the garrisons of Italie. Thither also came many round and flat bottomed
vessels, carrying victuals, munition, artillerie, horse, and a good number of foot, newly leuied
to that end in Spaine, Italy and Germany, so as there was found when this army weighed
anchor, three hundred and sixtie saile, carrying besides the Court, the traine of noblemen,
and many voluntaries, seuen hundred men at armes, two thousand light horse, and 12
thousand bisoques or new souldiers, fiue thousand old souldiers, Spaniards, and sixe thousand
Italian foot, and seuen thousand Lansquenets, men of experience. These forces being
not lesse than forty thousand men, parted with a prosperous wind from the Isla^d of Sardinia,
and came to land the fiue and twentieth of Iune, this yere 1535 at a place called Porto
Farina, neere to the ruines of old Vtica, about sixe leagues distant from Tunes. There
order was giuen by the emperour, for the landing of his men; the first were the old Spanish
arquebuzies and the Italians, that they might keepe off the Moores, who had shewed
themselues both horse and foot, to disturbe their landing, wherin the Marquesse of Guast
who was general of the foot, shewed great iudgement, for he wold not suffer the souldiers
to leaue their standings and to pursue the enemy, vntill the army were landed with the
victuals and munition, and the quarters made and fortified with a Trench: in the which
they found great difficulty for that the sand was loose and not fit for that purpose, neither
had they any bauines or other matter to binde it with all. The army being lodged, the emperour
called a Councel,Councell held by the emperour for the beseeging of Goulett. where it was propounded, whether they shold first assault Goulette,
or goe directly to fight with the enemy in Tunes, which was much more easie than
that of Goulette: whereas attempting that fort first, being strong by situation, defended
by valiant men, commanded by iudicious captaines, and hauing great store of artillery, and
which did most import, not being able to take their succours from them, neither by the
lake, nor by land on the east part, either the action would proue desperate, and they shold
consume their forces there in vaine, or at the least they should spend so much time there,
as not onely Baberousse would grow stronger in men, and be of greater reputation; but the
Christians campe being wonderfully afflicted with the violent heat of the Sunne in that
region, and vnder that clymat, and, which did more import, the waters which they dranke
being halfe salt, in short time being corrupted, would breed a great mortalitie, so as they
should be forced rather to seeke to saue the relikes of their army, than to attempt any new
enterprise. But the most judicious shewing how dangerous it was to leaue such a fort as
Goulette, with a great garrison, and so neere vnto Tunis behind, that the army aduancing,
they should be in extreame want of victuals, the which not being able to bee conducted
but from the army, the enemies horse being many and venturous, scouring the fields continually,
would at the least force the Christians to keep the greatest part of their horse and
of their best foot, to gard their victuals which were ingaged. It was therefore resolued
first to attempt Goulette:Goulette the fort. which fort Barberousse had furnished with great care: it is a great
square Tower, with large rampers and flankers, and is set vpon the mouth or entrie

of the Lake, which extends from it vnto the Citie, and is foure leagues broad:
(Campana writes that it is twelue miles long, and fiue miles broad.) The Citie of
Tunes was great and well peopled, but at that time the walles were weake and low,
hauing three suburbs open, greater and farre better peopled than the towne, in the
which there dwelt many kindes of Merchants, some of the most industrious Artisans,
and among them some other rich people, who were delicate and idle. For the gard of
these places, Barberousse had about eight thousand good souldiers,Forces of Barberousse in Tunes. whereof he had put a
good part into the fort of Goulette (some write they were three thousand men) commanded
by Sinan Cefutt of Smirna, called the Iew, and N^aid, surnamed Chasediuels. The rest
were with Barberousse, who had also leuied great numbers of Moores and Alarabes, both
horse and foot, whome hee sent, or led himselfe continually to the warre, and made
continuall skirmishes to molest the emperours campe, to hinder the approaches, and
the batterie which was planted against this fort, the which they must force and take
before they came vnto the citie, vnlesse they would bee betwixt two enemies, subiect
to the great and ordinarie sallies of either of them, especially of the Moores, who ouerrunning
the countrie, which was well knowne to them, might hinder the victuals,
surprise them that went to forrage, seeking aboue all things water, which is rare in
that countrie, and take from them the commoditie of the sea, if they had gone farre,
and left this fort standing, and so had ruined the imperiall armie. Whilest they are busie
at this worke, and about fiue weekes after the emperours arriuall, Muley Hascen
creepes out of his holes, and comes vnto the campe (hauing had a good conuoye
sent vnto him) with two hundred horse, or there abouts, Moores, ill attyred and ragged,
mounted vpon geldings or mares, peasantlie clownes. Hauing saluted the emperour,
and kindly receiued by him, they conferred long together by truchmen, but
they soone discouered that this Prince had neither friends nor meanes, although hee
vaunted that hee had left, not farre from thence, sixteene thousand horse Alarabes,
and eight hundred camels laden with victuals and refreshings, of the which they neuer
saw head nor taile, assuring impudently that hee had great intelligences within the
Towne, with the chiefe inhabitants, who notwithstanding neuer made any signe that
they would fauour him.
Thus the winde carried away all the goodly promises, which his embassador had made
in Spaine to the emperour, for he kept not any one, were it through inconstancy or impossibilitie.
Notwithstanding the emperor continued constant in his resolution, to chase away
Barberousse, and to restore this exiled king, to the possession of his realme, for he had made
no accompt to be assisted by the Moores, and had beene drawne vnto this enterprise more
for his owne priuate interest, then for any other consideration, and therefore he was come
well prouided. Notwithstanding all the attempts of the Barbarians, Goulette was battered
by land with forty peeces of ordnance planted in two batteries, and by sea with aboue
200, for the galleys being put into squadrons, whilest that one approached to discharge,
the other retired to charge their peeces, and so they continued from the break of day vntill
noone, whilest that the two batteries at land thundred continually. The which did so ruine
the tower, as the greatest part of it falling, it couered or made most of the ordnance,
within it vnprofitable: The ruines of the tower had made the way easie for an assault, so
as the Spaniards, Italians, and Germanes being put in order, one nation after another,
at their time appointed they presented themselues with ladders to the assault with so
great resolution, as al the defence of the moors and Turkes was in vain, so as a great part of
them were slaine or wounded fighting, neither was the slaughter lesse of them that
fled a long the lake, or that sought to escape by swimming, for they were slain by the shot,
or thrust through by the Germans pikes, if they came neere the shore, so as it was reported
there died aboue 1500, and not without the losse of some men of worth among the Christians,
yet Campana writes there were not aboue thirty slaine. Goulette being taken it was
bruted that they had taken 300 peeces of ordinance,Gouletta taken by the emperour and all Barberousses fleet which was in
the chanel of the lake; the number whereof is diuersly reported, some write 20 gallies, 20
galliots, and fiue foysts, others seuentie and two, and some affirme they were 107. Three
daies after the taking of this fort Ferna^d Gonsago came vnto the camp, who hauing certain

vessels appointed him by the viceroy of Sicile, brought many refreshings, for the which
but especially for his owne valour, hee was ioyfully receiued by the emperour, and by the
whole army.Ferdinand Gonzaga comes to Guolette to the emperour. There grew now some diuersitie of opinions touching the continuance of
the warre, some cold flegmatike complections, were of opiuion the emperor shold rest satisfied
with the taking of Goulette, which was held impregnable, the which hee should
fortifie and furnish with a great garrison, and good prouision of victuals to liue and defend
it, with a designe to returne the next yere to besiege Tunes, Alger, and the other townes
vpon that coast of Afrike. Their reasons were grounded vpon the great difficulties which
the army did then suffer, in their drink, wheras the scorching sun did cause great thirst, and
did force the poore souldiers to drink the pit water which was verie falt, which bred many
infirmities, and many died of it, wherfore seeing the army much diminished by the former
enterprises,Councell of the Imperialists to continue the warre of Naples. and hearing that the enemy grew daily stronger, and that he did shortly expect
a great number of Arabia^s, which he had hired, they persuaded the emperor that he might
with his honor return into Europe, and prepare, as we haue said, for the next yere. But this
was contrarie to the greatnes of Caesars minde, who discouered with better reasons the
weakenes of his enemy hauing lost Gouletta; the little confidence the Turkes had in the
Arabians and Moors, and the good disposition of the Christian army, especially after so great
a victory, the which althoug it were diminished in numbers, yet it was increased incourage
and resolution, so as Barberousse should haue means to furnish himself better for the next
yere, and to obtaine greater forces from the Turk, to defend his possession in Afrike, the co^quest
wherof (which was not now vneasie, hauing found the enemy in a maner vnprouided)
would afterwards proue vnpossible, besides it was not for the dignitie of so great an
army, honoured with the presence of the Christian Emperour, to goe away contented
with the taking of a Tower. The captaines of greatest resolution and experience were of
the same opinion, the which was mainteined by Muley Hascen with great reasons, who
discoursed particularly of the nature of that nation, of the designes of Barberousse, and of
remedies for the thirst, persuading them to the enterprise of Tunes, and of the easinesse
to take it; affirming that the enemie would neuer be drawne to a battell, neither had
he meanes to keepe the citie many daies: His reasons were beleeued, and although his
desire to returne into his realme, with the hazard of another, made him to be the lesse credited,
yet the authoritie and will of the emperor, who was the authour of this councell,
did confirme it. Barberousse on the other side was wonderfully grieued for the losse of
Gouletta, so as hee could not forbeare to complaine of Sinan the Iew, who might haue
escaped, flying away with his men, from so great a daunger, in the which hee had lost
many Ianisaries, and other good souldiers. It is written that Barberousse was once in an
humour to haue slain all the Christian slaues that were found there, the which for his better
securitie, being diuers thousands, he had already imprisoned in the castle: and that Sinan
the Iew, and others of authority had diuerted him from that wicked and cruell
resolution, shewing him, that so foule and brutish a fact, would not onely bee a perpetuall
blemish to his name, but also bring him into disgrace with Solyman, who was a generous
Prince, and hated all such base and wicked actions, as that would be, to kil people who being
in a strait prison, neither had nor could offend him. Being then dissuaded from these
cruel imaginations which rage and greefe for his former losse did suggest, he began to prouide
for the rest, taking councell of such as were about him what was to be done for their
common health, with this resolution still, to keepe himselfe close, and to defend the citie,
and not to come to battell with the enemy, hoping that in Autumne they should be forced
to leaue that coast, and it might be their fleet would be beaten, and disperst with stormes.
The emperour being not freed from that feare, was carefull to haue the ruines of the fort
of Goulette repaired, whereof he gaue the charge to Andrew Doria, with his sea-forces,
who caused it to hee clensed from the infection of dead bodies, which were found there,
both men and beasts, and the breaches to be raised: Hee tooke an Inuentorie of all the
goods that were in it, where were found (as we haue said) three hundred peeces of ordnance,
great and small; great store of armes of all sorts, with an incredible quantitie of
victualls, powder, and all other munition, Engines, and implements necessarie for the
defence of places.

The emperour seing all things in a readinesse, hee commanded euerie souldier shold
carrie a bottle, full of water taken out of the prouision of the nauie, hee marcht that
way the twentieth of Iuly. Comming within fiue miles of the citie, they found certaine
welles of fresh water, which bred great disorder among the souldiers, who were verie
greedy to drinke, so as the emperour was forced to come thither in person, to stay the
souldiers greedy rage, who desired rather to drink and die presently, as many did, for that
the enemy had poisoned the waters, than to suffer a little, and to preserue themselues, at the
least to die fighting. Hauing past this danger with no smal difficulty, they discouered Barberousses
armie, who was come forth of the citie, in shew to giue the emperour battel. The
number of his army is diuersly set downe: Vlloa writes that he had 70000 moors and Arabians,
and 7000 Turkes,Forces of Barberousse in Tunes. whereof two thousand serued on horsebacke, and Guazzo affirms
that he had twelue peeces of ordinance in front: others write that by the report of some
Christian slaues, who had seene him take view of his men two daies before, he had 20000
horse, and aboue 100000 foot, moors and Arabians, besides his Turks, vpon whome hee
did chiefly relie. The two armies being in sight one of another, and it being generally beleeued
by the Christians that they should fight, their captains sought to incourage them
with good words, notwithstanding that they were all verie ready and willing: the prince
of Saleme made a speech vnto the Italians, Alarcon to the Spaniards, and Eberstin to the
Germanes, and to all the nations the emperor himselfe, who going among them all, promised
them a certain victorie, and filled them all with an assured hope, and importunate desire
to charge the enemie, who stretching themselues out in length, thought to terrifie, disorder
and put the Christians to flight. Barberousse had staied within three miles of Tunes,
who began as soone as euer the imperiall armie approched to discharge his artillerie, but
without any great effect: On the other side D. Fernand Gonzaga, who serued that day
without any charge, but being among the formost, charged the enemies, and slue a Captaine
of the Moores with his lance,Battell betwixt the Christians and Barberousse in Afrike. making such a slaughter of the enemies, as hee was
that day noted aboue the rest: Hee was nobly followed by others, and the Spanish Harquebuziers
did so gall the Barbarians with their shot, as hauing scarce begun to fight
they basely fled: neither did Barberousse shew any courage that day, who had no intent to
hazard his life and state vpon a battell, but to flie speedily into the Citie.
There was no great slaughter of the enemy in this action, for that they fled presently,
besides the Christians horsemen could not pursue them being but weake,Barberousse flies into Tunes. and much lesse
might the foot men do it, being tyred with their march in the sand, and with the extreme
heat: wherefore the emperour lodged his army that night vpon the place whereas Barberousse
had stood in battel, fortifying it with the carts of his baggage, yet standing alwaies
ready in armes being so neere his enemy. Barberousse being returned into Tunes, full of
disdaine for this disgrace, being a proud man, he consulted what was to be done, seeming
verie confident to be able to defend the citie: and then he entred againe into a resolution
to murther the Christian slaues, and he was againe dissuaded by his own people; God disappointing
so wicked a councel, to make the Christia^s victorie more easie; for this pretended
crueltie of Barberousse being bruted abroad, it did moue two renegados to compassion,
Giaffer Aga, and Meni, the first was borne in Cataro, and was called Vinsenzo, the second
a Spaniard,Christian slaues seaze vpon the Castle of Tunes. whose name was Francisco, who was much fauored by Barberousse. They
opening the prison doores to these wretches, who some write were sixe thousand, some
ten thousand, and they hauing broken their chaines, wherewith they were bound, got
staues and such other weapons, and became masters of the Castle, driuing away those few
Turkes that were left there in gard, and with all they seazed vpon the treasure, victuals, and
armes, which Barberousse had left there: who being aduertised thereof, posted presently
thither, seeking first by good words, and then by threats to be let in, but it was in vaine,
they chasing him away with reproches, and the hazard of his life, if he had staied.
All this hapned the day after the Battell, the emperour preparing to drawe neere the
towne, when as those slaues sought to make signes vnto him to approach, but the distance
would not suffer them to be seene, and yet the emperour finding that there was
some alteration, he sent two companies of horse to discouer it. In the meane time Barberousse
finding himselfe in bad termes, and fearing the inconstancie of the Moores, hee resolued

to leaue the citie, by the gate next the mountaine, and went towards Bona, being
followed by seuen thousand Turkes whome hee had preserued to serue him at need:
The Christian army marching towards Tunes, they were met vpon the way by the Embassadors
of the citie, who offered to yeeld vnto the emperour, and to receiue what conditions
he should impose, so as he would secure them from sacke, wherein some write that
Muley Hascen intreated the emperor: so as at the emperours first entrance into Tunes, the
souldiers carried themselues mildly; But soone after as some affirme, at the instigation
of Muley Hascen, who desired to be reuenged of the inhabitants, which did not seeme to
fauour him during the siege,Retreat of Barberousse from Tunes. the Spaniards fell to the spoile, vsing all kinde of excesse and
acts of hostilitie, as if they had beene in a towne taken by force, and assault. The Germanes
also slue many Moores, and fell to their feeding, being sorrie they found no wine in
their sellers, for those people drunke not any.
The sacke continued foure and twentie houres, some write three daies, together,
with great slaughter, and then it ceased, the emperour commanding euerie man vpon
greeuous paines, to retire vnto his quarter. They say that this sacke was not much lesse
than that of Rome, and that euerie souldier was rich. The Marquesse of Guast guided by
a slaue, found thirty thousand ducats, buried in a caue of the castle, wherewith acquainting
the emperour, he gaue him them. The emperour lodged within the Castle which
was reasonably well built, and newly accommodated by Barberousse. There were great
numbers of slaues found, whereof there were eightie and one Frenchmen, all which were
set at libertie,Tunes taken by the emperour. apparelled and sent home vpon the retreat of the army. There was found in
it much ancient armor guilt and grauen, which some thoght were the spoiles of the French
armie, which Saint Lewis had sometime led into that countrie, where hee dyed, and many
of his armie, of the bloudy-flix. The emperour hauing remained some daies within the
citie, and conferred diuers times with king Muley Hascen, touching his future gouernment
and agreed vpon conditions, according to the which these two princes and their subiects
should liue, traffike, and conuerse together, hee returned to the campe, making
the more hast to depart, to the end that such as were fled into the mountaines might retum
without feare to their houses. The armie was lodged close about a village called Lude,
two miles from Goulette, where there past a little brooke of fresh water, whereof the
countrie was much destitute, which was the greatest discommoditie they had in all this
warre: from thence they went to the first lodging they had made before the taking of that
sort, neere vnto a Tower which they called of waters, which was the common watering
place of the countrie. Thither came Muley Hascen to the emperour to confirm and sweare
the articles, which were these.
1 That king Muley Hascen did confesse and would acknowledge, for him and his successors
kings of Tunes,Articles of Accord betwixt the emperour and king of Tunes. that hauing beene chased out of his estate, he had recouered it by the
grace of God, and by the arms and vertue of the emperor Charles king of Spaine, who had
taken Goulette, and impregnable fort, and chased away his enemy Haradin Barberousse.
2 That in regard of so great a fauour, he shold set at libertie, all the Christians of what
age, sexe, or condition soeuer, that were detained prisoners within his realme, what offences
soeuer they had committed, without punishment, price or ransome; and that from
thenceforth there should not any of the emperors subjects, nor of his brothers D. Ferdinands
king of Romans, be made slaues within the realme of Tunes.
3 That it should be lawful for al Christians to traffike at Tunes, and places depending
theron, stay, inhabit, purchase lands, build chappels and churches, and exercise their religion.
4 That the moors of Spain which had receiued the baptisme of Christ shold not be receiued
into the realm of Tunes, if they did not shew letters of permissio^ from the emperor
or his successors kings of Spain, or from their lieutenants, viceroyes, or Magistrates.
5 That Muley Hascen did resigne vnto the emperor and his successors kings of Spaine,
all the right which hee had to any towns of Africke, places and Islands held then by Barberousse
and the Turkes to enioy them in propriety, if they did conquer them.
6 That Goulette, and two miles of the countrie round about, shold remaine in soueraigntie
to the kings of Spaine, who might put in any garrison, and fortifie it as they
pleased.

7 That the inhabitants of Goulette, and the territorie about it, and the souldiers of the
garrison should bee free both by sea and land, from all imposts and customes for that
which they should buy for their own vse, and if they traded in Merchandize, they should
be vsed like to them of the country.
8 That they of Goulette should not bee hindered to receiue the tolles and customes
of the kings of Tunes.
9 That to entertaine the garrison of Goulette, the kings of Tunes should pay
vnto the gouernours twelue thousand crownes yearely, at two paiments, in August
and Februarie.
10 That the fishing for corrall and the trade thereof, should be reserued for the emperour,
and his successors, kings of Spaine, to dispose at their pleasures.
11 That in acknowledgement of the benefits done by the emperour to Muley Hascen,
hee and his successours should honour the kings of Spaine for euer, as their Patrons
and protectors, and for an homage of that protection, they should bee bound
to giue them euerie yeare sixe faire horses, and twelue exquisite faulcons, the which he
should deliuer into the hands of the gouernour of Goulette, the three and twentieth of
August, vpon paine to loose fifty thousand crownes for the first time he should faile, and
for the second a hundred thousand, and if they should continue to neglect this duety, to
forfeit their realme to the king of Spaine, who might iustly dispossesse them.
12 That vpon the like paine the kings of Tunes should not make any leagues nor alliances
with any princes or states, Christians or Mahumetists, to the preiudice of the emperour
or his successors.
13 That there should no entrance bee giuen, in the ports of the realme of Tunes, to
any Pyrats, or robbers at Sea, common enemies, nor to the priuate enemies one of another.
14 Lastly that there should be good, sincere, and perpetuall friendship, and free commerce
maintained, betwixt these Princes and their subiects, and right and iustice mutually done.
These articles were sworne and signed in this forme reciprocally in the emperours
campe neere vnto Goulotte, the thirteenth day of August, in the yere of Christ 1535, and
in the yeare 942 of Mahumet, the sixt day of the moone of the month Casa.
King Muley Hascen taking the othe drew out halfe his Cymiter, and touching the blade
hee sware by the prophet Mahumet, and by the Alcaron, that hee would faithfully obserue
all the contents thereof, and neuer breake them: and the emperour sware and
promised the same, kissing his right hand, and taking hold of a cloake which a knight
of Saint Iames there present did weare, on the which there was a crosse, he kist it also. And
of this contract there were foure copies made, two in the Spanish, and two in the Arabian
tongue, respectiuely kept and carried by the officers and Secretaries of these princes.
There was also added to the said articles:
That from that time there should bee a supreme Iudge and Councell in Goulette, the
which in the emperours name should iudge without appeale, of all ciuill and criminall
causes, where any of his Majesties subjects should be a partie, traffiking or going into any
countrie of the realme of Tunes: And in regard of the towne of Afrike then held by the
Turkes, if it came by any meanes into the power of the kings of Tunes, the emperour and
his successors kings of Spaine should dispose thereof as they should thinke good. For witnesses
to the said accord and articles, there were set downe for the emperor Nicholas Perenot
seignior of Granuelle, doctor Fernand of Gueuara, and Anthonie Peres, councellors of
State; And for the king of Tunes, Aluar Gomesis Mahumet of Tunes, Hamet Gamaza, and
Abeder Heymin Maier, his councellors, kinsmen, and officers.
This done Muley Hascen retyred to Tunes, and the emperour gaue order for his
returne. He had a great desire to set vpon the towne of Africke, which lyes right against
Sicile, and was verie co^modious, for the Turks which held it, to make enterprises, but seeing
Autumne approach, which shut, vp the Seas for Galleys, hee deferred it to an
other season. Hee left D. Bernardine of Mendosa, brother to the Marquesse of Mondejar
gouernor of Goulette,Emperors retreat from Tunes. with a thousand Spaniards, of the old ba^ds. He sent Andrew
Doria, along the western coast, to learne what was become of Barberousse, and to watch

what he would vndertake, who found that at his dislodging from Tunes he had retired
to Bone, and that hauing some notice of Dorias approach with forty gallies, he had left
the place voyde,Bone in Afrike taken by Andrew Doria. whereon Doria seazed without any difficulty, who by the Emperours
commaundement put a garrison into the castle, and left the towne at the disposition of
the king of Tunes, thinking that the Moores inhabiting there would maintaine themselues
in peace better vnder his obedience. There is a suburbe at Tunes without the port
called Bethelmenara, containing about a thousand housholds, where there dwelt certaine
Christians, called by reason of that suburbe Rabbattins, whose predecessours had
bin brought thither by Ioseph Almansor king,Rabattins Christians at Tunes. and Caliph of Marroc, ruler ouer all Afrike,
some 300 yeres since. Of those which made profession of the Christian religion, the kings
of Tunes did commonly make the gardes of their persons, for most of them made profession
of armes: and carried the countenaunce of gentlemen; they held lands by homage
of the king, and were rich. The Emperour carried some of these Rabattins into Europe,
and did them good. Hee dismist the infant D. Lewis of Portugall from Tunes, with his
galleys, and did witnesse by his letters vnto king Iohn his brother, that in this voyage hee
had giuen preat proofes of his iudgement and valour, and with this opportunitie he sent
some of the noblemen and youth, which had accompanied him, into Spaine.
Barberousse flying from Tunes, being come from the riuer of Maggiordech, one of his
chiefe pirates called Aidino of Smirne, being very drie, drunke of that water and burst. At
his comming to Bone, he drew 14 gallies vnfurnished out of a neere lake, which had been
kept there for the like need, and hauing sodenly caused them to be armed, and all things
ready to goe forth, fearing to meet with the emperours armie, he had caused that port to
be fortified, but it appearing not, he went towards the East, meaning first to be reuenged
of the Christians in some sort: wherefore hauing passed to Alger, and there prouided
for his affaires, and furnished his army well, he sailed towards the Iland of Minorca, where
comming neere vnto the port of Maone, he set vp certain Christian flags which hee had
taken the yeare before:Minorca sprited by Barbarosse. the Ilanders thinking it to be a part of the Emperours armie, receiued
them ioyfully; where afterwards they tooke great spoiles of goods and people:
hee sackt a shippe of Portugall there, and slew Gonsaluo Per^lia the captaine after a long
fight: and so retiring with his prey to Alger, he set saile towards Constantinople.
The Emperour hauing dismist part of his army from Goulette, he passed with the rest
into Sicile,Emperor comes into Sicile. where he landed at Trapani, from whence he came to Palerme the thirteenth
of September, where he made a solemne entrie: soone after they of the Iland made him
a present of two hundred and fiftie thousand crownes, as well for the charges he had bin
at, as for the preparation he meant to make the next yeare against Barberousse, whom he
desired to chase out of Afrike, especially from Alger. Going out of Sicile, he past from
Messina to Naples, which city he had not seene: in his voyage hee was sumptuously receiued
as wel by the whole state, as by priuate princes his subiects, especially by the princes
of Bisignuno and Salerno, vntill he came to Naples, where being royally receiued,
that noble citie, the head of that kingdome, would not faile to make an extraordinarie
demonstration of their loue vnto their prince; so as on the third day of Februarie one
thousand fiue hundred thirtie and six they resolued in the monasterie of Saint Laurence,1536
the Emperour being present,Gift of the realme of Naples to the emrour. to giue him a million and fiue hundred thousand ducats,
the which was speedily effected.
During the emperours absence D. Isabella the empresse was gouernesse in Spaine as
she had alwaies beene, with a councell of state appointed to assist her: by whose aduice
and order D. Guttiere de Vargas Bishop of Plaisance caused a fleete of fiue shippes
to be finished, the which had beene long before vndertaken, in the presence of D. Iohn
then prince of Portugall,Ships sent out of Castille to the Molucques. who was come in pilgrimage into Castille. These shippes being
well furnished were sent vnto the Molucques, of the which onely one past the streit
of Magellan, which discouered the shoare of that continent, from the going out of the
streit vnto Arequipa 25 degrees from the Equinoctiall.
36 After the emperours returne from Tunes to Naples, a new warre being kindled
betwixt him and the French king,Emperours voyage into Preuence. by reason of the duke of Sauoy, the Emperours brother
in law, whom the French sought to spoile of his estate. Hee was not able to resist so

potent an enemy,1536 and therefore he had recourse vnto the emperour for aid, who hauing
gathered togither a goodly army, co^sulted with his captains of the maner how he should
make warre, whether he should stay in Piedmont, and recouer that which the French had
taken from the Sauoiard, of which opinion the marquesse of Guast and D. Fernand of Gon^age
were, who aledged some reasons to maintaine their opinion, or that he should passe
presently into Prouence, and leaue such forces to recouer Piedmont as should be thought^
fit, the which Anthony de Le^a and Andrew Doria, did maintaine, but especially the emperor
himselfe, who was confident for the enterprise of Prouence, and to that end he made
an eloquent Oration vnto his Councell, in these termes.

If the war we vndertake,Oration made by Charles the fift vpon his passage into Prouence. and the enemy against whom we are to fight, were not knowen
vnto vs, and withal, we were not assured in our selues that we shold bring this war to a good
end, without doubt we should not blame this your councell, or, to speak more properly,
consideration; but should rather commend it, and follow it. But knowing that we make
war against one that hath broken his faith, a perfidious man, who hauing no regard that
the duke of Sauoy was comprehended in the treatie of Cambray hath made war against
him, the which he knew to be against vs; we doubt not but God the iust Iudge of a violated
peace, and of the breach of faith, will take a seuere reuenge.
I wil adde thus much more, that we shall warre against the same enemy, ouer whom we
haue bin victorious for these 20 yeares: but which victories (to proue against that which
you haue said that we haue wonne, and that they may confesse they haue lost,) we hold still
the duchie of Milan, a glorious remembrance, and a rich spoile of our vanquished enemie;
the which should giue hope and courage to you that be winners, and feare and dispaire to
them. Besides, let vs compare our forces with our enemies, we shall find ours to exceed
them both in number and valour: we see no such danger as you pretend, although we diuide
our army, passe the Alpes, and go into France to assaile our enemy. But to answer first
vnto this, and then to returne vnto our former proposition: It is not vnknowen, and we can
proue it by examples, how many being afflicted with warre in their owne estates, haue
freed themselues by transporting the war into their enemies countries, and haue made conquests
of their aduersaries states: But in our case we will rather ground vpon firme and
sound reasons, than vpon examples, the which can hardly be found equal in al circumstances.
You are of opinion, that before we tra^sport the war into France, we should chase the
enemy out of Piedmont, so as there may be no relikes remayning: and we on thother side,
induced by many reasons, hold it much better, that passing into France we transport the
warre thither, rather than to nourish it in our owne and our friends countrey, and maintaine
it in Italie, the which hath beene so many yeares afflicted, and therefore it is reason
we should preserue it, and giue it some time of rest, after so great and tedious miseries:
so as it hauing felt for these 30 yeares, by meanes of the French, those miseries which do
accompany war, let France in like manner tast of spoiles, burning, rapes, let it tast of the
feare, terrour, amazement and flight of citizens, let it make proofe of the sacking of houses,
desolations, ruines, and the burning of cities. It fittes not to haue the citie of Turin,
or the country of Piedmont the reward of our victories, but Paris, yea the very Crowne
of France. We haue too long suffered that king, to make war in anothers country, I pray
you let vs make him labour to defend his owne dominions, and let vs trie if the French be
as much worth at home as abroad. But it may be their nature and disposition is not well
knowen vnto you, whom you haue so often knowen by experience: At the first charge
they are somewhat worth, but after some resistance, they faint, and loose their force: Besides,
we haue knowne that king to haue bin of so great a mind (we will not say so rash)
as he will hold it a great dishonor to suffer vs to enter and remain in his confines without
giuing vs battel: The which if he do, who is there among you that wil doubt of a victory?
Hold this for certain, that there is no other means to end the war, but that either he must
adde Spaine and the empire, to that which he now enioyes; or we conquer the realme of
France to our other possessions: for the effecting whereof we come to seek him in the bowells
of his owne realme. We must not grow old here, expecting when he should come,
and giue him meanes to preserue his owne country, from whence he is continually supplied
with money, whereby he entertaines his armie here at our cost, who inrich themselues

with spoile of those things, which should serue to pay out souldiers. And for that
which you feare, that the French king may leuy new souldiers more commodiously, there
is nothing more impossible to do, nor more vaine to speake, for that in bringing an armie
hither, it drawes new sonldiers with the hope of spoile, beeing accustome to steale and
spoile in a Country worne by the sword; the which without (...) they (...) doe in
Fraunce: for beeing kept in Martiall discipline by the king, the respect of the countrey
binding them, they will hold themselues for aduenturers, when it shall be lawfull for
them to liue with their owne pay, though hardly so as few will expose themselues to
wounds and death, for the miserable gaine of an ordinarie pay: and if the souldiers will
seeke to haue it augmented, they must afflict the people; so as what the enemie can not
get by warre, the companies will iniuriously take away, they will spoile they victualles and
diminish the treasure, raising tumults, seditions and rebellions, and the rather, if the matter
proceed in such sort; as the king himselfe be the cause of this spectacle, wherein wee
shall see a manifest example of Gods iudgement* And so hee (...) hath so often afflicted
anothers countrie with fire, sword and spoile, shall be now forced, ^^ining and burning
his owne countrie, not only to beare it, but also to do it himselfe. But me thinkes I heare
some of you feare, that he wil do that before our army arriue, whereunto he shall be forced.
This should not moue you, neyther can there be any thing to hinder vs, but wee
shold abound in victuals, hauing prouided for it, so as piercing into the heart of France,
we shall haue great abundance, and without any charge. As for your doubt, that the king
will gather forces together on this side the Alpes whilest that wee are in France, and this
country destitute of souldiers; we assure you that we haue prouided him so much worke
in other places, as he can hardly bend his thoghts to any other busines: for that besides this
army which will make him oppose all the vigour and force he hath, and another, which
it may be you haue heard of shall be led by Nassau and ^ossan, to inuade the confines of
Picardy; there is yet a third which should come and ioyne with vs in Prouence, the which
at the empresse intreaty, our people of Spaine haue leuied: and to that end we haue sent
23 gallies thither, and one with a particular commission, to informe her of my intention, and
of the prefixed time of my voiage: we haue also taken order that an other shall be made
ready, the which during the hottest of the war, passing through Champaine, shall inuade
Burgundy, and with the help of some of those two prouinces, which are affected vnto vs,
that army will worke no lesse effects than either of the other three. So as the king being
thus busied in many places, and with such great preparations of war, hauing no meanes
to leuy at one instant sufficient forces to resist so great a masse of armies, it can not be but
on some side we shal pierce into the bowells of his realme, let him prepare what army he
can. Let vs not feare to diuide our forces; Let vs leaue what shallbe fit for the siege of Turin,
and the rest which we shall lead with vs shalbe able to vanquish him fighting, specially,
if (as you haue propounded) he shal think to diuide his forces, to man those places which
he meanes to fortifie against vs. Adde (the which you know aswell as my selfe) what the
French footmen are, whereas they desire to be more esteemd for their horsmen, which indeed
they practise more, and proue better; at this time they are much vnfurnished. It is not
vnknowen vnto you, that at Fossan and Conflans we haue spoild them of 250 horse of seruice;
there are 200 now in Turin which can not hope for any better successe: and of the
other companies which came hither, halfe of them are consumed with the toile. So as
you are not to fight with that old caulerie of France, but with some relikes thereof: Besides,
they hauing heretofore wholy relied vpon the German footmen and the Suitzers,
of whom they thought to haue what numbers they pleased, we doe assure you that thorow
the helpe of God, and our diligence, they shal not haue any, concealing what means
we haue vsed to causea good number of them that were with him to abandon him: And
from the Suitzers we haue gotten a firme promise (wherein we suppose they wil not faile)
not to suffer any one to go out of the country to serue any Prince. Matters standing vpon
these termes, let vs continue constant in our first resolution: that we leaue a conuenient
army for the recouery of Turin, and that we passe into France with the rest and with
such men as shalbe leuied in Italie, and nothing staied by those difficulties which you haue
wisely considered, we may go by the riuer of Prouence. As for the difficulties which you

haue propounded touching the entrance, we wil neuer suffer the French to depriue vs of
that honor, to haue endured it more constantly than we. Concerning victualles, there is
sufficient prouided, which shalbe brought by sea, with the artillerie, munition, and other
necessaries, which otherwise would be very chargeble. Finally, the intemperatnes of the
aire, which it seemes you feare in Prouence; hold it not worse than that of Afrike, the
which our souldiers haue constantly indured. And therefore all duly considered, I do not
see why we should rather feare danger, than glorie in this victory, hauing to deale with an
enemy who is vnprouided of valiant men.

After this speech the enterprise was concluded,Army of Charls the fift going into Prouence. and preparation made accordingly,
they write that the emperour had in his army 24000 Germans, 14000 Spaniards, 12000
Italia^s and 5000 horse. The marques of Guast was general of the foot; the D. of Alua was
generall of the men at armes; and D. Fernand of Gonzague, of the light horse. How they
entred, and what they did in this enterprise, you may reade at large in the French history.
The prince D. Philip of Spaine, being now tenne years old, gaue great signes of wisedome
and sufficiencie hereafter, to gouerne those realmes, whereunto hee was borne an
hereditarie successor. And to make his studies the more easie, they appointed him for his
Scholemaster Iohn Martin Silicco a man not onely very learned, but of an innocent life,
whose merits did afterwards make him archbishop of Toledo and cardinall: D. Iohn of E.
stuniga or Zuniga, a lmight of great wisedome and iudgement, and commander maior of
Castille, was made his gouernour: and to giue him an honourable Competitor in all his
studies,Lewis prince of Sauoy dies in Spaine. and a sweet companion in that tender age, two yeres before D. Lewis his cousin,
the eldest sonne of Sauoy, had passed out of Italie into Spaine: But this yoong prince of
great hope died this yeare on Christmasse day at Madrid, to the great griefe of the prince
D. Philip, who loued him deerely, and of the whole court, in the 13 yeare of his age.
37 I will now relate something of the progresse of the Portugalls nauigations at the
east Indies,India. Exploits of the Portugalls. and how the Turkes came and besieged them in Diu, a towne which the Portugalls
had so fortified, as they neither feared the fraud nor force of that barbarous and inconstant
nation. But the better to vndersta^d the war which was brought thither this yere
by the Turke, wee will make a repetition of somethings that went before. In the yeare
1532 the king of Portugall had sent Noui^ d' Aeugna generall to the Indies, who hauing a
desire to get footing in the realme of Cambaia, hee sent Antonio Silueria with a great army,
to discouer that riuer, and to informe himself wel what might be expected. This captaine
made great proofes of his valor in that country, spoiling and burning some townes,
and striking a great terror into that people of the Portugalls name. It followed after that
the Bascia of Egipt, called Soliman by commandement from Soliman the great Turk, who
could not quietly indure the Portugalles good successe at the Indies, whereby his kingdomes
had receiued so great losse, being disappointed of the nauigation for spices, and other
merchandise from the east, the which were brought by the Arbic gulph, vnto the
ports of Egipt, and so distributed by his merchants ouer all Europe; he sent 2 Sangiacs
Mustapha and Safar treasourer of that prouince to take Aden, a strong towne with a port
in the said gulph. Whilest that the Turks labored to take city, being valiantly defended
by the king, it hapned that Antonio Silueria scouring those seas with a fleet of Portugall
ships, he heard of the Turks attempt, and not pleased they should extend their forces beyond
Egipt, he bent his course that way; whose ariual did so terrify the Turks, being griedie
of that conquest, and growne strong by the numbers that were come vnto them in hope
of prey, as they dislodged. After which Silueria put the King in mind of the fauour he had
done him, and did so magnifie the force and power of king Iohn of Portugal, as he drew him
to put himself vnder his protection, so as he should always defend him against the Truke,
for acknowledgement whereof he should pay a yerely tribute of 10000 crownes to the
king of Portugall, or as they say, Serafini, money of Ormuz: But this Barbarian did not
keep his faith long, for Silueria being gone, there came a ship lade^ with pepper to the port
of Aden, the which he spoiled, and trecherously slue the men. There hapned worse after the
Turks flight, who being 600, and aboue 1000 Arbians, vnder the same Mustapha and Safar,
and in the same ships,Nonio d Acugna assoiles Diu in voine. they went to seek their reuenge by those riuers, so as comming to
Diu at such time as Nonio d Acugna the Portugall gouernor was there, with a great armie

of aboue 300 sail wel furnisht,1537 with an intent to get that citie, hauing seazed vpon a stro^g
Iland called Betelem, not much aboue 7 leagues from Diu, they were a great aide to Tocan
who was lord of it. These succors (Mustapha hauing brought valiant men, harquebuziers,
much artillerie, and himselfe a good souldier) made Nonios attempts vaine, so as being
often repulst with losse, he was in the end forced to depart and returne with his army to
Goa, leauing Antonio Saldania and Iames Silueria with some ships and souldiers at Betelem,
for that they should co^tinually annoy the sea coasts of Cambaia, as they did: for the summer
following Silueria entred into Diu, and sackt and burnt the towne, with some places
thereabouts, for that Mustapha knowing that the Portugalls would not willingly desist
from that enterprise, and that they should need greater forces to resist them, he was gone
into Turkie, as an embassador for that king, to let the great Turke vnderstand how much
it imported him, to take him vnder his protection, and to get footing in those Indian seas,
hauing a great desire to chase away the Portugalls, whose power was feared in those seas.
But Acugna grieued at the disgrace he had receiued by his retreat,Bazaino at the I^dies taken by the Portugalls. made ready a nauie of
80 ships, in the which were 4000 valiant soldiers, and hauing called Iames Silueria with his
forces to him, he presented himselfe before Bazaino a sea towne, which the K. of Cambaia
did fortified with all industry, but it could not resist the Portugals valor, who ruined al the
fortifications. There came a new gouernor of the Portugall army at the Indies, called
Martin Alphonso de Sosa who made some attempt in Cambaia, and took the castle of Panam
by force, the^ like a conqueror he ran vp that riuer as far as Diu, forcing that lord to sue for
peace, and to yield Bazain and the neighbor Iland of Salseta vnto King Iohn.
An. 1535 Badurto K. of Cambaia finding himself ingaged in dangerous wars,Fort built at Diu by the Portugalls. he craued
aid fro^ the Portugals, and gaue the^ liberty to build a fort at Diu, the which they caled Thomas,
for that it was begun on that saints day, and another neer vnto it, which they named S.
Iames, either of them being stro^gly walled; this fort was raised in 49 days, whereat the K.
wondred. To whom afterward the Portugals gaue great aid, and recouered for him certein
places which he had lost; the^ leauing Emanuel de Sosa in the fort with 800 soldiers, and good
store of artillery, the gouernor returned to Goa. Soon after Badurio repented him that he
had yielded so much to the Portugals in his realm, so as in the yere 1536 he commanded
Tinarao gouernour of Diu, that vpon some fained colour he should seeke to build a strong
wall opposite to the Portugals fort, the which being denied him, there fel a deadly hatred
betwixt them. The viceroy Acugna, hearing that this king making a shew of friendship,
sought to ruine the Christians, he sailed to Diu with a great army, where faining himselfe
sick,Badurio king of Cambaia slaine by the Portugalles. he drew the ill-aduised king, to visit him in his ship; but in his returne he was slaine by
the Portugalls, with some of his people that had accompanied him, in which action there
were some Portugalls also slaine, among the which was Emanuel de Sosa captaine of that
fort. It was easie the^ for the Portugals to seaze vpon Diu, and vpon the whole Iland, whereas
they got good store of mony of the kings treasure, abundance of victualls, instruments
of war and ships of all sorts. In the beginning of this yere 1537 they began to fortifie the
castle better, fearing some new altera^tion of those Barbarians, knowing how much they
were discontented for the death of Badurio, in whose place they presently set a child, his
nephew by the sister, whom certain lords of the cou^try took the gouernme^t of with great
authority, so as the realme seemed to be diuided among many, which was lesse dangerous
for the Portugals: The gouernment of the fort at Diu, in the place of Sosa, who was slain,
was giuen to Antonio Silueria, and 600 soldiers appointed him for his garrison; who could
not long rest, beeing still annoyed by them of the countrey; fearing moreouer that they
should be soon set vpon by the Turks forces, hauing discouered that Badurio a litle before
his death, had with rich presents obtained great succours from Ottoman, and that after his
death his wife went vnto the Turks court,Army of Turkes prepared against the Portugalles. and made greater instance: wherefore the great
Turke caused a great army to be prepared at Suez, a port in the farthest bosome of the red
sea, Soliman the Eunuch, Bascha of Egipt, who had the charge of it, surpassing so many difficulties
as it seemed incredible: And hauing caused timber to be cut in Caramania, he
made it to be transported wrought to Damieta, and then by the riuer of Nile to Caire,
where the vessells being made, and ready to ioyne, they were in the end carried vpon Camels
backs to Suez 80 miles. This army as some write, was of 63 gallies, of 26 barkes, to

the which there ioyned 6 galleons, ^ g^^eots, 2 foists or Oleadi, 20 ships of burthen, and
many other small barkes; so as they might well carry, besides the men of seruice, 20000
soldiers, among the which were 4000 Ianizaries, with so much artillery, as they thought
necessary for so great an enterprise. Towards the end of Iune, Solyman went from Suez
with this army: in his voiage he strangled Zebith Nocoda lord of that place, by whom he
had bin bountifully entertained: then continuing his course, on the 5 of Iuly, he came to
Aden, a famous citie and port, standing vpon the left point of the Persian gulph. Here the
Eunuch gaue a new testimony of his treacherous crueltie, for first he craftily sent some of
his men into the city, where they were friendly entertained, and then he procured that K.
(who we said had contracted friendship with the Portugalls) to come and visit him in his
ships, faining himselfe sick, where this king complaining much of the tyranny that was vsed
against him,King of Aden hanged at a mainyard by the Turkes. being made acquainted with Solymans mind, he was presently hung vp at
the maine yard, with some of his people which had acco^panied him. The army staid some
daies at Aden, first sacking the city, and then leauing a good garrison to keep it for the Ottomans,
and then they sailed towards Diu, where they ariued the 4. of Septemb. There they
found the Portugalls ready to receiue them as enemies, for approaching neere 2 of their
gallies were sunck with the Artillery, so as they were forced to retire, and to be more warie
in their landing, which they did afterward with the great ordnance to better the castle.
Solimans army was much augmented, by some lords of the country that ioyned with him;
among whom there was one called Coffaro, his mother a Turk, his father a Christian, born
in Chio; others say that his name was Cozazaffer* a renegado, borne in Calabria, who had
bin very deere to the deceased K. of Cambaia,Fort at Di^ held by the Portugalls besieged by the Turkes. and had brought vnto him 20000 souldiers
gathered vp in the country. They ioyntly besieged the fort both by sea and land; Silueria
hauing but few souldiers in regard of the enemies number, and his continuall toile; and with
all he had not much poulder for the vse of his artillery; wherof he did aduertise the viceroy
being in Goa, crauing succors, and assuring him that they had made what defence was
fit for them. There were in Diu, besides the chiefe fort held by the Protugals 2 towers of
a reasonable strength, in the one there were 60, in the other 50 souldiers, and being both
battred by the Turks (who had trecherously sackt the citie in entring, without respect that
they had declared the^selues friends) the one was yielded vpon conditions, but il obserued,
for hauing promised liberty to the Portugall souldiers, they made them gally slaues. The
Bascha did also batter the castle, shewing more furie then iudgement: Silueria defended it
with great iudgement and valor, making sallies vpon the enemie, and disappointing all their
designs: the Turks, besides their huge artillery had with their pioners raised a mount against
the fort so high as they might look into it, and discouer what they did, annoying the
defendants much with their shot. But the Port^galls did speedily preuent it, making diuers
Trauerses, imploying therein all their cotton, timber, or whatsoeuer else they had.
The Turks and they of Cambaia prest the siege hard, but more by land than by sea, for that
they held it weakest on that side, so as battering a tower they made a great ruine, by the
which they were in great danger to lose the whole castle, the enimy seeking twise a day to
force it, which they continued all the month of October. Silueria did sodenly cast vp a trauers
with good flanks, wherby they might brauely defend the^selues, making great slaughter
of the Turks. On the 20 of October they attempted to take a tower standing towards
the sea, for the defence of the Castle by scalado, but they were repulst with great losse: yet
the next day they came with 10 gallies, and 33 armed barks, with great numbers of soldiers,
to force the tower, but in vaine; for they were not only forced to retire by 50 Christians
which defended it, but also flanked by the artillery of the castle, there were in 2 dais aboue
800 slain,Sallie of the Portugalls vpon the Turkes at Diu. and many vessels sunck. Three daies after at noon day, when they least expected,
there was a sally made by 150 Portugalls, who entred the Turks tre^ches, that were sleeping,
with such resolution, as they slew about 260, and so disordered the whole army, as they
could scarce put the^selues in defence, but seeing the nu^ber so small, they offred to charge
them, yet so late, as they had time to retire into the fort in good order, with the losse of 3
men only, and 6 hurt. Soon after Silueria sent a frigot to Goa, to craue aid fro^ Acugna, who
had already sent 16 galeots,Garcia Norogna viceroy at the Indies. with poulder, march, and some soldiers, but they were not yet
come to Diu* At the co^ming of this seco^d message to Goa, Garcia of Norogna was come to

viceroy, who took vpon him the charge to prepare a great armie, to succor the besieged,
and to fight with the enemie, if need were. Arriuing the 11 of September, and taking vpon
him the gouernment: he gaue libertie to Acugna to returne into Europe, but he died
in his voyage neere vnto cap Bone Esperance, hauing bin gouernor for his K. tenne yeres
at the Indies,Death of Nonio Ac^gna. with much honor and reputation. Norogno came wel prouided from Portugall,
for this war, for that they had intelligence of the Turks preparation in Egipt, bringing
7000 soldiers in 11 ships; being at Goa he prepared 12 great ships of burthen, called
hulks, 16 galeons, 25 chrauels, 29 gallies of 26 banks, 15 galeots, and 20 ^oists, which in
al made 117 great and smal,Army of Portugalles prepared against the Turkes. but al wel armed. The ^ of Nouember Soliman Bascha made his
first attempt to force the castle of Diu, but he found a braue resistance Silueria hauing the
night before discouered the Turks intentions by their preparations. At the break of day
there approched neere vnto the tower vpon the sea, about 50 barkes and 12 gallies full of
soldiers and engins, making a shew to assaile it, but it was only to draw their force thither,
from the land part, where they meant to make their greatest attempt. But Silueria like a
discreet captaine, knowing the strength of that part towards the sea, brought his greatest
force, where there was most need, and where the enemy was likely to vse his greatest force.
And so it fel out; for first of all there were 3000 Turks, which presented themselues to the
assault, who for an houres space were brauely affronted by the Portugalls, and in the end
repulsed with great losse: but the Bascha renued the fight with brauer men, but fewer in
number, which did not a little terrifie Silueria, who had seen many of his men slaine in the
first assault.Assault giuen by the Turkes (...) Diu. He therefore commaunded his lieutenant Roderigo of Araue, who was in the
tower towards the Sea, to come vnto him with his fresh band: the which was speedily
effected, but vnfortunatly for him, being slain with a shot, in whose place Emanuel Vasconcello
was put, being followed by 30 fresh soludiers, for that the enemy omitted no force.
Vasconcello carried himself brauely; the enemy being vpon the breach, whereas they were
come to the sword, and in the end repulst. Hauing had som litle rest, behold ther sallied out
of the tre^ches aboue 6000 Ianisaries, Turks, and others of the realm of Ca^baia, which Solima^
had chosen and reserued for the last, toouerthrow the Portugals forces, which wer alredy
much weakened; and at the same instant he caused a generall assault to be giuen to the
whole castle. The enemy aduanced to the rampires, and the Portugalls made resistance,
Silueria went from place to place with a few choice souldiers, and comming where hee
saw greatest need, he turned him vnto his company, and said: Ah countrymen, do you
not remember that you are the souldiers of Christ, for the confession of whose faith we
haue put on these armes, follow me then, and sacrifice your liues gloriously in his seruice,
who refused not to suffer a shameful death for our health. And without speaking more
words, shaking his sword, he went wher he saw most of the enemies, wheras he made such
resistance as after 5 houres that this last assault continued, he made the enemies attempts
vaine.Turkes valian^ly repulsed at Diu. At the last night gaue an end to this cruell assault, not without great slaughter of
the Mahumetans; they had lost that day, as some write aboue 3500, besides hurt men, of
the Portugals there were 70 slaine, and aboue 300 wounded, so as they say, there remained
only 12 vntoucht. But the numbers of the slaine and wounded are diuersly reported, yet
they al affirm, that if the enemy had giuen another assault, they could not haue withstood
it, wanting both men and munition, for they had no poulder but what their ordnance was
charged with, so as Silueria to prouide for a future mischiefe, causes those peeces which
were towards the sea to be drawne away in the night, and to be planted towards the land.
But the Bascha seeing his attempts vaine, laied the blame proudly vpon Coffaro, and other
Lords of the countrey, who had assured him that the fort was very weake, and not able to
make two days defence: moreouer he said they had abused him, and not assisted him, with
such forces as they had promised him in the beginning, and assured the great Turk in Constantinople;
so as full of wrath and shame, he knew not what to resolue, for that there was a
bruit of a Portugal army which was preparing at Goa, doubting they wold fight with him
both by sea and land, trusting litle in them of Ca^baia, who in effect hated him generally, for
the sacking of Diu and other great wrongs the Turkes had done them: Besides, they feared
that this cruel man hauing chased away the Portugals, would put their new king to death,
and seaze tyrannously on the whole Countrey. Whilest they stood vpon these termes,

the 16 galeots sent by Acugna arriued happily, being come the night after the 2 day of
Nouember within sight of Diu, foure miles off from the enemies army, the commanders
thought it a politike stratagem, euery one to carry 4 lanthorns, the which succeeded haply;
for the enemies th^nking they had bin so many ships as they saw lights, and beleeuing
it had bin the whole army, they lay close and would not hazard to meet them: so as being
fauoured by the darknes of the night, and the enemies feare, being terrified with the former
successe, and the opinion they had of the army, they entred happily into the riuer, which
made the port of the castle, bringing great ioy to their friends, who were in that poore estate.Turks retire (...) from Diu.
The Bascha being first in doubt, was now resolued to rise, hauing no hope to better
his condition; whose rising was with such disorder and feare, as it seemed a very flight. Soliman
leauing at land about 150 pieces of ordnance as Goez writes, 1000 Turks that were
wounded, and another thousand which were gone forth to forrage, all which were slain by
them of the country, to reuenge the iniuries they had receiued. The Portugalles got the
artillery, with some goods of value to repaire the losses they had sustained in those combats.
The Turkish army being gone from Diu in this confusion, Soliman reuenged his disgrace
vpon those miserable Portugalls, which had bin taken in the Tower, whom he had
treacherously kept in prison, causing them to be all murdred.
The new gouernor Norogna, hearing that his men were freed, that ther was no need to
goe with an army to Diu, he resolued to secure all things in the prouince, in quieting the
peopls minds, the which was easy to effect, throgh the reputatio^ which the Portugals had
gotten, in defending themselues against the Turks forces, and by the hatred which they had
purchased by their thefts.Mamudio K of Cambaia: and an accord made by him with the Portugalls. He therfore made a peace with Mamudio the new K. sisters son
to the deceased Badurio. Vpon these conditions, That the Portugalls should be masters of
the fort, and port of Diu, but the king should haue half the customs of the said port; and that
he might raise a wall right against the fort, but so farre off, as it should no way annoy nor
hinder it; which concluded, he prouided for the gard of the castell, sending Iames Sosa for
gouernor, in Siluerioes place, who required rest after so honourable a seruice, he had 900
men giuen him for garrison, with all fit prouisio^s. This yong king was not long quiet, but
solicited by the ambition of some, and by his grandmother, desirous to reuenge the death
of her son, he began to make warre against the Portugalls, vpon a pretext to recouer Bazain,
whereof there had been no mention made in the last accord: but it proued a war of
no moment.
38 After the Emperours retreat out of France,Enteruiew of the Pope, Emperour, and French king at Nice. the war being hot in Piedmont, pope
Paul considering how many miseries this warre brought vnto Christendome, and fearing
and foreseeing the ruine of Italy if it continued, hee procured an enteruiew of those two
princes and himselfe in the towne of Nice, where there was no means to reconcile them:
there was onely a truce concluded for ten yeares, of either side the Alpes, both of them
holding what they had gotten: the pope hoping during this long truce there would be
some means found to conclude a peace. The emperor returning fro^ Nice towards Spain,
he was staid by the weather about Marseilles, where the king sent to intreat him to enter,
and to rest himselfe vntill the wind were faire: for the which he gaue him thanks, letting
him vnderstand, that he desired they might see one another At Aigues mortes. Whereunto
the king consented, and went thither from Auignon, being vpon his returne towards
France.Emperour and French king meet at Aiguesmortes. The emperor landed, and dined with the king in Aigues mortes, and the king entred
afterwards confidently into the emperors galley, where they discoursed long together,
but what it was few men vnderstood, yet they parted with great shews of friendship.
This yeare one thousand fiue hundred thirtie and nine, the emperour, the yong
prince Philippe his sonne,1539 his two daughters, and the whole Court, were full of sorrow
and heauinesse for the death of the empresse Isabella;Death of the empresse Isabella. she died the first day of Maie being
deliuered of a sonne, which followed her soone after, they were both much lamented by
the young Prince, who beganne to feele the heauie crosses whereunto the miserable
condition of man is subiect. Shee was carried from Toledo where shee died, with
a funerall pompe befitting so great an Empresse, to bee buried in the royall Chappell
of Granado, which honours were afterwardes religiously reiterated in all the
Cities subiect to the Emperour her husband, and by King Iohn of Portugall, her

brother. After her death the emperour Charles remained alwayes a widower, during the
which he had a base son by a maid whose name and family was concealed:D. Iohn of Austria. he was called
D. Iohn of Austria, whom he did not aduow vntill his death.
39 The emperor being a prince of a great courage and high attempts, imbraced many
actions, so as his reuenues could hardly supply the charge, wherefore he sought to draw
mony from the people and towns that were subiect vnto him,Impositions cause of troubl^. by diuers means, by subuentions,
impositions, loans and extraordinary beneuolences. Among others he would haue
the Castillans make him a present whereunto the Nobility should contribute, without
exemption of any, hauing caused it to be propounded in an assembly of the lords and noble
men of the countrey, giuing them to vnderstand it was for the charges of the war he made
against infidells, whereof the profit and honor was common to them with him. Whereunto
answer was by D. I^igo of Velasco constable of Castille in all their names: That the
Nobilitie would neuer suffer their freedoms and liberties to be broken; whereat the emperor
was very much discontented; and there hapned at the same time an accident, whereby
he might see that the nobility of Castille, were not easie to be gouerned as they pleased
that councelled him: and this it was. There being a turney held without the city of
Toledo, where the court lay, whe^ the sport was ended, and the emperor desirous to return
towards the citie, the presse being great, an Alcaide or Prouost meaning to hasten those
that marched before,Act of choler done by the Infantasg^. he strucke the duke of the Infantasgos horse with a riding rod vpon
the croper, he being the chief of the Me^dosas, and one of the greatest noblemen of Spain,
who sodenly drawing his sword struck the Alcaide on the head, telling him that he shold
learn to execute his charge with respect: whereupon the dukes seruants would haue slain
him presently, but he staied them. The Alcaide being al bloudy, presented himself before
the emperor, wherat he seeming to be offended, doctor Ronquillo one of the 3 prouosts of
the emperors palace, aduanced as if he would lay hold on the duke to carry him to prison:
but he was willed to forbeare vnlesse he would receiue as much as the other, and that hee
should go and learne his duety better: wherein Ronquillo shewed himselfe nothing obstinate.
The duke retired to his lodging being followed by al the nobilitie, leauing the emperour
in a maner alone: who dissembled this act, lest he should cause some trouble in
Castille,Satisfaction done by the emperour to the duke of the Infantasgo. where they had so freely refused him the donatiue which he had demanded, and
the better to couer his discontentment, hee caused the Alcaide to be put in prison, as hauing
exceeded in his charge, sending the duke of the Infantasgo word, that he wold cause
him to be hanged to giue him satisfaction. The duke came and gaue the king thanks with
al humility, sued for his deliuery, had him cured at his charge, and gaue him 500 crowns,
wherein he shewed himselfe generous. The emperour soone after passed into Flanders,
where he vnderstood that the Gantois were rebelled by reason of subsidies and imposts,
which Queene Marie of Hungarie gouernesse of that country had laied vpon them;Rebellion of the Gantois for imposts. and
discharged his choler vpon that people.
The Emperour at his going out of Spaine towards Flanders, he left the prince D. Philip
his sonne,1540 his lieutenant and vicegerent there, being them no foureteene yeares old, he
was assisted by the same Councell that the empresse his mother had, he took his way thorow
France, where he was roially entertained, and accompanied by the Infants of France.
Henry Dauphin of Viennois, and Charles duke of Orleans, whom the king his father desired
much to see duke of Milan. What passed in his voyage betwixt him and the French,
the French historie relates. But the Gantois were seuerely punished, and kept in awe by a
strong Citadell,Citadell of Gant built. which was built, furnished and garded at their owne charge: the Emperour
beeing the more incensed for that hee heard of nothing but mutinies and rebellions
in all places for want of money: for that at the same time that hee punished
them of Gant, the Spanish souldiers which were in Lombardie mutined against the
Marquesse of Guast gouernour of Milan, for want of pay, but they were pacified by
a generall taxation layed vpon the Countrey,Mutinie of the Spaniards in Lombardie. the which they did willingly paie D.
Bernardin of Mendos^ had more difficultie to content his mutined garrison in Goulette,
beeing forced to shew his wisedome and to saue both himselfe and the place
from their furious disobedience and mutinie, which made him feare that they had some
intelligence which the Moores of Tunes or the Turks of Alger, and that they would deliuer

liuer the fort into their hands.1541 The duty we owe vnto God, and reasons of State march
not in one ranke in our policies. D. Bernardin hauing aduertised D. Fernand Gonzague
viceroy of Sicile,Rebellion at Goulet^e. of the danger wherein he was, and had good correspondency with him,
he intreated, coni^ured and flattred the Spaniards in such sort as he filed them with hope
to receiue their pay in short time, holding them in this expectation vntil the comming of
the gallies of Sicile, bringing new souldiers to change this garrison: and then it behoued
him to lie, and assure them with the most religious othes that might be, that their money
was all ready at Messina, to be paied them as soone as they should land, and that the emperour
remembring the good and faithful seruices they had done him, and desirous to reward
it, drew them out of that barbarous land, to lodge them in a more pleasant and delightfull
country where they should be freed from their toile, persuading them with such
good words, as they gaue him credit, and imbarked in the same gallies: But they were
much amazed, that comming to the port of Messina they would not suffer them to enter
into the citie, and that they told them there was no mony for them, and that they sought
to diuide them into diuers garrisons, vntill that the Emperour had otherwise disposed,
wherefore being transported with furie and shame, to haue been thus circumuented, they
began to ouer runne the country, and to spoile houses in open villages, with all the insolencies
that might be imagined: they first of all gaue an assault to the towne of Castro reall,
and had almost forced it: their insolencies were such, as ioyning other mad men vnto
them, they were a terrour to all the Iland, the viceroy being forced to assemble the nobilitie
and commons to suppresse them by armes, seeking in the meane time to winne and
draw away the heads and ringleaders of this mutinie, so as hauing won some with othes
and promises of impunitie, and hope of pay, he had meanes to disperse them into diuerse
small troupes, afterwards he caused the most seditious to be easily apprehended and to
be executed by way of Iustice,Punishment of the mutinous Spanish souldiers. filling the townes and high waies with gibets well furnished,
for examples sake. This serueritie caused the Spanish nation to beare a deadly hatred
to D. Fernand.
The Castillans of the east Indies, whereof D. Antonio of Gueuara was gouernor, sent
forth in the yeare 1541 a new army to the Molucques,Portugall. vnder the command of captaine
Villalobos, which arriued safely at Tidore and Gilolo, but hee was as vnfortunate as the
rest,Portugalls will not suffer the Castillans to saile to the Molucques. which had gone before him, he himselfe with his ships and men falling into the Portugalls
hands, hauing retreats and forts in those Ilands, and could not indure the Castillans
should vndertake that voyage. The like successe they all haue had, which haue since
attempted it: whereby it seemed that it was the will of God the Portugalls should inioy
them: who haue vsed this nauigation with great honour and profit, as well to their owne
nation, as to other countries of Europe: hauing made storehouses for that trade, and for
the distribution of their merchandise and drugges, in the city of Lisbone, euen vnto the
kings palace, vpon the riuer of Tayo, the which are called the house of the Indies. To
giue more ornament to the realme of Portugall, the city of Ebora had beene the yere before
1540 made an Archbishopricke at the instance and request of the king D. Iohn in fauor
of cardinall Henry infant of Portugall,Ebora made an arch^ishopricke the kings brother, who was the first Archbishop,
hauing the bishop of Silues for his suffragan. So as from that time there were three
Metropolitans in Portugall, Braga, Lisbone, and Ebora.
The Emperor hauing setled his affaires in the Netherlands, he went by Metz to Spire,
and from thence to Ratisbone,Castille. where hee had appointed an imperiall diet, as well to
prouide for the warre against the Turke, as to bring the Protestants vnder the obedience
of the Pope and Church of Rome, which was a faire publique pretext: but hee
had other designes for the aduancement of his owne house, which hee did hope to attaine
vnto, vnder colour of religion, as it appeared, and vsing at that time this shadow
of religion, hee thought to stay the French king from making war (being much offended,
for that Cesar Fregose and Anthony Rinson his embassadours, were murthered vpon
the riuer Po,Voyage of the emperor to Alger. going to Venice) by vndertaking the conquest of Alger, for the which
hauing assembled what forces hee thought sufficient out of Germanie, Italie and
Spaine, hauing seene Pope Paul at Luques, reiecting obstinately the wise councell of
Andrew Doria and other great Captaines, aduising him to deferre the enterprise vntill

the Spring following (by reason of the season of Autume which would be come before
hee should land his men, and the bad disposition of that yeare: but he imbarqued in the
port of Luna, and came in view of Alger with aboue two hundred and fiftie vesselles,
of the which there were threescore and fiue gallies which caried two and twenty thousand
foot entertained, with some three thousand voluntaries, and twelue hundred horse, besides
the traine of noblemen and captains which did accompany him, whereof the chiefe
were D. Fernand Gonzague Viceroy of Sicile, D. Fernand of Toledo duke of Alua, Andrew
Doria prince of Melfi,Assan Aga gouernour of Algier. Virginio Vrsino earle of Anguilara, Augustine Spinola, and Camillo
Colonna. Barberousse had left Assan Aga a renegado of Sardinia gouernour in Alger, being
accompanied (besides the Moores inhabitants) by many Turkes, of the which there
were 800 horsemen, for the defence of the towne, and without it there were great numbers
of horse and foot, Alarabes and Africans entertained, or otherwise drawne thither with
the hope of spoile:Disposition of the Alarabes of Afrike. For this vagabond nation doe like vnto rauens or vultures, who by a
certaine instinct follow armies, being assured to finde whereon to feede: So this people
when they heare of any tumult in the country, they stay not till they be inuited, but flie
thither in great troups, as people which haue no other care nor imploiment but to theue,
by whom the emperours army was much annoyed in the landing, which was on the East
side towards Cape Metafuso,Imperiall, armie landed at Alger. within 7 miles of Alger. They diuided the army into three
batallions; on the left hand were the Spaniards with Aluaro de Sande marshal of the field,
and with D. Fernand Gonzague viceroy of Sicile, and the duke of Camerino. In the battel
where the emperors person was, the Germans marcht; and on the right hand towards the
sea, were the Italians with their colonels, the earle of Santa Fiora, and other noblemen
aduenturers. That day they marched only 2 miles, and staied neere vnto a fountaine that
night, hauing still sight of the Moores and Arabians on horse backe, but they durst not
approch to charge the Christians; but at night thinking they had beene at rest, they came
downe from a neere mountaine on the south side with great cries, and charged the Christians,
by whom they were easily repulsed with losse. The Emperour at his first landing
had sent to trie Assan Aga the gouernour, if hee would yeeld vp the place to his Majestie
for reward, and not subiect himselfe to the danger of a mighty and victorious enemy.
But the Aga answered with a smiling countenaunce, that hee was to defend that place against
the Christians, as it had beene done twice to their great losse, and some write,
that hee grew thus confident, not that hee found himselfe so well furnished for his defence;
but through the words of an old Inchauntresse, who hauing foretold the vnfortunate
attempts of D. Diego de Vera, and D. Hugo de Moncada, had also affirmed that the
Emperour of Christendome should suffer great losse there. The next day they marched
three miles, and camped within two miles of Alger, in a place strong by nature, being
flanked by two torrents which fall from the mountaines, the Spanish foot (whereof the
Duke of Alua generall of the horse was the chiefe) took their lodging vpon a little hill,
from which the army might haue been much annoyed. The sea being also growne somewhat
calme after a great storme, the gallies came within canon shot of Alger, and the
shippes drawing neere, they did with great toile vnship their horses, there being a great
skirmish betwixt the Spaniards and Moores vpon the hill. But in the meane time they
gaue order to land their victualls, artillerie and munition. Towards night the sea began
to swel againe, and there fell such abundance of raine all night, with a cold northern wind,
which is dangerous vpon that coast, as both the campe at land, and the army at sea did
suffer much, and the enemies imbracing this occasion, thinking they could not be much
annoyed with the Christians shot, meant to assaile them at the breake of day. And so the
Arabians which were abroad, and the Turkes and Moores within the city being ioyned,
made a great attempt on the Spaniards and Italians quarters, towards the mountaine
and the sea shoare, the Germans being something more backward* but the Spaniards repulst
the enimy valiantly, although they could not vse their harquebuses, and did win much
more commendation than the Italians, who keeping a gard vpon a bridge which was vpon
one of those torrents, suffered them to winne that passage, so as the enemies horsemen
came euen vnto their quarter.Italians as^ailed by the Turk^s at Alger. Camillo Colonna was that day in gard, who with great
valour withstood the Barbarians force, and putting them to flight, chased them beyond

the bridge, thinking it sufficient: But it was the opinion of D. Ferdinand of Gonzaga to
pursue the enemy, that they of the towne not being able to vse their artillerie by reason
of the raine, the Christians in their pursuite might happely enter pell mell with the
Turkes, and so sending Spinolaes regiment after them, they pursued them vnto the port
of Algier, the which they finding shut, the Turkes went about the wall, and being wel
acquainted with those places, escaped from the Italians: who retiring incouraged the
enemie to sally forth, and to pursue them with great numbers; they being new souldiers,
tired with the raine and myre, not knowing the country, and wearied first with pursuing
the enemy, they fainted and disbanded, so as the Barbarians made a great slaughter of
them, for Assan Aga sallying forth with his horsemen, and fresh foot, they were easily put
to rout, but some knights of Rhodes, colonell Spinola, count Iohn Francisco de Bagna,
with some few captaines and old souldiers, making a stand at a bridge, withstood the enemies
force: And yet worse would haue happened considering their great aduauntage of
armes, vsing arrowes and stones, whenas the Christians could not vse their harquebuses;
vnlesse the emperour, who that day, and alwayes performed the duety of a captaine, a
sergeant, and a souldier, had not come to succour them with some companies of Germans;
whereof the first being put to flight, he with an inuincible mind giuing courage
to the rest both with words and action, in the end he repulsed the enemy, and retired his
men out of that dayes daunger, hauing lost aboue 300 men, and 200 hurt, but few men
of acco^pt: D. Carlo of Lanoye sonne to the prince of Sulmona was wounded. But the fortune
of the armie at sea was more miserable, which tost with the waues and windes, had
continued from midnight vntill no one the next day,Shipwracke of the imperiall army in Algier. in a hard and insupportable conflict,
against the furious violence of those enemies. The ships which had no other shelter, but
to commit themselues to the mercy of the raging windes, sought to vnburthen t^emselues,
casting their ordonance or any thing else of weight into the sea, and cutting downe
their masts; yet many perished, being either swallowed vp in the sea, or beating one against
an other were driuen on shoare, to be a prey the Barbarians. With the like misfortune,
but with more art, and force, the gall^es did striue. Doria, and the other captains
of iudgement laboring to preserue them with many anchors, and with the industrie of their
oares, they also casting their artillery ouer boord; but they still finding the^selues in exceeding
great danger, some hoping to saue their liues at land, cut their cables, and ranne on
ground, which was a most miserable spectacle: for the gallies breaking, whilest that the
men tired with the toile, being vp to the chin in water, sought to saue themselues, and held
it for a happinesse to be accepted for slaues, the Arabians and Moores which stood ready,
to make the vnfortunate condition of those Christians more miserable, shewed themselues
to be greedy of their blood and death, killing them most barbarously without any
mercy. Among which Iannettin Doria Admirall ranne on ground neere vnto the Emperours
campe, so as it might well be relieued by his maiestie, who presently sent some
companies of Italians, to suppresse the furie of the Arabians, and saued that valiant
yong man, with the greatest part of his companie. There perished foureteene gallies,
some write fifteene after this manner, whereof eleuen did belong to prince Doria, and the
rest to Anthony Doria, to Naples, and Spaine; of greater vesselles some say seuentie, and
some a hundred and fifty, of shippes, carauells, and pinaces. At night it grew somewhat
calme, so as in the morning the gallies drew neere vnto the shoare, where they lay first,
but towards euening the wind grew high againe, so as prince Doria did persuade them to
retire to cape Matafuso, holding that place to be lesse daungerous, for that there were
few rockes, the which the emperour perceiuing, and seeing that there were no victualls
in the campe, the souldiers hauing beene the day before without any meate, he resolued
to rise and march that day six miles with his whole armie. The which he had put in good
order, for that the enemy was still behind him and on his flankes, yet they durst not charge
them, the sick and hurt men being put in the middest of the squadrons, vsing al care to saue
them, yet many were slaine by those Barbarians, being so weake as they could not be carried.
For wanting all kind of victuall, they had relieued themselues those two daies with
the roots of dates which they call palmette, and horse-flesh, some being slaine to that end.
They came that day vnto a riuer, which the Moores call Agaraz, the which was so risen

with the raine, as it was not possible to wade through, where, by reason thereof, and
to see if they could get any victualls,Hunger in the Emperors army. they staied that night, and gathering together the
masts and yardes of broken ships in that riuer, they made a bridge to passe the Germanes
and Italians the next day, the Spaniards hauing found out a foard somewhat higher.
The Turkes and Moores of Alger did not pursue the armie any further, and the Arabians
did little annoy them, so as within two daies they came vnto their galleys.
Heere the emperour did somewhat refresh his army, drawing some victualls out
of the ships, and then hee gaue order for their shipping, which was on the last
day of October. The inuincible and vndaunted courage of the emperour, was admirable,
who was a great consolation to those afflicted troupes: but in the shipping
of the armie there was great pietie noted in him; thinking it impossible that
ships shaken with the rage of the Sea,Constancy and pietie of the emperor Charles should carrie so much people, hee commaunded
that all the horses whatsoeuer should bee cast into the Sea, were they of neuer so great
price, not regarding the intreaties of their owners, desiring rather to saue the basest soldier
being a man and a Christian, that those noble instruments of warre D. Fernand of
Gonzaga, staied two daies to imbarke, who coasting along Barbarie towards the East, had
a shorter passage into Sicile. The Sea grew rough again, and they staied not long to haue
more particuler directions, the emperour hauing giuen order where his troupes should
land.
There is a memorable accident reported of two ships full of Spaniards, which in the
tempest were driuen on shoare neere vnto Algier, the Souldiers within them seeking to
preserue their liues by being slaues,Spaniards preserue their liues generously against the Arabians. but the cruell Arabians thirsting after mans bloud,
refusing to accept them, they made a braue and generous resolution, so as keeping close
together, they marcht fighting euen to the verie gate of Alger, where they gaue Assan Aga
to vnderstand that they were come to yeeld themselues his slaues, hoping that hee being
borne a Christian, wold not suffer them to be torn in peeces by the rage of the Arabians,
whose liues might be a greater benefit, and so they were preserued by that renegado
with more shew of humanity. The gallies which were with the emperors person, running
the same fortune recouered the port of Bugia, and there they refresh themselues a little,
and then the seas being somewhat calmed, they sailed towards Spaine, where the emperour
landed at Carthagene,Emperour Charles his returne into Spaine from the rout of Algier. from whence hee sent to Occagna to visit his daughters, hauing
first met with the Prince, D. Philippe, who went speedily to doe his duety, and to reioyce
at his returne, who with an inuincible courage, speaking little of his losse, shewed
how we should beare the crosses of humane accidents. Prince Doria who yeelded not to
any in greatnesse of minde and constancy, being arriued in Italie, where the miserable successe
of this enterprise, was already knowne, he did comfort such as came to condole with
him for his losse, and sought to comfort him. But the emperours bountie repaired his
great losse,Bountie of the emperour to Prince Doria. for he did not onely giue him three thousand ducats o^yerely rent for euer out
of the fines at Naples, but he also made him Protonotarie of that kingdome, which is the
fift of the seuen principall offices; the which the prince Iohn Andrew his newphew doth now
enioy.
41 At the emperours returne from Alger, hee found himselfe ingaged in a difficult 
warre,Warre betwixt the French king and the emperor. against the French king, the which would not suffer him to make any long aboad
in Spaine. The king pretended that the truce had beene broken, and the faith violated
by the Marquesse of Guast his lieufenant in Lombardie, by reason of the (...) of Fregose
and Rinson: which fact being sufficiently (...), it was dissembled by him; where
upon the French king, began the warre in many places. In (...) by
the lord of Longuenall, and Martin van Ro^sse. In the (...) by the
the duke of Orleance: The Dauphin Henry was come into the (...), and did
beseege the Towne of Perpignan with forty thousand foot, two thousand men at armes,
two thousand light horse, and great store of artillerie, one of the goodliest armies the
French had of long time drawne together; the which proued to bee of no effect, for that
proceeding so slowly, the duke of Alua had meanes to put some troupes into the town
(which was ill furnished) by land, and D. Bernardin of Mendosa newly made generall
of the galleys of Spaine, to supplie it with victuals and all other kind of munition by sea,

so as the Prince seeing it was not easie to force,1542 and hearing of great succours
which did aduance both from Spaine and Italie, hee retyred. In Italie the Lord of
Langey made warre for the king, and in Picardie the duke of Vendosme: what the successe
was, the French Historie will fully satisfie you.
The emperour feeling yet the bad successe of this affaires of Barbarie, and stung by the
French in so many places, fainted not: but that which did most trouble him, was the duetie
he ought vnto Germanie as emperour: for besides that Sultan Solyman had newly repulst
the forces of the empire from before Buda, hee was aduertised that hee prepared to
returne this yeare in person into Hungarie with a mighty armie: and that which toucht
him nerer, he vnderstood that by the persuasion of the French king, and of Captaine
Pa^lin, his embassador in the East, Barberousse was at Sea, with a great number of gallies
and foists, with an intent to inuade his Countries of Naples and Sicile, and to
spoile Spaine if hee might finde any opportunitie.
To preuent all these mischiefes, hee went to Barcelone to passe into Italie: where
whilest they made the gallies readie for his passage, and that the Souldiers came
which should goe with him, hee went into Nauarre, and caused some roades to bee
made into the neere frontier of Fraunce,S. Iohn de Luz burnt by the Spaniards. and the Towne of Saint Iohn de Luz to bee
burnt. And seeing himselfe thus prest, hee held the support of Henry the eight, king
of England, to bee needfull, with whome hee entred into leagne.
Hauing concluded together how they should make warre, the emperour came to Genoua
with forty gallies, and some troupes, when as Barbero^sse sackt and burnt the coast
of Calabria, and had taken the town of Regium in the streit against Sicile. Then the Turkish
armie came to Ostia, which did much amaze the Romanes, but they did only water,
and so past, not doing any harme to the territories of the church, which were recommended
by the French king, then leauing the riuer of Genoua, hee came to Marcelles.
The French king had sent Frances of Bourbon, duke of Anguien to bee his lieutenant
in Prouence, and to receiue the Turkes armie, who attending Barberousse,
and thinking to surprise the Castle of Nice, had like to haue beene surprised himselfe,
by Iannetin Doria, who watcht for him within the Port, with twentie gallies;
for hee beleeuing one who had laied this double plot, aduentured to goe with some
of the kings galleys, whereof foure which hee had caused to aduance were taken,
and hee himselfe escaped by flight.Barberousse bes^egeth the Castle of Nice. Barberousse being come, Doria quit the Port and
Towne of Nice to the Turkes, who sackt and burnt it, but the Castle held good,
being valiantly defended by Paul Simeon, a knight of Malta, the place being of it selfe
vneasie to batter, and worse to assaile, but after a while they tooke an occasion to
leaue the siege. Barberousse retyred with his gallies to Antibo, being much discontented
against the French, for the bad prouision hee had found in Prouence, for the
warre, for hee saw many necessarie prouisions to faile them suddenly, and that the kings
men were often forced to borrow powder, match and other necessaries from the
Turkes; so as hee grew often into such a rage, as hee did threaten Captaine Paulin to
put him in chaines, and to carrie him to Constantinople, there to bee punished as
an abuser and lyer, hauing made infinite promises to the great Turke, whereof hee
saw no effects; the which hee had done if the prince of Anguien had not somewhat pacified
him with good words. Being at Antibo, he vnderstood that the Marquesse of Guast
and the duke of Sauoy were come into the port of Villafranca, with prince Dorias gallies,
and that being ready to en^er into Port, they had been surprised with so great a storme, as
foure gallies thinking to get to sea, had been cast against the rockes and broken, and that,
wherin the Marquess^ was, in danger to be sunke: The Turke ready for al occasions went
thither with his gallies, but he came to late: he gathered vp part of the ship-wracke, and
drew the ordnance out of the sea: After which he went and wintred at Tolon, from whence
he sent fiue and twenty gallies to Alger, with the spoiles which hee had taken, the which
they increased with many poore prisoners of either sex, passing along the coast of Catelogne
and Valencia,Fernando Cortez depriued of his gouernment of Mexico. and with a ship and a galley, which they found neere vnto Palamos,
which they carried away.
I must speak some thing of Fernando Cortez, who conquered Mexico, from whence hee

was called being viceroy, by the meanes of some which enuied his greatnes, being accused
in Spaine vnto the emperour, and forced to come and yeeld himselfe a prisoner, in
the yeare one thousand fiue hundred and forty: he could not so sooneiustifie his innocencie,
although hee were in a maner set at libertie, following the emperour to the warre of
Alger, yet hee had no command; and as one in disgrace with his Maiestie, hee was neuer
called to councell In those dangerous accidents, although hee were a great Captaine,
and had beene tryed in greater difficulties, whereof hee had giuen good proofes in all his
attempts.
Hee carried with him indiscreetly in this expedition,Emeralds, fiue exceeding faire fiue admirable emeralds, the
which hee lost, whose forme and qualitie being held rare and precious, it is fit there
should be some mention made of them. One of them which was valued at forty thousand
ducats, had the forme of a cup, the button whereof was a great pearle, and the foot of
pure golde, the second was like a little bell, the clapper was of pearle verie properly
made: the third had the figu^e of a (...), on the head whereof there were eies of gold,
artificially wrought, the fourth was cut like a ho^e, and the fift like a rose. After the return
from that vnfortunate attempt of Alger, he laboured fiue yeres to proue his innocencie,
and in the end had leaue from the emperour to returne to Mexico, and to hold his
first honours and estates, but he could neuer enioy them, for being sixtie yeares olde, hee
died in the beginning of December one thousand fiue hundred forty seuen, leauing an honorable
testimony behind him, to haue beene valiant, modest, and religious.
After the taking of the Citie of Cusco at Per^ by Francis Pizarro,Proceedings of Pyzarro at Peru. the Spaniards went
to take the towne of Quito, which was great and rich, and stood in an excellent ayre,
almost vnder the South line, the which, besides that it abounds in mines of mettall, hath
great store of quicke siluer of yellow colour as they write. There came other Spaniards
from Panama, vpon the brute of the great store of gold which Pyzarro had found in that
prouince, and they soone made good purchase, though not so great as they expected.
There came also from S. Iago in new Spain, Pedro of Al^arado, with a fleet of some ships,
thinking to effect some great matters, but Pizarro would not suffer him to make any profit
in the countrie which he had discouered, and was his gouernment: wherefore they agreed
to leaue his ships with Francis for 100000 crowns, and Aluarado returned from whence he
came. In the yere 1535 the citie of Lima was inlarged, and many dwellings made for Spaniards
by Pizarro,Lima called the kings Citie. he made it the residence for the councel of the realme, and called it the
kings citie, choosing it for his dwelling, and giuing the gouernment of Cusco to Almagro.
This yeare 1542,D. Philip sworn future king of Spaine. the emperour caused the Prince D. Philip to be sworne future king of
Spaine, by the estates of the Countrie, seeking to draw his subiects to giue him good
helps for the future warre, wherein hee was well assisted by the treasure which came in
those daies from the West-Indies for his fift part, besides a great summe of money which
was lent him by Merchants, and others, giuing them assignements out of the ordinarie reuenues
of his realmes. He was come to Barcelona, to be neere to Perpignan, or to any other
attempt of the French, and there he caused the Spanish footmen to passe, which had
been in Sardynia at his returne from Alger; the which he wold haue remaine vpon those
frontiers, if need should require, or be transported elsewhere vpon any occasion. From
Barcelona he went with the court to Taracona, from thence to Tortosa, and then to Valencia,
the Prince making a solemne entrie in all these place, where he was entertaind with
great feasts and pompe.
After which, they past the feasts of Christmas at Alcala of Henares, whereas their ioy
was doubled by the presence of the two Infants,Philip prince of Spaine contracted to the Infant of Portugal two marriages being concluded at that
time; one of the Prince D. Philip and D. Maria Infanta of Portugall, daughter to king
Iohn the third, the other of D. Iohn prince of Portugall, a youth of fourteene yeares
of age, and D. Ioane the emperours second daughter. They continued in Alcala with
great feasting, vntill the end of the yeare, and then went to Madrid, where hee made his
entrie the first day of the yeare one thousand fiue hundred forty and three, where
they made preparation of new solemnities for the future marriage, as also for the
warre, the emperour beeing resolued to passe into Italy in the Spring.

The marriage of prince Philip concluded in winter,1543 was celebrated in March after, with
great pompe and state,Mariages of the Prince and Infant of Spaine. and in like maner that of the Infanta his sister; the Emperor
neglecting nothing touching his preparation for warre, as well against the French,
who had the yeare before annoyed him in many places, as also against the Moores
of Tremess^n, who according to their naturall inconstancie, had iniuriously rebelled.
To suppresse the which hee had in beginning of this yeare, sent D. Martin of Cardone,
earle of Alcadette into Africke with eight thousand foot, and about fifteene
hundred horse,Tre^essen rebels against the emperour what succeded there you shall heereafter heare. After which hauing
prouided a great summe of money, and such foote and horse as should passe with
him into Italie, hee gaue order for the gouernment of those Realmes vnder the
charge of the king D. Philipi, to whome hee appointed for his chiefe Councellours,
the commaunder Couas, and the Duke of Alua, fore-seeing many matters of great
importance, and prouiding for them all with great care, as hee that sought to make
his forces greater, to free himselfe from the molestations of Fraunce, and frustrate
their practises which they had in Germanie, where they had those Princes readie to
make any alteration, being not greatlie affected to the house of Austria: wherefore
hee sought to settle the greatnesse of his house, for many ages, according vnto humane
wisedome: And therefore hee had matcht D. Philippe his Sonne to the eldest
daughter of Portugall, and to the sole Prince of the realme had giuen his second
Infanta, onely with foure hundred thousand crownes dowrie, although his Sonne
had receiued double the summe, and for Maximilian, eldest sonne to Ferdinand his
brother, hee had reserued his eldest daughter for all doubtfull euents of succession
in those great dominions.
In the beginning of the yeare the emperour (as wee haue said) had sent the earle
of Alcad^tte to the enterprise of Mostagan;Earle of Alcadette at the enterprise of Tremessen. who going with eight thousand foote
and fifteene hundred horse from Oran, in the beginning of Februarie this yeare,
neere vnto Tabida, had a skirmish with the Moores, who charged him in the reareward,
but it was of no moment. The next day at the passing of a riuer neere vnto Tabida,
they found a greater armie of Moores, both horse and foot furnished with good
shot, yet the Spaniards marcht in such order, and shewed themselues so valiant, as
notwithstanding that the enemie stood ready on the other side of the riuer (which they
were to wade through) to receiue them, yet they repulst them with great losse, and
aduanced to take Tabida.
Hauing rested there a while, they marcht on the next day, but somewhat late, towards
Tremessen, lodging two leagues from the citie, being continually molested by the
Moores, with often charging and flying away. The king was in Tremessen where hee
had leuied what souldiers he could both of horse and foot, hauing entertained about 400
Turkes which were in garrison vpon that coast, so as the next morning the earle did with
great iudgement put his men in battell, left that (being farre inferiour in nu^ber to the enemy)
he should be inuironed by so great a multitude, and disordered, being charged in front,
flanke, and rere: and therefore he so disposed of his troupes, both horse and foot, as they
might fight and succour one another, fortifying his rereward as much as might be, for that
he vnderstood they had laied an ambush, and would charge them behind. They had sent
the woman and children with their richest mooueables into the mountaines which were
neere, to preserue them whatsoeuer should happen; and the king hauing disposed of his
troupes, would not be present at the battell, but attend the euent in a place of safetie. The
two armies being ioyned, the Spaniards shewed no lesse valour then was needful, the enemies
foreward being greater then all their army, and although the Moores in the beginning
shewed great resolutio^, and discharged a great volley of shot, yet they did it so disorderly,
and so far of, as there was not any one slain, and but three lightly hurt, the Spaniards giuing
them no time to charge again, and the horse co^ming vpon them with great violence:
the fight continued about two houres; and the General hauing placed some loose shot in
the head of the foreward, they made a great spoile of the Moores and Turkes; so as in the
end the enemy was put to rout on that side, whilest that they fought with great obstinacy
in the rereward. Thither the earle sent two companies, who charged with such resolution,

as the Spaniards taking new courage, and the enemie being amazed, hauing seen their
companions put to rout, the battell was ended (hauing continued about three houres) and
the Christians won the victorie, but there was no great slaughter of the Moores, who desired
rather to saue themselues by flight than by fighting obstinatly, to giue their enemies
any cause to feare a new incounter.King of T^emessen defeated by the Spaniards fl^^s. The king of Tremessen, who expected the doubtfull
euent of this battel, hauing a signe giuen him by smoak that it was lost, he prouided for his
safety by flight among the rest. the earle of Alcadette did win great honor in this battell
both for his valor and iudgement, being worthily imitated by his three sons, D Alfonso, D
Francisco, and D. Aluaro, the first leading a part of the foreward, and the seco^d of the rereward:
D. Alfonso of Villaruolo marshall of the field, D. Martin of Cordoua, D. Iohn Pacieco with
other noblemen of marke, were much commended for their prowesse that day. This victorie
was won the fift of Februarie, the victor hauing lost few men, and most of them were
slaine with crosbows, whereof there were not aboue a hundred among the Moores, and
aboue fiue thousand Harquebuziers. The Spaniards desirous to enter the Towne, the generall
sought to stay them that night, fearing the slaughter would be great, or there wold
be some great disorder committed in the sacke: wherfore he lodged the army without the
towne, among certain Oliue trees, giuing good instructions vnto the captains, to preuent
all dangers which might grow by their too great confidence of the victorie, or the disorders
which doe accompany spoiling, as it hath often fallen out, either by the small authority
of the generall, or by indiscretion, on want of militarie discipline.
About this time the state of Tunes (which the emperor had conquered and restored to
Muley Hascen) fell into great combustions,1545 he hauing only retained Goulette,Moores 42. with an homage
and small tribute for the kings of Spain,Muley Hascen king of Tunes dispossest again. as we haue said. The occasion was that Muley
Hascen, being desirous to confer with the emperor, had past into Sicile, with an intent to
come vnto him to Genoa, or wheresoeuer he should be at his last passage out of Spaine;
after which hee came to Naples, and meaning to continue his course by sea he was staied
there some daies by a tempest, during the which D. Pedro de Toledo, viceroy of Naples, receiued
a commandement to will him not to depart from thence, vntill hee receiued farther
newes from the emperour, who was busied with the warres of France, and would not
haue any thing to diuert him. This king as it was reported, had a meaning to demand some
forces against the Turkes which held Constantine, a towne within his realme, the which
was rich and strong, and did much annoy him, and for that at the time of his passage into
Sicile, Barberousse was at Marseille, hee feared also that in his returne he would fall vpon
him.
He thought in like maner that in leauing the countrie he should auoid some great accident
wherewith the starres did threaten him, if hee remained in Afrike at that season, this
prince being studious of Astrologie,Moores curious and superstitious. and too credulous of such diuinations. During his
absence, such as loued him not and desired some Innouation in the state, bruted it out that
the king was dead at Naples, after that he had beene baptized; and prest his Sonne Amida,
(who had the command of certaine garrisons which were appointed to withstand the
inuasions of the Turkes, and the thefts of the Alarabes, which did adhere vnto them,)
to hasten his comming vnto the Citie,Sonne dispossesseth the father. and to seaze vpon the Castle and his fathers
treasure, before that his younger brother called Mahumet (who remained in hostage
at Goulette) should preuent him, and make himselfe king with the helpe of Francis
de Touar, then Gouernour of the fort. Amida did easily credit that which it may bee he
desired, and although in the beginning he found some resistance, which was made him by
the Manufette of Tunes,Amida incestuous. (who as it is were the kings Lieutenant general in that Countrie)
yet in the end hee preuailed, and slue all his fathers friends and seruants, yea, hee abused his
wiues and concubines.
These newes being broght to Naples, Muley Hascen was much troubled; and making great
hast to depart, he made great instance to haue some forces, the which hee obtained of the
viceroy, who suffered him to leuie 1800 men, such as were banished and condemned by justice,
to whom impunitie was promised, if they went to this war; and they had a gentleman
of the countrie appointed for their commander, whose name was Baptista Lofredo: with
which troupe the King did assure himselfe that hee should bee able to surprise his rebellious

sonne before hee were setled. Being come to Goulette the Gouernour
sought to dissuade him from going into the Towne, no not to approach too neere,
before hee vnderstood how the people were affected, and whether there were any
men of authoritie of his faction, to assist him: notwithstanding that, some Africanes
came to visite him, promising him by ceremonies, othes (setting their daggers against
their throates, according to their manner) to aide him, and to die with him if
neede were, whome the gouernour wisht him not to trust.
Notwithstanding all that Touar could say vnto the king, and to Lofredo, they would
needs march towards the towne, b^t before they came thither, they knew that they
had beene well aduised by To^ar, for they fell into an ambush which Amida had la^ed
for them, and were charged by so great a multitude of horse and foot, as they
had no meanes to saue themselues. In this defeat there were slaine aboue thirteene
hundred Christians vpon the place; the rest with great difficulty recouered Goulette,
disarmed (hauing cast them away) and wounded.Defeat of Christians. Among the which the king had escaped,
had hee not beene discouered by the persumes wherewith hee was annointed
according to his custome; whereupon he was hotly pursued and taken.
Being deliuered to his wicked sonne, hee caused his eyes to be presently put out,
the like crueltie hee vsed to Nahasar and Abdulas his younger brethren,King of Tunes taken. who were
taken with the king, to whome hee reproached that hee did him but justice, for that
he had in like maner made his Vncles blinde,Crueltie of the sonne to his father and Bretheren. and in the end had slaine them, to raigne.
Which being done, Amida renued with Francis of Touar, all the conuentions and accords
which his father had made with the emperor, and did the same homage. The which
Touar thought good to accept by prouision, applying himselfe to the time, drawing (for
that hee would not seeme to carefull of that which had hapned) a certaine number
of ducats from the new tyrant; who also deliuered twenty knights, Rabatins of the blind
kings gard, who had been imprisoned for that they had shewed themselues too affectionat
to his seruice; yeelding vp also the ensignes, which had beene taken from Lofredo, and his
body, without a head, that they might burie it after the maner of Christians: And moreouer
Amida deliuered into his hands for hostage a sonne of his called Seithen. But notwithstanding
all this, Francis de Touar, detesting the fact of Amida, as vnworthie to bee
tollerated by the emperour, hee did aduertise Abdamelec one of the bretheren of
M^ley Hascen, (who had escaped with Araxid, and liued then in exile with a Lord of
Numidia, called Aneniseba,) wishing him to come speedily to Tunes, hauing wacht
an opportunitie by the absence of Amida, who was gone to Biserte to receiue that
rich custome of fishing which was neere. Abdamelec was not sloathfull, but comming
secretly to Goulette, hee found meanes to enter into Tunes by night, with a good
number of horse which had accompained him, going directly to the Castle with his
head and his face couered, and wrapt in a sheet after the maner of the Countrie,
where hee was receiued without any difficultie, they thinking it to bee Amida who
was returned from Biserte, but they soone found their owne error, and being amazed
thought to fall 10 armes, but they that were most forward, were presently slaine, and
the rest so terrified,Amida dispossest by Abdamelec his vncle. as they yeelded. Abdamelec being Master of the Castle, hee caused
many of the towne which did fauour him to come, by whome hee was saluted
and acknowledged for king of Tunes, but hee raigned but thirtie and sixe daies, dying
of a pestilent burning feuer. Before his death hee drew Muley Hascen out of prison,
who receiued this good from him whome hee had persecuted, and retyred to Goulette,
where hee had left in the hands of Francis Touar, many jewels and mooueables
of great price, whereof hee gaue him no verie good accompt. The Tunesians in
Abdamelecs place, did choose for their king a Sonne of his called Mahumet, being but
twelue yeares old, to whome they gaue foure cheefe men for Councellors and Gouernors
of his youth, which were Abd^lages, who held the dignitie and office of
Manufete, Abdelchiri^, Mesuar, which is another dignitie, and Xerife, borne at Bugia,Disloyaltie of the Rege^ts to the young king of Tunes.
a Moore learned in the law of Mahumet, and with them one Iohn Perell, of the order
of the Rabatins. Abdelchirin, for that hee was an honest man, was slaine by his
companions, who afterwards made a Friumuirat betwixt them, committing all excesse

and villanie, contemning the kings youth, and promising vnto themselues all impunitie.
Among other insolencies, Perel hauing seised vpon the Serrail, where the wiues and
concubines of Amida were, he rauisht them all; which haply was the greatest displeasure
Amida receiued, for those people are wonderfull jealous of their wiues: but he tooke a
cruell reuenge,Reuenge of Amida. hauing soone after surprised the citie, with the helpe of his friends and
partisans, so suddenly, as the young king had scarce leasure to get into a little barke and
flie to Goulette: he caused Perel to be cruelly tortured, and hauing cut off his priuie parts,
the instruments of his sinne, he caused him to be burnt aliue in the market place. He put
them also to death which had adhered to Abdamelec, and among others fortie Rabatines,
whose bodies were eaten with dogs, a punishment which he vsed for them which had
committed any haynous offence, causing them to be torne in peeces aliue, and denoured
by his famished dogs. Amida raigned aboue fifteene yeares after, vntill that Aluch Ali,
whom they called Locciali, gouernour of Alger, depriued him, surprising the towne in
the yeare 1560, which hath euer since beene held by the Turke, but for some short interruption,
whereof D. Iohn of Austria was the cause, as we will shew. As for the poore
king Muley Hascen, he caused himselfe to be conducted to Naples, and from thence went
to the Emperour to Ausburg, where he reported his misfortunes, and complained much
of Francis de Touar, who detained his jewels. The Emperour ended this difference, by a
composition made betwixt the parties, and he appointed that Muley Hascen should haue
apention paid him, during his life, by the Sicilians, and so he was sent back into Italie, and
Touar soone after called home from his gouernment.





@THE 28 BOOKE OF THE
Historie of Spaine.
The Contents.1 BIrth of D. Carlo prince of Spaine.2 Agreement betwixt Pope Paul the third and the Emperour Charles, to make warre against
the Protestants of Germanie.3 Warre betwixt the Portugals and Turkes, at the East Indies.4 Mariage of Ioane of Albret, heire of Nauarre, with Anthonie duke of Bourb^n.5 D. Philip prince of Spaine goes into Flanders.6 Muley Basan, a prince of the Moores, demaunds succours in Spaine.7 Councell transferred from Trent to Bolonia.8 Sedition at Peru for the gouernment.9 Octauio Farnese excommunicated, cause of new warre betwixt France and Spaine.10 League betwixt the princes of Germanie and the French king, again the Emperour.11 Mets besieged by the Emperour.12 Afrique a towne in the realme of Tunes, taken by the Spaniards.13 Birth of Henrie of Bourbon, king of France and Nauarre.14 Birth of D. Sebastian, future king of Portugal.15 Mariage of D. Philip and Marie queene of England.16 Death of queene Ioane the Emperours mother.17 Death of Henrie of Albret king of Nauarre.18 The Emperor Charles giues ouer the gouernment to his sonne, and retires into Spaine.19 Truce for fiue yeares betwixt France and Spaine, soone broken.20 Mariage betwixt king Philip and Elizabeth of France, and a peace concluded.21 Death of the Emperour Charles the fifth.22 Death of D. Iohn king of Portugal.23 Persecutions in Spaine for religion.24 Spaniards defeated in the island of Gel^es, or Zerbi, by the Turkes.25 End of the Councell of Trent.26 New bishop in the Netherlands.27 Contention betwixt the French and the Spanish, for Precedence.28 Ora^ defended, and Pegnon de Veles taken by the Spaniards.29 Malta besieged by the Turkes, releeued by the armie of Spaine.30 Enteruiew betwixt Charles the French king, and Elizabeth his sister, queene of Spaine.31 The Viceroy of Sicile in disgrace.


The Realmes of Castille, Leon, Arragon, and Nauarre, remaine
vnited in D. Philip the second.
Portugal by the death of the King D. Iohn, is gouerned by Queene Katherine
his widow, and the Cardinall D. Henrie, during the Infancie of D. Sebastian.
1 THis yeare 1545 the Emperour had two seuerall aduertisements,
the one of great joy and content,Birth of prince Charls of Spain. the other of much sorrow and
heauinesse: He had newes, That the prince D. Philip had his
first son born in Vailledolit, the ninth of Iuly, who at his Christening
was called Charls, at the which there were great and solemne
feasts prepared; but within three dayes after all was turned into
mourning and heauinesse, by a strange accident: for the princesse
Marie, the young childs mother, died, for that (as they sayed) she had eaten something
disorderly, contrarie to the state wherein she was; which happened by the negligence
of the duchesse of Alua, and the wife of Couos, the high Chauncellor, to whom
the care of her being committed, they absented themselues a little, being desirous
to see a certaine sight,Death of Marie of Portugal, wife to D. Philip. so as at their returne they found her dead, or dying. The prince
felt that force which is vsuall at the losse of so deere a person, yet bearing it with that
constancie that was fit for his royall mind; but the loue hee bare her, being a princesse
of singular vertues, made him to retire himselfe for a time. Shee was much lamented
and wanted of all men, for her great bountie and charitie. She was honoured with a
^oyall funerall pompe: her bodie remained for a time in Saint Paules church in that
towne, in the custodie of the Dominican Friers, vntill that it was carried to the royall
chappell of Granado. D. Philip had this sorrow increased soone after with a new griefe,
for the death of D. Iohn of Tauera, Cardinall, and Archbishop of Toledo, vnder whose
wise gouernement he had beene bred vp from his infancie, so as he loued and respected
him much.
The Emperour Charles hauing concluded a peace with the French king, he presently
began to imbrace the affaires of Germanie, which were in combustion, by reason
of religion, since the preaching and writing of Luthar, against the Pope, to whom
some princes of that nation, and many townes, did adhere: Which controuersie
many graue and religious men did beleeue, might haue beene easily reconciled by the
Emperours onely authoritie, being assisted by the Estates and Princes of the Empire,
without crauing any other helpe. But, according to the common opinion, this prince
and the Popes were possest with one humor, to rule absolutely, the Popes aspiring
to bee sole Iudges in matters concerning religion, and Charles aspiring to the like
soueraigne power in temporall things depending of the Imperiall function, and not
to gouerne himselfe by a certaine necessitie, according to the aduice of the assemblies
of the Estates, which they call Diets, by the which hee thought hee was kept
in awe.
2 Pope Paul and he concurring in one designe,1546 made a league the six and twentieth
of Iune 1546,League betwixt the Pope and Emperour. by the negotiation of the Councell of Trent, and they concluded to pursue
the Councell of Trent* published the yeare before, and begun in December: and
for that the Protestants did not allow of it, nor would not submit themselues vnto it, it
was said, the Emperour should force them by armes, and if he entred into any treatie of
peace with them, hee should not doe any thing to the prejudice of the Church of
Rome. That the Pope should consigne an hundred thousand crownes at Venice, besides
an hundred thousand which he had alreadie consigned, to be imployed in this warre.
That he should moreouer entertaine twelue thousand foot, and fiue hundred light horse,
for six monethes, ouer the which he should appoint a Legat, colonels and captaines.
That the Emperour might for this warre take the one halfe of the reuenues of the

Clergie, and sell of abbie lands to the value of fiue hundred thousand crownes: And if
any prince should seeke to hinder their resolution, they should joyne their forces together
to resist him. This was at such time as the Councell began, whereas they made preparation
for warre against the Protestants, both in Germanie* Spaine, and Italie, the
Emperours designe extending fa^ther; for his (...) was (as it appeared since, and was
not then vnknowne) That after that he had (...) the Protestants,Designe of the Emperour against Germanie which made the greatest
power of Germanie, he would subiect the Estates of the Empire to his will, that he
might keepe the Empire in his familie, and make it hereditarie. And to giue some proofe
of this absolute power which he did affect, he had made a truce with the Turke, the better
to attend this warre, without taking the (...) those princes and States, who had
contributed great su^^es of money, to ra^se an armie against that common enemie of
Christendome. The Protestants had long before made a declaration, That they tooke
the Pope and Sea of Rome for the^ (...) partie, and therefore they would not haue
him for Iudge, accusing him of impietie, saeriledge, false doctrine, and of vsurpation
ouer the magistrats appointed by God, and of many other crimes. They offered to giue
vndoubted proofes to a free Councell, lawfully called, were it generall, or nationall in
Germanie. They complained, That the Emperour had often put them in hope, but now
they saw themselues frustrat: yea, that contrarie to the decree of the last Diet of Spier
and Wormes, where it was concluded, That to prepare the way to so holy an assembly,
there should be a conference of Doctors, and men of State of either part, which should
bring in writing the meanes to liue in peace and vnitie one with another, attending the
determination of such a Councell, and that in the meane time all proceedings against
the Protestants should cease: yet they saw the Archbishop of Cologne pursued and
condemned, for that he sought to reforme his Clergie, the conference made frustrat by
the policie and importunitie of some Monkes, the Pope to vse his absolute authoritie,
and all Germanie to be full of armes; their aduersaries picking quarels, with the priu^tie
of the Emperour and Pope, so as they were forced to defend themselues, the which
was falsly tearmed sedition. Vpon which discontents there were many embassadours
sent vnto the Emperour, from the Protestant princes, whereof the chiefe were Frederic
duke of Saxonie, Elector, and Philip Landgraue of Hesse, who drew after them many
princes and barons of great place, their friends, allies, or vassals, with the chiefe Imperiall
townes,Demands of the Protestants. all which demaunded peace, and assurance that it should not be broken
by any decree of the Councell of Trent, and a present reformation of the Imperiall
Chamber, where there were some of their profest enemies.
To which demaunds the Emperour made dilatorie and ambiguous aunswers, to
win time, to the end hee might draw his forces, which came from all parts, into one
bodie: so as they, seeing no other remedie, began also to arme, Ausbourg, Vlme, and
other townes of high Germanie, being assisted by the duke of Wirtemberg, came first
to field, and fell vpon the subiects of Ferdinand king of Romans, taking Ereberg at the
foot of the Alpes, comming out of Italie, with other places. The duke of Saxonie,
the Landgraue and their confederats, raised a mightie armie vpon the marches of Franconia,
and marcht towards the riuer of Danow, passing quietly through the lands of
the bishop of Virtzbourg, and of other Clergie men. The Emperour, who prepared
his campe with all speed about Landshuot, vpon the riuer of Iser, proclaimed them
as troublers of the publicke peace,Protestants preclaimed. and guiltie of high treason. Being fortified hee
came and lodged vpon the riuer of Danow, betwixt Ingolstade and Ratisbone, hauing
receiued tenne thousand foot, and fiue hundred light horse, from the Pope, led
by cardinall Farnese,Captaines of the Popes armie. Legat, and Octauio his brother, prince of Parma and Plaisance,
assisted by many worthie captaines, whereof the chiefe were Alexander and Paul
Vitelli, Iohn Baptista and Frederic Sauelli, Iulio Vrsino, Sforce Paliuicin, Alphonso of
Este, and Ralph Bailloni: And they had brought him out of the garrisons of Italie, six
thousand Spaniards of the old Regiments, vnder the commaund of Ferdinand of Toledo,Captaines of the Emperors forces
duke of Alua, Marshall generall of the armie, Iohn Baptista Castaldo, Philip of
Launoy, Aluaro Sandis, Alphonso Viues, and other auncient and approued Captaines.

In this Imperiall armie the cardinall of Ausbourg had the charge of the victuals.
There was with the Emperour, Maximilian, sonne to the king of Romans, Emanuel Philibert,
prince of Piedmont, with many princes and noblemen, Germanes. The Protestants
armie aduanced, being much stronger than the Emperours: they had two generals,
the Elector Frederic,Two generals the ruine of an armie. and the Landgraue, with equall authoritie, which, it
may be, was the ruine of their armie. They had with them Iohn Ernest, brother to the
duke of Saxonie, and Iohn Frederic, his eldest sonne, Philip duke of Brunswic, and
foure of his sonnes, Francis duke of Lunebourg, Wolfgang prince of Anhalt, Christopher
of Heneberg, George of Wirtemberg, Albert of Mansfield, earles, William
of Furstemberg, Recrod and Reffeberg, colonels; with six companies of Suisses.
The two armies lay neere together for some dayes, and the Protestants offered battell
to the Imperials; but the Emperour would none, assuring himselfe, that the enemie
could not keepe those great forces long together, and that in the end hee
which gets the profit of the warre, hath the honour: besides, hee expected Maximilian,
earle of Bure, with foure thousand horse, and ten thousand foot, of the choice
bands of the Netherlands.
The Landgraue,Heads of the Protestants armie disagree. who was a resolute souldier, and therefore feared more by the Emperour
than all the rest that were in the Protestants campe, made offer to force the Emperour
to fight, if they would giue him credit; but the Elector would not yeeld to it: so as
these two commaunders not concurring well together, lost many occasions. The earle
of Bure came to the campe, and many of the Emperours faction in Germanie, spoyled
the Protestants lands, whilest they were in the armie; yea some Protestants, being woon
by the Emperour with goodly promises of aduancement, and persuading them, that
the warre was grounded vpon other causes than religion.Maurice of Saxonie serues the Emperour. Among them was Maurice of
Saxonie, who desirous to get the Electorship, was entred into duke Frederics countrey
with forces, wherewith king Ferdinand had furnished him, out of Bohemia and Hungarie,
and had by loue, or force, seised vpon all the townes and places of Turinga, Misnia,
and other prouinces adioyning, vnder a colour of charitie; saying, That it was to
preserue the duke Electors countrey and lands, the which would haue beene ruined, if
any other had beene imployed by the Emperour in that conquest: yet the Bohemians
and Hungarians vsed as great crueltie and violence, as if they had made warre against the
Turkes. The Protestants armie being verie great, and not able to draw the Emperour to
battell, being in some want of victuals, but much more of money, the which they were
forced to beg from the townes and comminalties, the confederat princes haning no support
from the kings of France and England, as they had expected, hauing sent embassadours
vnto them with full instructions, touching that which the Emperour practised by
this warre, to the preiudice of Germanie, and the neighbour Estates. The heads being
also jealous of their owne houses and lands, which they saw inuaded whilest they laboured
for the common cause, they thought to draw the warre neerer to their owne commodities,
whereupon they dislodged, and marched towards Norling, the Emperour still
coasting them.
The townes of Vlme, Ausbourg, and others, holding the Protestants partie, seeing the
armie retire farre from them, hauing done nothing of import, they began to think of their
estates, and the rather, for that the Imperiall armie increased daily, there being a fresh supplie
of six hundred men at armes come from Naples, vnder the conduct of Iohn Baptista
Spinelli: and the confederats being retired, they made shew as if they would besiege
Vlme, one of the richest townes of all Germanie. Being troubled with these considerations,Protestants league dissolued
and terrified when as they vnderstood that the Landgraue had left the duke of Saxonie,
and was retired home to his house, leauing the whole conduct of the warre to him,
and that the duke marcht towards his owne countrey, without any longer delay they sent
vnto the Emperour, to make their peace. Vlme was one of the first that obtained pardon,1547
paying an hundred thousand crownes, and twelue peeces of ordnance, with
their furniture, and receiuing a garrison of ten companies of foot. Ausbourg did the
like, and paid an hundred and fiftie thousand crownes, and twelue peeces of ordnance, and
receiued the like garrison.

Diuers other townes yeelded also,1546 and in the end the duke of Wittenberg would
make triall of the Emperours clemencie: so as being assured of high Germanie, he began
to follow the Protestants armie, and came to Nuremberg. The Prince Elector tooke
some small townes in his way, bending towards Francfort, to draw money as well from
his friends as from the Clergie; and then he turned towards his countrey, his armie decreasing
much, for that many, seeing the Emperour to prosper, abandoned him. He being
come into Turinga and Misnia, Maurice dislodged, hauing put good garrisons into
Leipfie and Dresda, which places he onely preserued, for all the rest the Electors recouered,
and then he retyred to Ferdinand, and they both together came and ioyned with the
Emperours campe at Egre, vpon the confines of Bohemia. The earle of Bure was come
towards Francfort, with commaundement to enter into the Landgraues countrey, for
whom many princes, and among them Maurice, his sonne in law, did sue vnto the Emperour
for his pardon; but to small effect, for he had a great desire to haue him, thinking
him alone sufficient to raise the Protestant affaires,Landgraue feared by the Emperour. if they were ruined. Bure tooke Darmast
by composition, and then Francfort, where they were in great feare to loose their
Faires, which many of their neighbours did affect. Strasbourg, a great and rich citie, did
also compound. The Emperour comming with great speed to the riuer of Elbe, hauing
found a foord, where the Spaniards did him great seruice (for the passage was defended
by the Protestants armie) he past his troupes, and pursued the Elector, who sought to recouer
Wittenberg, the chiefe towne of his Electorat, being strong and well fortified:
but he stayed him neere vnto the forest of Lochane, the Elector hauing scarce halfe his
forces,Defeat of the Elector of Saxony, and his ^^king. for he had not leasure to gather them together, being dispersed. Being thus forced
to fight with disaduantage, he was vanquished and taken, being wounded in the face. Ernest
of Brunswic, sonne to Philip, was taken with the Elector: his eldest sonne recouered
Wittenberg, being hurt, whither many others escaped from this conflict. The Emperour
hauing this prince his prisoner, vsed him roughly in speech, and king Ferdinand more. He
was giuen in gard to the duke of Alua, who committed him to Alphonso Viues to keepe
safely. Within few dayes the Emperour gaue sentence of death against him; the which
notwithstanding was reuoked, at the suit of the marquesse of Brandebourg: but to redeem
his life, he was forced to vndergo hard conditions. Among others, he did quit the dignitie
of Elector,Conditions imposed vpon the Elector of Saxonie. which was giuen to Maurice, with all his lands, by the Emperor, who did
confiscat them, as being guiltie of high treason, he and his children promising to obey
the Imperiall chamber, such as the Emperour should erect; and for his entertainment,
Maurice was charged to pay him a yearely pention of fiftie thousand crownes: The
towne of Wittenberg, and the castle of Goth, were deliuered to Maurice, leauing it to
his discretion, to suffer Frederics children to dwell in Goth: and as for himselfe, hee
should remaine the Emperours prisoner. There were many other sharpe conditions imposed
vpon him, all which he signed, and refused but one article, which was, a promise to
obey the decrees of the Councell of Trent, the which hee constantly reiected, saying,
That he had rather die than yeeld to it:Constancie of the Elector Frederic. wherefore the Emperour caused it to be rased
out. Duke Maurice being now Elector, and hauing ioyned to his owne patrimonie
the inheritance of prince Frederic of Saxonie, he began to be a suitor for the Landgraue
of He^^e, his father in law, imploying all his friends, as the marquesse of Brandebourg
did in like maner, who in the end obtained a promise from the Emperour, to pardon his
life,Conditions propounded by the Emperor to the Landgraue. to remit all other punishments due to rebels, to leaue him his country, with one fort,
furnished with artillerie: so as he did renounce all leagues, to the preiudice of him or his
brother Ferdinand, obey the Imperial Chamber which the Emperor should establish, giue
him all the rest of his ordnance, pay him within foure moneths 150000 crownes, for the
charges of the warre, to deliuer the prisoners which he held, and come and craue pardon
of the Emperour.
The Landgraue hauing accepted these conditions, by the aduice of his counsellors,
considering the present danger, he came to Hale in Saxonie, to the Emperor, on the eight
and twentieth of Iune, where, before he presented himselfe vnto him, they brought him
the former articles to signe: but for that they had added many things which were not
contained in those which the marquesse of Brandebourg and duke Maurice had sent him,

he would not doe any thing;1547 for the which there was great question betwixt betwixt him
and the bishop of Arras, who would needs haue him signe it. Among other things, they
had added, That the Emperour did reserue vnto himselfe the interpretation of euerie
article, and that the Landgraue did submit himselfe to the decrees of the Councell
of Trent, for the which he should giue caution.
The Landgraue being prest and threatened, remembring that Brandebourg and the
new Elector, had promised to maintaine the confession of Ausbourg, he signed, That he
would obey the decrees of a holy, free, and generall Councell, where both head and
members should be reformed, as Maurice and Bra^debourg would doe. This done, they
led him into a hall,Submission of the Landgraue. whereas the Emperour was set vpon a throne, where kneeling downe
before him, and confessing, That he had offended his Maiestie, and deserued punishment,
he craued pardon, and implored his clemencie. The Emperour made answer by George
Selde, That although he had deserued grieuous punishment, yet vsing his clemencie, and
yeelding to the intreaties of many princes and noblemen, whom he desired to gratifie, he
remitted the punishment which he had deserued, either by losse of life and goods, or by
perpetuall imprisonment. Which done, the Landgraue was carried backe to the duke of
Aluaes lodging, where he supt; where, hauing plaied late at dice, he was amazed, when
as offering to goe away, he was staied, and had a gard giuen him: whereat the marquesse
of Brandebourg and Maurice were much discontented, but there was no remedie, the
duke of Alba and the bishop of Ar^^s saying, That it was the Emperours pleasure.
This proceeding, which the Emperour sought to justifie by glosses, depriued him of the
fruit which he pretended of his enterprises: so easily are mans designes and imaginations
ouerthrowne.
3 We must now returne to the Portugals at the East Indies,Portugals at the Indies. where the Turks sought
to expell them. They hauing honourably defended their fort at Diu, and concluded a
peace with the Indians of Cambaia, in the yeare 1537, whereas the young king Mamudio
had succeeded after the death of his vncle Badurio, into whose fauour Zaffer the
Renegado did still seeke to insinuate himselfe, and to whose wicked pract^ses this last
warre is chiefely attributed; deuising still how hee might expell the Portugals, for
the effecting whereof he made such secret preparations as hee thought necessarie, drawing
men together from other barbarous nations, making of armes, ordnance, and harquebuses:
hauing with exceeding charge drawne fiue master workemen from Constantinople,
and yet they circumuented the Christians, making them beleeue, that it
was to make warre against the king of Patano, an auncient enemie, which confined
vpon them; and yet they sought with great secrecie to incense the lords of the neighbour
prouinces, against the Portugals: Notwithstanding they intreated them verie
louingly, and obsequiously, knowing that it was pleasing vnto the king. With which
policie they had made them so secure and carelesse, as they were wholly giuen to the
gaine of marchandise, and to propagate the faith of Christ in those parts. The Portugals
then were growne so secure, and had so neglected all care of warrre, as whereas
Garcia of Noragna had left nine hundred foot in garrison at Diu, there were not
then aboue two hundred and fiftie, vnder the gouernement of Iohn Mascaregna, who
had succeeded Iames de Sosa; and, which was worse, they had no munition to make fortie
dayes defence, and for that the souldiers had wanted their pay, many of them had sold
their armes; all which was well knowne to Zaffer, and to king Mamudio, which
made their designes more easie, and their hopes greater to bee freed from the Portugals.
To make their enterprise more easie, Zaffer began to giue it out, That the king
had giuen him that citie, and that hee would soone come and take possession thereof:
And although it seemed strange, it being one of the chiefe townes of Cambaia, and
brought great profit vnto the king by trade of marchandise, yet it was the more credible,
for that the towne was reduced in a manner vnder the Portugals dominion, and many
times annoyed by the Turkes, so as it was not so beneficiall to the lord as it had beene,
who long before had giuen another strong place, called Sorrato, vnto Zaffer, besides many
other places which he had either purchased, or gotten by fauour. He writ vnto Mascaregna,

as a friend, rejoycing, that by the kings bountie he had meanes to be his neighbour
continually,Iohn Mascaregna gouernour at Diu. and to enjoy more freely the fruits of their friendship: but knowing
how distastful new lords were vnto their subjects, he should be forced to come with some
numbers of souldiers, to keepe them in awe that should not like of his gouernement in
the beginning: whereof he thought it good to aduertise him, to the end that Mascaregna
should not suspect, that they would not entertaine peace with king Iohn and the Portugals.
But Mascaregna began, in the end, to fall into consideration of these things, thinking,
that these great preparations could not be against the king of Patana (as they had
giuen it out) who notwithstanding did not moue; which made him feare that it was against
the fort of Diu: Whereupon he did write to D. Iohn de Castro, Viceroy of the Indies,
remaining then at Goa: Hee did also write vnto Anthonio Sosa, gouernour of
Chaul, and to William Meneses, gouernour of Bazain, to let them vnderstand in what a
strait the fort of Diu was, and what need he had of helpe; and therefore they two should
seeke to stop the victuals which should come by sea from that coast vnto the enemies,
who stayed not long to enter the towne of Diu, with Zaffer, being then about fiue
thousand,Diu besieged by the king of Cambaia. but with such a number of pioners and labourers, for their workes, as
some affirme, they were almost thirtie thousand. Most of the souldiers were Turkes and
Abissins.
Among other aduantages which the king of Cambaia, and Zaffer, his generall in this
enterprise, had gotten, this was most important, to haue begun the warre in the beginning
of Winter, the which begins, in those countries, when as the Spring begins with vs, ab^ut
the beginning of March. But Mascaregna knowing with what policie the enemie
had wouen this web, and seeking, with the like dissembling, to win time, and to prouide
for himselfe, he dissembled the jealousie he had of Zaffers designe: he seemed content
with his comming to Diu, and to discouer his mind fully, hee sent Simon Feo, a man of
great judgement, to visit him, and to congratulate his comming, who, with like counterfeiting,
was joyfully and honourably receiued by the Renegado, yet seeking to effect
his designes, he began to discouer plainely to what end he was come thither. He
propounded vnto Feo, That hee would build a wall which should diuide the commerce
of the fort from the towne (the which had beene granted at the peace making,
so as it were no hinderance to the fort) whereof Zaffer made not any mention; but hee
complained, that the traffique at sea was reduced to that point, as the king of Cambaia,
to his great dishonour, could not dispose of it, being expelled out of the possession by
their violence, whom some few yeares before hee had of courtesie receiued into his
realme, to make them partakers, as other strangers, of the trade of marchandise
in those countries.
All this being related to Mascaregna by Feo, he found, that the Barbarian desired as much
to haue an occasion to fall to open warre, as he sought to auoid it for the reasons aboue
mentioned, and therefore he sent again to Zaffer, to let him vnderstand, That whereas by
order from the king he would renew some treatie touching the Nauigation, it must bee
done with the Viceroy Castro, who being not farre off, would soone resolue, and according
to equitie: Touching the building of the wall, hee was not to hinder it, persuading
himselfe it should be according to the conclusion of the peace; whereof he sent a copie
by Feo. The Renegado tooke occasion vpon this writing to breake out into armes,
who growing into a rage, tare it, and put the embassadour into prison: Then giuing the
Portugals no more respite, hee began to make his approaches, and to assault the fort.
Mascaregna foreseeing all this, had made such prouisions as time would giue him leaue,
and hauing an especiall care of their want of victuals, he had sent away the weakest
women, with the children, and other vnprofitable persons, in two marchants ships,
to Bazain and Chaul: and for that the sort was large, hauing seuen bulwarkes, and hee
so weakely manned, hee diuided his souldiers and commaunders, appointing twentie
to euerie bulwarke, and the rest where necessitie should require. He had also drawne
into the fort many Christian marchants which did traffique in the towne, and did prouide
for all things necessarie for a siege.

The seat of this rocke was in an island where the towne stood, made by a riuer which
fals into the sea: (Some haue written, it is Indus, making no difference betwixt Diul and
Diu:) That part of the island which lies betwixt the sea and the riuer, makes an angle,
and riseth with certaine steepe rockes; there the fort is built: so as on two parts towards
the sea and the riuer, it is safe. Towards the citie, besides the strong walls and bulwarks,
there was a large deepe ditch, which did stretch from the sea vnto the riuer. Within
the riuer, right against the fort, there was a strong tower, not easie to bee battered, for
that towards the chanell (which was betwixt it and the fort, whereas the marchants
ships lay) there could no enemies ship come in, being subiect to the canon on either side:
but in the other chanell they had entrance, but in small barkes, the water was so low;
and yet the souldiers could not wade through. The Portugals reserued two ships in
the great chanell, the which vnder the commaund of Iames Latta, hauing also armed
two smaller vessels like gallies, Mascaregna commaunded they should scoure
that coast, to stop the victuals and other commodities which came to the enemies:
Wherein Latta shewed such diligence, as in a short time hee had taken foureteene
barkes, laden with victuals and diuers other things for the vse of the armie. But
Zaffer, who had long before deuised how this enterprise should bee gouerned, and
therefore had brought such a multitude of labourers, in one night he caused a fort
to bee made vpon a little hill betwixt the towne and the castle;Fort raised by the Barbarians against Diu. and hauing made
the outward part of stone, many foot thicke, within hee filled it with earth, leauing
some loope holes for ordnance. The like hee made in the towne, the which was
so high, as it did equall the highest part of the fort, hauing safe parapets: Hee armed
the wall on the out side with sackes of cotton, to defend it from the enemies
ordnance. This fort being seene in the morning, did not amaze the defendants, being
prepared to resist the Barbarians assaults euen vnto the last gaspe, for the honour
of Christs name, and the seruice of their king, labouring with all industrie
and valour, to frustrate the designes of a treacherous enemie: and then the ordnance
of either side began that cruell warre, which did much honour the Portugals name in
all the East.
To the first fort Zaffer added a second and a third, with the like speed, both towards
the sea shore: and for that the ground was stonie and hard, so as they could not well
make their trenches, but with losse of time, they aduanced a wall of stone, trauersed
in such wise one before another, as whilest they aduanced, they were safe from the
ordnance of the castle; and with this art they might easily come within a stones
cast. There hee began to rayse a strong rampar of stone, thirteene foot thicke, and
behind fortified it with earth, the which they brought from the sea vnto the riuer,
and so they enuironed the fort on that side towards the citie, where it might be assaulted:
And for that there was a great distance betwixt the first great forts, they
made some lesser along the wall, in the which they placed small Corps de gard, to defend
the workes against the enemies sallies; this renegado planting ordnance and
small shot, with great judgement, to batter the fort continually.
Hee had a designe also to take the tower vpon the riuer, and thereby not onely
make the way more easie to take the fort, but also hinder such succours as should
come by sea vnto the Portugals, for being master of that port, the armie which
came from Goa, should with great difficultie land any men. To attempt this tower,
they had prepared a great marchants ship which they had kept in the hauen, making
a fort of wood vpon it; and fortifying it with cotton against the defendants shot, and
it was made so high, as being brought vnder the tower at a full sea, it did reach to
the top of it: With these and with certaine floates of plankes which they thought to
make fast at a low water, they resolued to assault the tower; whereof Mascaregna
was aduertised, who feared the successe would be daungerous: Wherefore he commaunded
Latta, That he should come in the night with his two ships, and fire that
engine within the port: for being depriued of that ship, they should hardly at that
season prouide another, the riuers being carefully kept by the Portugals. On the fiue

and twentieth of Aprill Latta went with all the silence that might be, to burne this ship,
yet he was discouered by the noyse of them that rowed, giuing an alarme vnto the enemie:
notwithstanding, hauing but twentie souldiers with him, hee went on to execute
his designe, whereas they found another let, for that it was not possible for them to fasten
the wild fire which they had brought, vnto the ship: yet hee left not to effect his designe
after another manner; for some of them leaping, with great resolution, into the
ship, and cutting the cables speedily, they towed her, in despight of the enemie, into
the chanell vnder the fort, where they burnt it at their ease, making great joy for this happie
successe on Easter day.
On the eighteenth of May Fernando of Castro, the Viceroyes sonne, arriued with eight
barks, like gallies, who by reason of the contrarie season, could not haue come sooner,
without verie great danger, he brought them some small succours of men and munition,
promising him, in his fathers name, that they should haue greater succours, as time
would permit. His arriuall renewed their joy, and taking a view what souldiers they
had, they found 450 valiant men, which were better than two thousand hirelings, and
gaue hope of a victorie, although their enemies were hardie and resolute, and furnished
with all things to annoy them. They did trouble them of the fort with their continuall
shooting, and slue many, yet they had made no royall batterie, with any intent to
giue an assault, neither were their defences taken away, as the art of warre required: the
which was reserued, for that king Mamudio would haue the honour to be present at so
important an action: Wherefore, on the fiue and twentieth of Iune, he being come into
the towne, at the breake of day, there were suddenly three great peeces of ordnance
planted vpon the Barbarians trenches, which they called Basilisks, with other small peeces
of batterie,Batterie against the fort of Diu. against two bulwarkes, one called Saint Iames, and the other Saint Thomas,
and the curtaine betwixt them. Mascaregna had prouided for all this, who had not onely
caused a platforme to be made for the defence thereof, but also, fearing they would vndermine
that of Saint Thomas, he caused a countermine to be made, but with exceeding
great toyle, by reason of the hardnesse of the stone whereon it stood: vpon which bulwarke
he did also plant two great peeces, with the which hee did wonderfully annoy
the enemie, breaking two of their Basiliskes, and dismounting the third. They continued
their batterie fiue dayes against those two bulwarkes, and did somewhat ruine
that of Saint Thomas, and they did so spoyle the parapets of Saint Iames, as the gunners
could not stand to charge their peeces: yet for all this they saw no meanes to take
the fort, and they were rather fit to consume the besieged at leasure, than to make way
for an assault. Afterwards they planted another batterie against Saint Iohns bulwarke,
which was weaker, resoluing to seeke to force it and the other two, which they found
to bee in bad estate: wherefore they began to batter them anew with many great peeces.
In the meane time there fell out an accident, which did so terrifie king Mamudio,
as, doubting of his life, hee returned to Madaba, and was neuer more seene in the
campe; for that a peece being discharged from the fort, slue a kinsman of his, which
was verie neere him: Yet Zaffer continuing his designe, hee ruined Saint Thomas,
Saint Iohn, and the curtaine, verie much, whose breaches falling into the ditch, they began
to make the way euen for the Barbarians to goe to the assault.
They had also raysed in the neerest trench a caualier, or mount, from whence
they might looke into the fort, so as the Portugals could not safely goe to their
places of gard, without great daunger: and therefore Mascaregna was forced to
rayse vp a platforme against it, whereon hee planted fortie harquebusiers, vnder
Anthonio Pezanna, to driue the enemie from thence, which could not bee done
without great toyle, and the losse of many: so as the number of the besieged decreased
dayly, but they increased in courage and resolution. The harquebusiers vpon
the platforme, not performing that which was needfull, they raised another caualier
neere vnto the church, on the which hauing planted a Basiliske, they made such spoyle
of the enemies, as no man durst stay there. It seemed the ruines of the bulwarkes were
such, as if they might fill vp the ditch to come to the assault, there would bee no

great difficultie to force the fort, and therefore with a long and infinit toyle he began
to dig certaine trenches to fill vp the ditch: and for that they would not be troubled
in the carriage of it, they were couered ouer head with quarters of timber and chaulke
layed thicke vpon it, to defend it from fire and shot. Carrying stuffe by this chanell,
and casting it into the ditch, they made their worke in such sort, as they were not annoyed,
nor yet seene by the defendants: for the which they found a remedie, in opening
a little doore, whereby they were accustomed to goe into the ditch: but it was
stopped vp with the ruines, and it did behooue them to cleanse it, and make vse
thereof, the which they did verie secretly in the night, to feed the enemie the longer
with that hope. But they in the end finding that their worke did not aduance,
and discouering the reason, they drew Zaffer himselfe thither to view the place, and
to prouide some remedie; a happie accident for the besieged: for whilest that hee
went carefully vp and downe considering of all things, putting his head aboue the
trench,Zaffer generall of the armie against Diu, slain* and leaning vpon his hand, a great shot came and tooke away his hand, and
the top of his head, so as he fell downe dead. Hee being slaine, the armie was in
some confusion to name a successour, so as attending order from the king, he declared
that Rumecan the sonne of Zaffer deceased, should hold his place, who in his fathers life
time had beene generall of the ordnance. This man shewed himselfe much more
carefull and vnderstanding, than either friends or enemies did at the first beleeue, so as
following euerie action without rest, and trying all possible meanes, they raysed vp
the caualier againe with new matter, being halfe ruined, where hauing planted two
Basiliskes, they made so great a ^^ine, as they stopt vp the doore by the which the
Christians came forth, to emptie the ditch, so as they could no more oppose themselues,
being tyred by a multitude of their enemies, which came daily in great numbers
to the campe, and the besieged decreasing wonderfully; and therefore they
had sent another Fregate to the Viceroy, to solicite him to send them greater succours.
The enemies hauing filled vp the ditch, and torne the bulwarkes of Saint Iohn and
Saint Thomas verie sore,Assault giue^ at Diu. they sought to climbe vp, hauing set vp long beames and
peeces of wood crosse, like ladders, with such obstinacie, as the vndaunted valour
of the defendants was not sufficient to repulse them, vsing many meanes to annoy
them, whereof one wrought great effect. They tyed certaine piles together with
chaynes of yron, and betwixt euerie pile they put pitch, rozen, and other matter
to burne, the which being fired, and cast vpon the enemie, it did burne and spoyle
them, and at the least did stay their furie, yet neither fire, yron, nor stones, could
terrifie them: Seeing therefore that place in great daunger, and the little fort made
neere to Saint Iohns bulwarke being weake, from the which both it and the curtaine
were defended by Antonio Pazanna, with fortie souldiers, hee was commaunded,
if need required, to goe and succour D. Fernando de Castro with some of his men,
who on the nineteenth of Iulie had with great valour repulst the enemies, which
were come in great numbers vpon the breach. But the enemie hauing now made
the ditch euen, he resolued the next day to giue a generall assault, going the night before
to their temples, and praying with great affection, after the manner of the Gentiles,
to their imaginarie gods: Which Fernando Car^^ial, captaine of the tower vpon
the water, seeing, hee aduertised Mascaregna, that hee might prepare for his defence
with such forces as he had remaining. Two houres before day the Barbarians presented
themselues to the assault:Assault generall at Diu. their greatest force was against Saint Thomas bulwarke,
where Lewis de Sosa with certaine choice souldiers behaued themselues worthily,
though with some losse. And at this time the Portugals leauing the places of least danger,
to succour where need required, had left the corner of the fort next vnto the sea without
defendants, where (by reason of the height of the rocks) they did not thinke the enemie
would make any attempt: but they (whether discouering it then, or suspecting it before,
as it is likely) being not yet day, and the ^ide being gone had left the water very low,
sent some of their most actiue and resolute souldiers with ladders, who (being threescore
in number) mounted without discouerie. In the end they were discouered to be not only

vpon the walls, but within the houses, where falling to spoyle, they found some little resistance
made by the women who were there remaining, who both there and at the wals,
did vse armes, and assist their husbands and brethren in so great danger* Whereof Mascaregna
being aduertised, he with a discreet secrecie (for that he would not amaze them
that defended the breach) taking some souldiers with him from places least in danger,
went and charged the enemie, whereof some he slue, the rest cast themselues from those
rocks into the sea, but few escaped. They fought obstinatly at S. Thomas bulwarke, where
there were about 1000 of the assailants slaine, and they were so wearied, as they were forced
to retire: but soone after, hauing brought fresh souldiers, they gaue a more ^urious assault
than before,A second assault. and were as valiantly repulst by the Christians: and it is reported for a
wonder, that in this cruell incounter there were onely seuen Portugals slaine, but many
were hurt. Two dayes after they gaue another assault, whereas they lost aboue three hundred
souldiers, in which Fernando de Castro, and Lewis de Sosa, did win much honor. The like
did Francis of Almeida, who hauing the gard of S. Thomas* about noone time, when as other
men vse to take their rest,A third assault. the enemies ran furiously to the assault, the which he with
twentie fiue souldiers maintained valiantly, vntill that some others came to second them;
where the fight was cruel for some houres, with great losse to the Barbarians, where they
lost 800 men. But the defendants began to be out of hope of victorie, their numbers being
diminished by death, and weakened, for that many were hurt, and the assaylants on the
other side were much fortified, there being come vnto the campe, a supplie of foureteene
thousand souldiers, vnder a certaine lord of Cambaia, called Moiatecan: besides, within
the ^ort they had great want of victuals, and many hurt and sicke for want of good feeding.
Afterwards the Barbarians began to make mines, with great secrecie, making
shew of other approaches; but on Saint Laurence day, hauing brought one to perfection,
vnder S. Iohns bulwarke, they made offer of an assault, to draw many thither to defend it;
but when they thought it time, they retired without the compasse of the mine, and then
gaue fire to it,Bulwarke of S. Iohn blowne vp with a mine. which blue all that building into the ayre: in which accident there dyed
aboue sixtie valiant souldiers, and men of account, among which were D. Fernando de
Castro, the Viceroyes sonne, a young man of great worth, Iohn of Almeida, Lewis Mello,
Diego Sotomaior, Aluaro Ferriera, Roderigo Sosa, Lorenzo Faria* Iohn Brandano, George of
Almeida, Tristan Sosa, Francis Lupio, and Garcia Ferr^^ia. It is written, That Mascaregna
doubting of some fraud, when he saw the Barbarians retire, aduertised Fernando de Castro,
That he should leaue that place; but he was not obeyed. The Infidels would not loose
the opportunitie of this ruine, but suddenly aduanced to enter into the place, where they
found foure souldiers onely to make resistance, for that of twentie which were remaining
aliue, the rest were so amazed at this accident, as they could not doe any seruice. In
the meane time those foure, more by the assistance of God than any humane force, staied
the enemies furie, vntill the comming of Mascaregna with some choyce souldiers, who repulst
the enemie, being fauoured by the approaching night: And in the meane time others
labouring behind, they had raised vp a wall of stone, without morter, sixteene spans
thicke, the which they did afterwards rampar with earth: and thus they repaired the ruines
of that bastion. They continued their mines in other places, especially vnder Saint
Thomas, where the Portugals countermines auailing them nothing, they ruined a great
part of it. The like they did to others, and were aduanced into the place, and had gotten
footing into Saint Iames church, from whence the Portugals could not expell them, so
as they drew a wall through the middest, and it remained a lodging for them both some
dayes.
The Viceroy being aduertised of the progresse of this siege, foreseeing their need,
sent another sonne of his, called D. Aluaro, with foureteene vessels; who parting from
Goa on Saint Iames day,Succours sent from Goa to Diu. which was in those countries the verie height of the Spring, he
arriued (notwithstanding the foule weather) at Baziin: and for that he knew it would be
impossible (by reason of stormes) to come all together to Diu, he gaue order, they should
all get thither as they could; so as all of them arriued soone or late, as they could worke it
out at sea. D. Aluaro de Castro, and Fran^is de^ Meneses, arriued the eighth of August with
the greatest part, hauing not brought aboue 400 souldiers, who had much co^^age, but

not so much militarie judgement, as the state of their affaires required. They pretended
that standing alwaies vpon their defence, they had lost much, and therefore they should
sally forth couragiously vpon the enemy, and hinder his proceedings.
The good reasons of Mascaregna,Importunitie of some Portugals did somewhat restraine their forwardnesse: when as
hearing that the enemy sought to draw two great peeces of ordna^ce out of one of the ruined
Bastions, they held it an insupportable affront, forcing Mascaregna to giue the^ leaue
to sallie forth, who to auoide a greater mischiefe by a sedition, yeelded to this necessarie
remedie, to whome he spake after this manner. That it was fit souldiers should bee
gouerned by their Captaine, and not gouerne him; that they should attend their ensigne
and not take it by violence, as it did behoue a commander and his Councellors, to
know how to mannage warre. But you hauing now in a manner laid violent hands vpon
me, and presented your selues before me with seditious words and lookes, the Maiestie of
command is ouer-ruled by an vnreasonable desire, by an indiscreet hope: Goe on and
God make it successefull vnto you; let them know your valour and the force of your
armes: I will be content to follow you, who by right shold lead you; and although it be in
an vnseasonable time, yet will I be partaker of your toile and daunger. Remember that in
going into the enemies trenches, and in fighting, you continue as valiant and resolute as
you haue shewed your selues before the fight.
After which speech, when occasion and time serued, he diuided his little army into three
small squadrons leauing some few to gard the fort. The first he gaue to Aluaro de Castro, the
second to Francis de Meneses, and himselfe remained with the third to succour where need
should require: which action was performed with as little discretion as it was begunne:
For they were no sooner in the enemies trenches but they began to doubt of the euent,
and although they did terrifie those that were then in gard, killing some, and putting the
rest to flight; yet when as they saw ^he great squadron, began to march from the bodie of
the armie, they were so surprised with feare, as they had no care but how to saue themselues
by flight, neither could they which had retained more valor, make the retreat without
disorder. The losse was great, for among a hundred that were slaine, there were diuers
of great worth, as Francis de Meneses, who led the second squadron, Francis of Almeida,
Lupode Sosa, and Edward de Meneses, sonne to the earle of Feria, who would not be partaker
of his companions defect, but making a stand to withstand the furie of the Barbarians,
contemning their horrible cries, and fighting valiantly, exhorting the rest both
by his words and example, to vanquish with the sword and not by flight, he dyed honourably.
D. Aluaro de Castro mounting vp a wall, had a great blow on the hinder part of his
head with a stone cast out of a sling, the which battering his head peece did hurt him verie
sore, causing him to fall backeward, where hee had beene slaine, if Mascaregna had
not come presently to succour him, and carried him into the fort, as he did all the rest that
were wounded. This vnfortunate action, which hapned the first of September, did much
weaken that small garrison: yet Mascaregna fainted not, but prouided such remedies for
his defence, as time and meanes would giue his leaue: The enemie did so ruine the Bulwarkes
and courtines with his mines, as planting diuers peeces of artillerie in those mines
against the Portugals, they did wonderfully annoy them within the fort, wherefore the
beseeged were forced to labour day and night, and to make new defences, either fighting
or working continually, hauing little leasure to eat, or rest, their number being so
small.
The Viceroy D. Iohn de Castro had beene aduertised of the death of his sonne, who suppressing
his particuler greefe, vsed great diligence to prouide a remedie for the generall
good; He therefore first of all dispatcht Aluaro de Acugna with order to gather together
those few Portugall ships, that were in those seas, and hauing put souldiers into them
to saile presently to Diu, the which bee effected, comming thether the last of September,
with fiue ships and so many men as the garrison was encreased to twelue hundred,Succour broght to Dieu.
so as they might with more ease make head against the enemy. Soone after
hee sent fiue other ships from Goa with foure hundred souldiers; and with them many
Artificats, and some Architects for the vse of building, so as they grew daily more confident,
neither did they feare, (hauing heard that a certaine kinsman of Zaffers who had

beene sent to Caire to leuie men, came sailing towards Diu) to incounter him with
their armie,Victorie of the Portugals at sea whome hauing fought with all, defeated and taken him with many others
prisoners, the rest being sunke or dispersed at Sea, they returned ioyfull to their
Companions. They would not saue one of their prisoners aliue, but beeing slaine,
they cast their heads into the current of the riuer, to carrie newes vnto the enemie,
except that of Xaffers kinsman, which was set vpon the top of a launce. But the
Viceroy with all his diligence, could not draw such an armie together, as hee might
hope to raise the siege, before the middest of October: so as hauing about seuenty
ships great and small, hee beganne his voyage, and hauing surmounted all difficulties,
being forced by foule weather to stay some daies at Bazain, hee came to the
coast of Diu,D. Iohn Castro the viceroy comes to relieue Diu. the seuenth day of Nouember: where hee presently sent for Mascaregna,
being desirous to vnderstand particularly in what estate they were, where they
tooke councell how to put souldiers into the fort, and to charge the enemies camp,
which being done, Mascaregna returned, and prepared to receiue the succours on
the side towards the Sea, where the enemie least suspected it; and hauing planted ordnance
in all places, where they might annoy them, they did it in such sort as it
did much aduance their affaires, neither did the enemies shew themselues fearefull;
but they answered them with the like art and courage, and foreseeing that they
meant to charge the campe at one instant, both from their armie at Sea, and their
fort at land, they did fortifie that part towards the riuer, with a gard of fifteene thousand
Souldiers.
The Viceroy had fore-seene all this, and therefore hee vsed a politike stratagem,
on the ninth day at night, hauing drawne two thousand souldiers out of the ships
into the fort, hee caused the whole fleet to stand as it were in armes, some holding
burning to^ches, some held two launces, and some an ower in oare hand, and a
match light in the other, all men of no seruice, causing the ships to moue but softly,
as if they would giue an assault to that part of the riuer, where the enemies feared
most, and to gouerne all these things hee had left some captaines, himselfe being
gone to land.
All things being readie, the souldiers hauing reconciled themselues vnto God, in
the morning they went out of the fort, the Viceroy hauing caused all the gates to bee
set wide open, and leauing a gard within the fort, commaunded by Anthonio Corigia,
they did not feare with fiue and twentie hundred souldiers, to goe and charge
an armie of forty thousand in their owne trenches. The enemie was verie watchfull
of the landing of the Armie, where they most feared the daunger, for that they
were persuaded there could not come any great numbers from the beseeged, wherefore
they had placed the best of their forces on that side, which made the Portugals
victorie the more easie. Mascaregna had the fore-ward, with foure hundred choise
Souldiers, who beeing entred into the Barbarians trenches, had fought valiantly,
and they began to retyre, when as fresh men arriuing, hee had good need of succours,
and so they did fight often that day, with an interchangeable inclination of
victorie, yet the Portugals aduanced still; and hauing wonne one of their forts; in
the end by their exceeding valour and the fauour of heauen, they defeated the
Barbarians,Victorie gotten by the Portugals at Diu. and put them to flight, some escaping by a bridge which they had made,
ioyning the Island to the firme land, all the rest of what age and sexe soeuer, were
made subiect to the reuenging sword of the Conqueror, who incensed with crueltie
vsed against them at that seege, and with the treacherie of them of Cambaia, would
not suffer any one to bee taken prisoner, except (...) a Captaine of Cambaia,
much esteemed, who was in the Viceroies power. The souldiers hatred was so great, as
they not onely slue men, women with childe, and infants, but euen their tame cattell.
Rumecano the Sonne of Zaffer (who had the chiefe charge of the army) was found
dead, with Audecano a Captaine of Cambaia, who came the day before vnto the armie
with fiue thousand Souldiers, and Id^lcano a Captaine of strange souldiers. They
tooke the royall Standard of Cambaia, with many other, they recouered their lost
ordnance, and tooke thirtie and fiue peeces of the enemies: but the spoile gotten afterwards

in Diu did much inrich the Souldiers. They write that this cruell seege continued
eight moneths: there dyed one thousand fiue hundred Portugals, and in this
last battell onely sixtie, and foure thousand Infidels. The Viceroy hauing taken order for
the repayring and new building of the fort, hauing also rewarded the well deseruing souldiers,
returned to Malaga.
4 During the warre in Germanie,Nauarre. whereof wee haue formerly made mention,
there was a marriage concluded in Fraunce,Mariage of Ioane heire of Nauarre to Anthony duke of Bourbon. betwixt Ioane of Albret, the heire of
Nauarre, and Anthonie of Bourbon, duke of Vendosme, a prince of the bloud royall of
France, the marriage was celebrated at Molins, in Bourbonois. This realme of Nauarre
was reduced vnto a Prouince, when as the duke of Alua seased thereon in the name of
the king D. Ferdinand in execution of the sentence of pope Iulio the second, and had been
alwaies gouerned by Viceroys and Lieutenants, as wee haue said. In the yeare one thousand
fiue hundred fortie and two, D. Iohn de Lauega, Lord of Grayal, was viceroy, in
whose time D. Ferdinand Aluares of Toledo, grand childe to the duke of Alua, rased
the wals of Lombier, which stood vntill that time: D. Lewis of Mendosa, Marquesse of
Montdejar succeeded the Lord of Grajal in the gouernment of Nauarre, in the yere one
thousand fiue hundred forty and three; and in the yeare one thousand fiue hundred forty
and sixe, D. Aluaro Gomes Manrique of Mendosa, entred into the gouernment, and successiuely
in the yeare one thousand fiue hundred forty and seuen, D. Lewis Velasco, at which
time this marriage was consummated.
The emperour hauing gotten so great and absolute a victorie,Castille. as hee thought he now
held the reynes of all Germanie in his hand, he sends D. Ferdina^d of Toledo, duke of Alua
into Spaine, to persuade his Son to come vnto him into the low countries; whether he
went carrying his prisoners with him in triu^ph, leauing Ferdina^d king of Romans his brother
to gouerne the affaires of the empire in his absence, and for that D. Philip comming
out of Spaine, he must leaue some great one there, with the title of gouernor; and to giue
that dignitie to any lord of the countrie, it would breed jealousie in the rest, he resolued
to send Maximilian of Austria, prince of Hungarie, his nephew thither, to whome hee had
designed for wife D. Maria his owne daughter, with a dispensation from the pope; for they
were cousin Germans. This Prince came and imbarked at Genoua, soone after the duke
of Aluas departure, being acco^pained by the Cardinal of Trent, the yong duke of Brunswike,
the earle of Mansfield and other noble men, and arriued at Barcelona, with a prosperous
wind, whereas all the chiefe noblemen of Arragon and Castille came and met him; as
their Gouernour and Viceroy, and conducted him to Vailledolit, where the marriage betwixt
him and D. Maria was solemnized. These princes being maried, they gouerned Spain
for a time in prince Philips absence, who parted in the same fleet, and in the same vessel that
had brought Maximilian.Prince Philip goes into Flanders. Being arriued at Genoua, he staied there fifteen daies, where he
was visited and honoured with gifts and presents, by al the princes and potentates of Italie,
and by the estates of the emperour his father. From Genoua he came to Milan, where
he had a solemne entrie made him, and then by Mantoua and Trent hee continued his voyage
throgh Germany, and came to Brusselles, where the emperor attended him, who made
a progresse with him through all the prouinces of his hereditarie countrie, causing an oth
of fealtie to be taken vnto him as to his onely heire.
At the estates of Castille who were held at Vailledolit in the yeare 1548,1548 it was deereed
that the emperour should be intreated againe, (as he had beene often) to pay the money
which he had borrowed of the king of Portugall, by colour whereof he did not pursue his
right vnto the Molucqus, for the which there were deputies sent vnto him into Flanders*
who offered him in the name of the estates, to discharge that debt, so as hee would graunt
them that trade for sixe yeares, making the landing and entring of Spices at the Groin, as
he had formerly ordained; which sixe yeares being expired, the emperour should receiue
the benefit of the trade: whereunto he gaue no great eare, for that hee would not displease
D. Iohn king of Portugall, to whome he bare great affection.
6 At that time there came vnto Maximilian of Austria,Muley Buason a Moore demands succor in Spaine and D. Maria of
Castille his wife, gouerning in Spaine, Muley Buason, a Prince of the Moores, and Lord
of Veles de la Gomera in Afrike, who had beene brought into Spaine by D. Bernardine de

Mendosa, generall of the galleys, to demaund succour, against Muley Mahumet Xerife
of Marroc, who had expelled Muley Hamet his kinsman, of the race of the Merins,
out of the realme of Fez. This Moore was honourably entertained by Maximilian, but
touching his chiefe businesse, hee aduised him to goe vnto the emperour, the which
hee did, and past through Fraunce, but hee could not obtaine that which hee pretended,
notwithstanding that hee offered to doe homage to the emperour, and to
pay him tribute for the realme of Fez. Hee knew well there was no great assurance
in the promises of those Barbariens, who are naturally disloyall, and that it was in
vaine to make any enterprises in Afrike, if hee did not altogether follow it; else it
would prooue but a fruitlesse toile and charge. After long soliciting, Buason returned
into Spaine, and made a like sute vnto D. Iohn king of Portugall, who gaue him
some succours, the which had like to haue ruined him, but afterwards hee made good
vse of them.
7 The Councell continued at Trent vnto the seuenth Session,Councell transferred from Trent to Bolonia. touching the doctrine
and reformation of Prelates, and the Pope seeing that Germanie was in such a
combustion, as there was no likelihood of any reconciliation, hee thought it expedient
for his affaires of Cologne to draw the Councell out of Germany, and transferre it to
Bolonia, a towne belonging to the church, causing a decree to bee made in the eight
Session, as if this translation had come from the motion of the Fathers that were assembled,
by reason of the indisposition of many which fell sicke through the bad constituion
of the ayre, and the discommodities of the cold and moist countrie. The Legats went, and
were followed by the Prelates and Doctors of Italie, but the Germanes were discontented:
wherefore the emperor vpon the complaints which were made, sent his embassadors
vnto the Councell of Bolonia, (which hee called an assembly) which were Francis
Vargas, and Martin Velasco, to the end the Councell might be setled againe at Trent.
The Princes and States of the empire being assembled at Ausbourge, did also write verie
earnestly vnto the Pope, beseeching him to cause his Legats to returne to Trent, and
to conti^ue the Councel there, vnlesse he wold spoile that which had bin well begun. The
Pope referred it to the fathers that were at Bolonia; who could not be induced to retract
that which they had resolued by a common consent, and as it were (said they) by the inspiration
of the holy Ghost.
The emperour being discontented at the Popes obstinacie, thought to finde some
meanes to reconcile the controuersies in Religion, without attending a councell any longer,
for the which hee caused a booke to be made, which he called Interin, containing in
substance all the doctrine of the church of Rome, and the ceremonies thereof; and to giue
occasion to the Protestants to receiue it, they were allowed to communicat vnder both
kindes,Interi^ of the emperor reiected by the Pope and Protestants and for Preests to marrie. It was censured by the Pope in those two articles, and
was reiected by some of the Protesta^t Princes: but afterwards the Councel was returned
againe to Trent, after the death of Paul the third, vnder Pope Iulio the third.
8 The emperour being come this yeare,1550 one thousand fiue hundred and fiftie, out of
the Netherlands,Sedition at Peru for the gouernment. to an imperiall assembly at Ausbourge, doctor D. Pedro Guasca, (being
newly come from Peru, where he had commanded foure yeares) came vnto him to giue
an accompt of his gouernment, of the fruits whereof hee brought him a great summe
of gold, the which did much further his affaires. This man by his wisdome and good gouernment,
had ended the sedition and rebellion of the Pizares in that countrie, which
had continued many yeares much vnpleasing to the emperour; and therefore he was verie
welcome: wherefore I haue thought it conuenient to make a breefe relation of
the whole action. Wee haue formerly made mention of the quarrell betwixt Francis
Pizarro and Iames of Almagra, either of them seeking to command ambitiously ouer
his companion in that rich countrie, which they happily conquered with mutuall
duetie, and their common armes: wherein they had gotten great honour if they
could haue mainteined themselues, but they grew into factions, and to ciuill warre, pretending
nothing lesse in the end, then to make themselues absolute Lords, and it hapned
after many attempts and enterprises, to the preiudice one of another, that Francis Pizarro
had beene vanquished in a great incounter, in the yeare one thousand fiue hundred

fortie two and his brother Ferdinand taken, who notwithstanding was soone
after set at libertie, yet not without great difficulty.
Hauing afterwards repaired their forces, and comming againe to fight, the misfortune
fell vpon Almagro, who being led to Cusco, hee was there publikely, but
vniustly, beheaded, by the commaundement of Ferdinand Pizarro, who was a little before
his prisoner. The son of Iames of Almagra carrying the same name, born in that cou^try
of an Indian woman, desirous to reuenge the vniust death of his father, found meanes to
come by night into Lima, (otherwise called the towne of kings) where hee surprised
Francis Pizarro, and a brother of his, and cut their throates in their owne lodging, and if
Gonsaluo Pizarro their other brother had beene there,Francis Pizarro murthered. hee had past the same way, but hee
was gone to make warre at Quintoa, in the prouince of Cauclane.
Gonsaluo, being aduertised of this accident hapned to his bretheren, brought backe his
Souldiers, and beganne to make a cruell pursuite against young Iames of Almagra,
and hee on the other side to make head against him, so as the whole Countrie was
for some yeares miserably afflicted with these factions, vntill that the emperour sent
a gouernour thither with some forces called Vasco de Castro, who did somewhat suppresse
these seditions, going first against Iames of Almagra, whome hee beseeged in
Cusco, forcing the Inhabitants to deliuer him, hee causing his head to bee cut off
without any long processe.
Ferdinand Pizarro, (who had put his father to the like death) beeing come at that
time into Spaine with great treasure, it may bee for that hee would not bee in Peru
at the comming of Vasco de Castro, and giue an accompt vnto him of his actions)
was there committed to prison in the Castle of Medina, where sometime after at
the instance of the kings Atturney generall, and vpon the accusations which were
sent from the Indies, his processe being made, hee was condemned to loose his
head, and the chiefe reason was* for that hee had vniustly and rashly put Iames of
Almagra the father to death.
It is said, that through the quarrels of these mutines vnto that time, there had
perished one hundred and fiftie thousand Indians, sometimes taking part with the
one, sometimes with the other. By the death of the heads it seemed the troubles
had beene ended and supprest, there remaining none but Gonsaluo Pizarro, who kept
himselfe close: but the change of the Gouernour made them greater than before.
For it seeming to the emperour, or to the chiefe of his Councell, that Vasco de Castro
was not fit to gouerne that prouince of Peru, hee called him home, and sent
Vasco Nugnes de Velez, in his place, with so absolute and seuere a Commission, as
seeking to execute it, he caused in a maner all the Spaniards that were in that countrie,
to reuolt with the Indians, hauing for the first act of his Tragedie declared all
them guiltie of treason, which had carried armes, were it for the Pizarres, or the Almagras,Sentence in considerate and vniust.
not considering how farre this generalitie did extend, for among all the Spaniards
which dwelt at Peru, and the souldiers entertained there since the Conquest therof
for the emperours seruice, there was not any one which had not followed some one of
the parties, wherefore there were infinite appellations to the Councell of Spaine, and
to the emperour, whereunto the new gouernour refusing to yeeld, and stopping their
passage into Spaine, which were deputed to carrie the justifications of so many men that
were condemned,Gonsaluo Picarro head of the rebels, they were forced to rebell, chosing Gonsaluo Pizarro for their Captaine,
the which he willingly accepted, being already incensed, for the death of his brethren, but
especially for Ferdinand, whom they had beheaded in Spaine, beginning to make sharpe
warre against Vasco Nugnes, and them that followed him, in the which a great number of
his old Spanish souldiers perished. This new gouernour although he were vnfortunate in
his exploits and enterprises, yet he continued in his seueritie or rather insolency, so as such
as were about him, appointed to be his cou^sellors by the emperor, were forced to lay hold
of him, and deliuer him to the custody of Iohn Aluares, for that he had slain William Suares of
Caruajal, with his own ha^d, for some priuat hatred, hauing an intent to send him into Spain
by the first wind, as an vnprofitable person, yea prejudicial to the quiet of the cou^try, that
he might giue an acco^pt to the emperor of his actions, but the violence of the rebels, and of

their commander, Gonsaluo was such after this restraint of the Gouernour, (they of
the Councell disagreeing among themselues) as they were forced with all speede to
deliuer him; to gouerne this warre, the which prooued difficult, for Picarro being assisted
by Francis of Caruaial, a great Captaine, and an old experienced Souldier,
hee then declared himselfe openly against the Emperour, and contended for
the Soueraigntie of Peru, hauing made the Towne of Cusco the chiefe of that countrie,
his store-house for the warre. Vasco Nugnes striuing to resist them somewhat rashlie,Death of the gouernour Vasco Nugnes.
was slaine in an Incounter neere vnto the towne of Quitoa, and his head was
carried to Cusco, and there made a publike spectacle, and scorne to all men, a brother
of his called Vela Nugnes, being then a prisoner, who had no better fortune afterwards.
To bee reunnged of this rout, Iohn Aluares, Iames de Silua, and Iames de Ceuton
remaining heads of the emperours part, vntill there were some other order taken,
gathered all the souldiers they could together, but they were also defeated by Francis
Caruaiall, so as they had great difficultie to mainteine their masters authoritie
vnto the yeare one thousand fiue hundred fortie and sixe, that the Emperour
after long deliberation,D. Pedro Guasca gouernour at Peru. and by the aduise and choise of his Councell, sent D. Pedro
Guasca thether, a clergie man and of the Councell of the Inquisition, a graue, wise,
and discreet man, to whome hee gaue a more ample power than to any of the precedent
Gouernours, with the title of President of the royall audience of Peru: parting
from Seuile that yeare, he came to Nombre de Dios, notwithstanding that he
vnderstood that there was there in garrison Ferdinand, Mexia de Gusman, vnder Pedro
Alfonso Hinoiosa, Gouernour in that Countrie for the party of Gonsaluo Piarro, who
had a little before put Melchior Verdugo, one of the emperours Captaines to rout,
and chased him as farre as the fort of Carthagena, which is vpon the North Sea,
Hinoiosa remaine at Panama, which is opposit vpon the South sea. It is the narrowest
place of all the firme land of the Indies, betwixt the two Seas. D. Pedro Guasca did
in this action shew a great resolution, for hee had beene aduertised at the neere
Islands of this rout, and that the port of Carthagena was the onely landing place for
him, yet hee would needs cast anchor neere vnto Nombre de Dios, which place was held
by the said Mexia, with a garrison of eighteene hundred Spaniards, where hee sent
Alfonso Aluaredo to land, in ioyning him to aduertise Mexia of his comming, and to
found him how hee stood affected.Dexteritie of Guasca to win the rebels at Peru. The which Aluaredo performed so well, as Mexia
and hee parted good friends in effect, though they made shew to the contrarie. For
some daies after the President Guasca was receiued honourably into that place, yea,
with ioy and content of the whole garrison. Thus this religious man being politike
and modest, did for the first fruits of his comming, winne this fort and them that held
it, without any tumult or blowes, who thinking himselfe well fortified, began with
grauitie and authoritie to sollicit the rebels and their leaders, that they should acknowledge
their errors, to repaire the which, hee gaue to vnderstand, that they had nothing
to doe, but to imbrace the emperors clemency, and the grace and pardon which
hee offered them. Hinoiosa who was at Panama vpon the South sea, had beene aduertised
of the presidents arriuall, and although he were none of the most obstinate rebels, yet
would hee see how hee would carrie himselfe at his first entrie into his gouernment,
being somewhat discontented that Mexia had spoken with him without his leaue and priuitie,
writing in choller vnto him; but Mexia was nothing amazed thereat, but by the
Presidents aduice went freely to Panama, to Hinioiosa; what discourse they had, the
euents did shew: for Mexia returned as freely as hee went, and presently the President
departed, and went towards Panama, where wrought so with good words, persuasions
and promises, as he drew Pedro Alfonso of Hinoiosa, and all them that were with
him to the emperours obedience. They say, that the greatest motiue to make them resolue
was, that they saw with the President the Marshall Alfonso of Aluaredo, who had
bin a dear friend to Francisco Pizarro. These things succeeding thus happely, the president
holding it a great aduantage to haue won Hinoiosa, hee thought it now time to presse Goncaluo
Pizarro, to come vnto himselfe, and to acknowledge his master. He gaue him hope

of good vsage, if he did obey, if not, he protested his vtter ruine* writing vnto him, and
sending him letters in the Emperors name (from whom he had brought many blanks signed)
the bearer whereof was Ferdinand Pauiaguada borne at Placentia in Spaine. The emperors
letters were dated at Venloo in Guelderland the 17 of February 1546, and the Presidents
the 26 of September following. Gonsaluo was at the time of this dispatch in the citie
of Kings (so called for that the first foundations thereof were laid, the day before the
feast of Kings, which wee call Twelfe day) where hauing some intelligence of the Presidents
comming, hee had called all the heads of his party vnto him, to consult what was
to be done; in the end they resolued to send vnto the emperour, and to informe him of
the causes of their rising, and to iustifie themselues for the death of the gouernour Nugnes,
and it was concluded, that the Deputies should carry letters from all the townes in
Peru, and that they should demand the generall gouernement for Gonsaluo Pizarro: That
in passing by Panama, they should informe themselues of the president Guascas authority,
and should acquaint him with the cause of their voyage, with protestation, that if hee
attempted any thing, or did presume to enter into the Countrey of Peru in armes, before
their returne and the Emperours answer, they would resist him by armes. The deputies
were Ierosme Loyosa Archbishop of the city of Kings, Laurence of Aldana (who commanded
the garrison there) Thomas of saint Martin prouinciall of the order of saint Dominicke
at Peru, and Gomes de Soli^ de Carceres, some of which being suspect to Pizarro (namely the
prouinciall) he was glad to be rid of him, and to estrange him from his designes, procuring
the bishop of Sancta Martha to goe the voiage with them. Thus the deputies being dispatcht,
they imbarked in diuers ships, and sailed towards Panama, causing Laurence Aldana
to aduance, and aduertise them what was done there. In the meane time there was
a conspiracie discouered against the person of Gonsaluo, which had beene practised, as they
said, by Vela Nugnes, the deceased gouernors brother, who was then a prisoner, following
Pizarro, but not in custodie, for the which he lost his head, being publiquely executed, to
the great griefe both of Spaniards and Indians, who sawe well that this would make the
peace more difficult. Laurence Aldana being come to Panama, and hauing conferred
with Hinoiosa, and spoken vnto the president, he was presently wonne by them, he forgat
his companions, and took an othe to the Emperour, persuading the president Guasca, to
go to field to fight with the rebells, if they giue him not a good answer. The other deputies
comming neere to Panama, and aduertised what Aldana had done, did the like, and
ioyned with the president: who gaue foure shippes of warre to Aldana, with some souldiers,
commanding him to run vp Southerly and Westward, and to trie if he could seaze
vpon the port and towne of Kings, there to make a body of all those that desired to maintain
the Emperors maiestie, and to giue all hindrances he could to Pizarro: he left a good
garrison at Panama, he paied his souldiers bountifully, he made Hinoiosa generall of the
imperiall army in field, he confirmed all the other captaines in their first places, and filled
them with hopes and promises to haue better: He caused the prouinciall Thomas of Saint
Martin, a man of great authoritie with the Spaniards, to imbarke with Laurence Aldana,
being fit to fortifie the imperiall party, to whom he gaue many blanks signed by the Emperour,
that he might fill them with letters directed to the captaines that were with Gonsaluo
Pizarro: He sent D. Iohn de Mendosa into new Spaine, to D. Antonio de Mendosa the
viceroy to bring him some succors, and others were sent by him to the gouernors of Saint
Domingo and other prouinces, to the same effect. Whilest that Pizarro expected newes
from Panama, and from his deputies, they brought Fernand Pa^^aguada bound vnto him,
who (as we haue said) had bin sent from the president Guasca vnto him, with letters from
the emperour, and had beene staied by him who commanded in the fort of Saint Michael
for the rebells:Gonsaluo abandoned by his chiefe adhere^ts. The Councell was assembled to heare the charge and report of this prisoner,
but Pizarro supprest the letters. Being heard, al their opinions were nothing but Rodomon^ades,
rebellions, fire and murder, and to conclude that they must keep the Emperors
army from entring into Peru: whereupon they sent for Francis de Car^^^al, who held
the second place among the rebells, and was then at Plata: he came to Pizarro with 150
Spaniards, 30 field peeces and about 400000 crownes; passing by the towne of Kings,
they told him that they had discouered foure shippes at sea, but they knew not what they

were, nor whither they went: Iames de Mora gouernour of the fort of Truxillo, was
sent forth to discouer them, who found that it was the little fleete of Laurence Aldana,
with whom hee spake in the port of Malabriga, and hearing what had passed at Panama,
hee staied with him encreasing his armie with his shippe, and so they went all to
Truxillo: from which place Mora was sent towards Caxamalcan, a neere Prouince to
draw all them together which had a desire to serue the Emperour, carrying with him
many blankes, the which hee filled with good words, assurances of pardon and promises
to the Captaines of that Countrie, all which in a manner did abandon Pizarro,
who beeing at that time much troubled for the reuolt of Iames de Mora, thinking to
prouide for the fort of Truxillo, hee sent Doctor Garcia de Leon thither, but hee reuolted
in like manner, and added an other shippe with twentie souldiers to Aldanas fleete.
Gonsaluo Pizarro was then certified to what end Aldana was come into that Sea: beeing
full of rage that hee had beene thus abandoned,Captains of Pizarr^s partie. hee deuised with himselfe how hee
might stay the rest, beeing resolute to make warre with all violence. Hee went to
field with about a thousand Spanish footemen, and three hundred horse, and a great
number of Indians which followed him. The Captaines of whom hee made accompt,
were Francis of Caruajal his lieutenant (pretending to share the fruites of his victories
with him) Doctor Caruaial and Doctor Cepeda, Iohn Acosta, Velez de Gueuara, Iohn Torrens,
and some others of lesse note. In his annie the Generalles Standard was with
the Emperours armes alone, but all other ensignes and cornets had Pizarros blasons
and deuises, testifying that hee termed himselfe King of Peru. Martin Silueiran and
Alphonso de Mendosa were left to gard the towne of Plata. Anthonie Robles was made
gouernor of Cusco, and others in other places: all which hee enioyned to send souldiers
and money speedily to the campe, and to publish his declarations and patents in their
gouernements, that hee was not in armes against the Emperour, but against D. Pedro
Guasca, who ambitiously contrary to the Emperours commaundement, had proclaimed
warre against him, and assailed him first. All that were surprized going to ioyne
with the imperiall troupes were forced to march vnder his ensignes, or to die. Hee caused
Peter of Vlloa a Iacobin frier, to bee put in yrons, for that hee went in the disguised
habite of a souldier amongst the troupes publishing the Emperours pardon, which
he offered to all those that would returne vnto his seruice: and hee sent Iohn Acosta towards
the sea, to hinder the descent of Laurence Aldana, who had newly withdrawne the
gouernour of Guanico, and all the souldiers, and had sent them to ioyne with the
troupes of Iames de Mora, at Caxamalcan, in reuenge whereof Pizarro caused Guanico
to bee fired.Cusco reuolts from Pizarro. To encrease his miseries, the Inhabitants of Cusco, disdaining to
be gouerned by Anthony Robles, a man of no worth, in the night they opened the gates
to Iames Ceuton, who, liuing in the mountaines and woods in great miserie, euer since
that hee and his companions had beene defeated, seeking to reuenge the death of the
gouernour Vasco Nugnes, had now come out of his holes, vpon the occasion of this
warre, which was made by the President, and had put himselfe into the citie with some
tattered souldiers, which hee had gathered together, beeing fauoured and fortified by
them of Cusco, both Spaniards and Indians; where hee defeated the gouernour Robles,
who going towards Pizarros campe, with most part of his garrison, and one hundred
thousand ducats, hearing of Ceutons enterprise, had turned head: They fought
within the walles, where hee was defeated, taken and his head cut off, retaining all his
souldiers which were appointed to succour the rebelles, by force or faire meanes. So as
Ceuton finding himselfe fortified with foure hundred foote, and two hundred horse, he
led them to the fort of Plata, to chase away Alphonso de Mendosa who had the gard
thereof.
Cusco being wonne, the townes and forts of Saint Michael, Mercadille, and Procellin,
their gouernors,Towns and ^orts (...) Pizarro and souldiers, abandoned Gonsaluo Pizarro; all which garrisons went
and ioyned with Iames de Mora at Caxamalcan. (...) Martines who should haue garded
Arequipa, could not get thither, for hee was staied prisoner by the way by his owne
souldiers; who made choise of Ier^sme Villega for their head, and went to Ceutons troups.
Against whom Pizarro marched, causing Iohn Acosta to aduaunce with those forces he

had with him at Quitoa, but confounded with such ordinarie reuolts, not knowing
whom hee should trust, hee beganne to vse crueltie, and without anie other reason
then distrust,Crueltie of Pizarro. he caused some captains to be slain in his presence, the which did not secure
him no more than a new oath, which hee caused the souldiers which hee had remaining
to take. Laurence of Aldana with his fleete of six shippes had come neere vnto the towne
of Kings, and had caused three of his shippes to enter into the channell of the riuer, to
see if hee could execute the Presidents charge, wherefore Gonsaluo Pizarro marched thither,
and lodged his armie neere vnto the shoare, hauing commaunded the inhabitants
to bee in armes, and some of them to follow him vpon paine of death. Whilest he laie
there in campe, there passed many messengers and mediators from either part, to come
to some composition, according to the Presidents instructions, who desired to end this
warre by the mildest meanes that might bee, but it was in vaine; Pizarro could not auoyde
his owne ruine, neyther could hee by anie care or diligence stay his men from
running to the imperialls campe, which should haue made him resolue to embrace the
pardon which was offered him. Euerie day there were some wanting in his campe, notwithstanding
that hee put them cruelly to death that could be taken: Francis Brauo Lagunes,
beeing taken by his horsemen which were sent forth to scout, hee commaunded
that hee should be strangled, but at the intreatie of many, especially of D. Agnes Brauo,Pizarro abandoned by his souldiers.
wife to D. Nicholas of Ribera hee gaue him his life, notwithstanding Lagunas fled
away, wherewith Pizarro was in a manner madde, and hee grew so furious, as no man
durst come neere him vnlesse hee called him. His affaires beeing in these bad termes, all
that were in his armie, were amazed and discouraged, but hee himselfe and his owne
followers were most of all, when as they vnderstood that Iames Maldonado aduertized
by Martin de Robles, that they sought him to put him to death, was fled vnto the enemie,
and that Martin de Robles, who had leaue to goe to the towne of Kings that was
neere, had gone to horse backe the next day earely in the morning; and going forth by
the port which leadeth to Truxillo, hee had said openly, that hee went to the President
Guasca, the Emperours lieutenant, and that whosoeuer loued his life, and would
not die like a traitour, should follow him, and leaue the tyrant Pizarro. The same night
Martin Lopes fled out of the campe, and there grew such a tumult, as the souldiers were
readie to kill Gonsaluo: wherewith hee was so terrified, as hee dislodged, and went and
camped two leagues farther from the towne, giuing the charge of marshall of the campe
to Doctor Caruaial, commanding him to keepe a carefull gard that none disbanded, but
hee also abandoned him that night, leauing willingly his rich moueables and furniture,
where hee had many goodly horses of seruice, and about twentie thousand ducats in
coine, and got to Truxillo, beeing soone after followed by manie other gentlemen of
name and qualitie: Gonsaluo Pizarro did not beare the retreate of anie one more impatiently,
than of Doctor Caruaial, complayning often that hee himselfe had made him reuolt:
for that (said hee) hee had made shew to trust more in Iohn Acosta than in him, hauing
lately sent him towards Cusco, by the mountaines, to trie if he might recouer that
citie which Ceuton had left in the peoples hands without anie garrison, and also for that
hee had refused to giue him the daughter of Francis Pizarro his neece in marriage: And
it is remarkeable, that beeing in these perplexities, hee sawe with his owne eyes two of
the common souldiers flie out of the campe, trusting to the swiftnesse of their horses,
crying out as loud as they could, God saue the Emperour, and confound the tyrant Gonsaluo
Pizarro. Then hee resolued to dislodge from thence; taking the way to Arequipa,
whether hee brought not the fourth part of his men, for most of them had left him
by the way, so as beeing come into the prouince of Nascana, he had not aboue 300 men
in his armie: Hee had recommended the towne of Kings, to Anthonie Ribera, Martin
Pizarro, Anthonie de Lyon, and other Spaniards, whom hee held faithfull vnto him, but
whenas they sawe him retired, they called the people into a field without the towne,
where they had planted a standard with the Emperours armes, and there they caused the
letters of a generall pardon to be published, which they had formerly receiued and kept,
the which was ioyfully embraced by them all: Then hauing taken the othe, they did

aduertise Laurence Aldana (who lay there by at anchor) that hee should come and take
possession of the towne in the Emperours name, the which hee did, leauing the charge
of his shippes to Iohn Fernandes, aduertising the President Guasca presently of all that
had passed: and that Gonsaluo Pizarro was gone from thence some eight dayes iourney,
with a small traine. As for Iohn Acosta who had beene sent to Cusco, he had like to haue
beene slaine by the way, by Paceco, Sotomaior, and other conspirators, who escaped and
came to Aldana.
Acosta being freed from this daunger hauing caused some of the conspirators which he
had taken, to be strangled, hee came to Cusco, and was let in (for there were no souldiers
in the towne) there hee reformed the gouernement, displacing those Magistrates
which Ceuton had made, and substituting others, leauing a sufficient garrison vnder the
commaund of Iohn Vasco, Taxia, and with the rest of his troupes hee went to seeke Pizarro
towards Arequipa; but hee was not farre gone, before that they of Cusco had
changed all that he had done, and restored Ceutons old officers. Ceuton who went to Plata,
drew vnto the Emperours seruice Alphonso de Mendosa with all his souldiers, and then
all together beganne to follow Pizarro, to see that hee should not escape out of the
Countrey of Peru, all the townes beeing in a manner reduced (some hauing expelled,
and some hauing slaine their gouernours with their garrisons) and vnwillingly acknowledged
the Emperour and the President Guasca his lieutenant generall, who vpon the
newes of this happie successe, went from Panama by sea, with fiue hundred Spaniards,
old souldiers, and great prouision of armes, and munition: he came neere vnto Toinben,
whither Embassadours and Deputies came vnto him from all partes, to offer him
men, money, obedience and seruice in such aboundaunce, as hee had reason to countermaund
the succours which hee had demaunded of the viceroy of new Spaine, and of
other gouernours of the Prouinces of the west Indies. From thence hee sent Hinoiosa to
Caxamalcan to commaund the troups, which were there assembled, and himselfe came
with the armie to Truxillo, appoynting them all a time to come in the valley of Sansaua.
Gonsaluo Pizarro beeing come to Arequipa, hee found not any creature there, for all
were gone to ioyne with Ceutons troupes, who aduanced to fight with him, the which
hee did,Victorie of Pizarro. but to his owne losse: for hee was defeated, and forced to flie, hauing three
hundred and foure score souldiers slaine vpon the place, with some captaines, and almost
as many taken prisoners, with which Pizarro fortified his army, distributing them
among his bands: and of his part there were onely one hundred men slaine. By this
good successe some others were induced to runne the same fortune with him, he promising
them great recompences: so as holding his forces to be sufficient, hee returned towards
Cusco, with an intent to fight with the imperiall army, wheresoeuer hee should
find it,Army imperiall pursuing Pizarro. the which beeing assembled in the valley of Sansaua, there were found to be sixteene
hundred harquebuziers, fiue hundred pikes, and seuen hundred horse Spaniards,
whereof the captaines were Peter Alphonso of Hinoiosa, commaunding in qualitie of
Generall, Aluaredes marshall of the campe, Doctor Caruaial, Pedro of Vlloa, and other
Captaines: Gabriel de Roias was master of the artillerie: The leaders of the horsemen
were Pedro Cabrera, Gomes of Aluarado, Iohn Sauedra, Iames Mora, Ferdinand Mexia, Roderigo
Salezar, and Alphonso Mendosa, all which had reuolted from Pizarro. The President
had for his councell, the Archbishop of the towne of Kings, Thomas S. Martin, prouinciall
of the preaching friers, with many others. Peter Valduuia gouernour of the Prouince
of Chiliane, came and ioyned with his armie, a man of great experience in matters
of warre, worthie to be opposed against Francis Caruaial, who was the most redoubted
captaine the enemy had; and in the end vnfortunate Ceuton came and ioyned with them,
with about fortie horse. Being all together, they marched towards Cusco, whither they
vnderstood that Gonsaluo Pizarro was come with his army. The Countrey by the which
the imperialls did march, was rough, desart, and without victualles, so as they suffered
much, vntill they came to Andaguara, where the Countrey is peopled, and furnished
with victualles and other commodities: wherefore they stayed long there, for that they
would not be consumed with trauell, and the tediousnesse of the winter, if the enemie

should seeke to prolong the warre, the which he might easily doe, hauing the towne
of Cusco, and the riuer which passeth by the valley of Seguisagrane at his deuotion. In
the Spring time of the yeare, one thousand fiue hundred fortie and eight, the President
caused his army to dislodge from Andaguara, and crossed many narrow passages of the
mountaines without any difficultie, and many riuers, whereas Pizarro might haue annoyed
them much, if hee had not beene negligent, and then came and lodged vpon the declining
of the hilles, in a discommodious place, aboue the valley of Seguisagrane, in
the which Pizarro was camped, who wanted not any thing, hauing the towne and riuer
behind him at his commaundement; whereas the imperialls suffered much hunger, cold,
and other discommoditities: yet notwithstanding the President did forbeare to fight,
being aduertised that a good number of the Spaniards that were with Pizarro, did but
watch an oportunitie to abandon him, and to reuolt, which he desired might be before
they did fight, that he might haue the weaker opposition. But they could not temporize
long in that bad lodging, whereas the cold which was great in that season, did so
benumme the souldiers, as they could scarce hold their armes; and also for the neerenesse
of the two armies which were daily in skirmish; so as they were forced to come to
a generall battell, the which was soone ended. For the ordnance was scarce discharged,
but many of Pizarros armie disbanded openly,Defeat of Pizarro. among which were Doctor C^peda, Garci
Lazo de la Vega, and Alphonso Peres Hita captaines; and all the souldiers which remained
at the rout of Ceuton, went away in one squadron to the imperialls, which made the rest
retire and to flie the battell, some going towards the citie of Cusco, which was fiue
leagues off, and others to other places: they that were most affected to Gonsaluo, and
most guiltie remained about him, who being foure in number, were of opinion to cast
themselues into their enem^es troups, and to die fighting valiantly, rather than to be led
bound to an ignomimious death; but Gonsaluo told them, that seeing Fortune had turned
her backe, it were better to die Christianlike, acknowledging their faults, than to perish
like pagans in such vanities. Being then enuironed by the imperiall horsemen, he yielded
his armes to Pedro de Vlloa, great Prouost of the armie, who led him before the President,
by whom hee was much blamed for his obstinacie, yet hee shewed himselfe nothing
deiected, but answered resolutely to whatsoeuer was demaunded. Being giuen in
gard to Iames de Ceuton, he was for some daies well and modestly intreated, not suffering
any one to disquiet him either in word or deed. All the other Commaunders were in a
manner taken that day, either with Gonsaluo, or in the pursuite, except Francis Caruaial,
who was afterwards found and deliuered by his owne souldiers, being hidden among
the reeds in a moore, thinking to renue the warre if hee might escape. All the rest were
somewhat lamented, but not hee, for hee was exceeding cruell, and the chiefe author
of Pizarros ^rebellion, and it was said that by his inhumane councell, Pizarro had caused
aboue sixe hundred gentlement to be murthered, and thrice as many good souldiers, Spaniards,
with an infinite number of Indians, and that he neuer was at the death of anie
one, but he did reuile him with all the opprobrious words he could inuent. The rebelles
campe remained a prey to the imperialls, whereby they were greatly enriched: and to
preserue the citie of Cusco from sacke, and to containe euery one in his duetie, and to
preuent reuenges, which do commonly follow ciuill victories, Ferdinand Mexia, and
Martin Robles were sent thither with two companies. Afterwards the prisoners processes
were formally made. The chiefe of the rebellion were condemned to die, as guiltie of
treason. Gonsaluo Pizarro had his head cut off, the which was for a time set in the market
place in the citie of Kings,Death of Gonsaluo Pizarro. for a publike spectacle with this Inscription. This is the head of
the Traitor and Tyrant Gonsaluo Pizarro, who being rebelled, and hauing taken armes in the
realme of Peru, against the most mightie Emperour Charles the fift, his prince, was vanquished
fighting against the standard royall in the valley of Saguisagrane, and hath beene thus worthily
punished. All his goods were forfeited: his proud palace which hee had built in the citie
of Cusco was ruined, the soile sowed with salt, and a pillar erected with a table containing
the sentence of his condemnation. He died co^stantly retaining his accustomed proud
looke, he was royally attired in silke imbrodered with gold and pearle; which the executioner
had. His bodie put into a coffin was honestly buried in Cusco. Francis Caruaial

was executed in like manner with nine other captaines, but their bodies were quartered
and hung in the high wayes. Many also of the most seditious were hung vpon trees on
the high wayes. The President hauing thus punished the chiefe mutines and rebelles,
hee caused a generall pardon to be published in Cusco to all the rest, forbidding any one
to reproach the fault hereafter, vpon paine of death.
This victorie was wonne the ninth day of Aprill, one thousand fiue hundred fortie and
eight, happie doubtlesse for the Emperour, for if Pizarro had wonne it, Peru had bin
lost for him, and Spaine depriued of the treasures of that Countrey, which are great
and incredible. The President found himselfe much troubled when hee came to reward
such as hee had drawne from Pizarros faction, to whom he had made great promises, for
there was not any common souldier but he held himselfe worthy of a gouernement: and
he could not please them all, but he supplied this defect with store of ducars, which abound
in that golden region. Then hee beganne to settle some order in regard of the
Spaniards, which were feudatarie Lords ouer the Indians, how they should carrie themselues
to the Indians their subiects. He erected a Parliament or royall Audience in the
city of Kings; to the which any man that was grieued might appeale, and giuing hope
to them that remayned at Peru, by the aduertisement he saied he had receiued from the
Emperour, to haue a Viceroy very soone hee bad them farewell, and went away in
December one thousand fiue hundred forty and nine, carrying with him about two millions
of gold for the Emperors part. He came from the city of Kings to Panama, where
hauing rested some dayes, hee went by land with his baggage to Nombre de Dios, vpon
the north sea, where he arriued happily: For, had hee staied alittle longer at Panama,
hee had beene in danger neuer to haue seene Spaine more. For that certaine other rebelles
led by Fernand and Pedro Contreras (whose father was Viceroy of Nicaragna)
came and seazed vpon Panama, thinking the President had beene there, and spoyled it:
and missing him, they pursued him, thinking to finde him vpon the way, and to strippe
him of his treasure, making an attempt to enter into Nombre de Dios, but they were repulsed
by the garrison and the Inhabitants. The gouernors and garrisons that were neere
made a head, and went to field, and dispersed them in some incounters, in one of the
which one of the Contreras was slaine,Contreras other rebells. and the other lost, so as hee was neuer more
heard of.
This second reuolt did somewhat stay the voyage of the President D. Pedro Guasca,
who embarqued in Iuly 1550, hauing suppressed two importaunt rebellions at the
West Indies, beeing followed by a great number of noblemen Spaniards, who were
rich in gold and siluer of the spoiles which they had taken, or for recompences in these
seditions; he arriued happily at Saint Lucar of Barameda, and from thence went to Seuile,
where hauing rested some dayes, hee passed into Germanie to the emperour,
whom hee found at Ausbourg, by whom hee was graciously receiued and honoured for
his good seruices, who in reward thereof some moneths after made him Bishop of Valencia
which fell void.
But let vs returne to that princes affaires in Germanie, and what hee had to treat of
at Ausbourg, whereas all things did succeed according to his desire, the negot^ations
of great Kings being like vnto other mens, seasoned with sweet and sower, by him that
gouerns the whole world, and for the good of men, who else would forget him if they
should alwayes prosper. This mightie Emperour, a Conquerour and wife, according
to the world, and the common opinion of all men, finding after much toile, by a hard
and preiudiciall experience, that hee was farre from that which hee pretended to doe
for the good of his house, by armes and force, against the libertie of the Electors, and
the Estates of the empire,Emperour solicites D. Ferdinand to resigne the dignit^e of king of Romans to his son Philippe. hee sought to attaine vnto it by the meanes of some conuention,
and therefore hee did presse his brother Ferdinand to resigne vnto prince Philip his
sonne his right and dignitie of King of Romans, whereupon they grew to a great quarrel,
to pacifie the which Mary Queene of Hungarie their sister, was forced to returne to Ausbourg,
from whence shee parted alittle before: he pursued this resignation by all the
meanes and policie hee could, for that it was the next infallible steppe to bring D. Philippe
to the empire, but Ferdinand would neuer yeelde to it, thinking that if hee made

this daungerous alienation, all his sonnes (hauing a good number) should remayne
without estates and meanes,Returne of prince Philip into Spaine. wherein hee had reason. Hee had sent into Spaine for
Maximilian his sonne to come to the diet, beeing a milde and courteous prince, and
very pleasing to all Germanie. D. Philippe hauing fayled to be king of Romans, parted
from Ausbourgh, and tooke his way towardes Genoua to returne into Spaine to gouerne
it.
Peter Lewis Farnese Duke of Placentia and Parma, hauing beene slaine the yere before
by his owne subiects, some thought by the Emperours procurement, for that Fernand
Gonzague gouernour of Milan, did instantly ^eaze vpon the towne of Placentia, Octauio
Farnese his sonne, distrusting the Emperour his father in lawe, hauing married his
base daughter, and seeing himselfe contemned by the new Pope, hee sought support
and protection from the French; whereat pope Iulio was so offended as hee
thundered out a sentence of Excommunication against him, by the which hee declared
him fallen from his estate, giuing it in prey to the Emperour:Octauio Farn^se excommunicated, the cause of new warre. whereupon 
D. Fernand Gonzague spoyled the territorie of Parma and the French sent succours
to Duke Octauio, which caused a new warre betwixt the Emperour and the French
king.1551
This warre beganne in the yeare of our Lord God,Extortions of the emperor vpon the German^ one thousand fiue hundred fiftie
and one, by meanes whereof the Germanes freed themselues from manie violences,
which had beene offered them both in generall and in particular by the Emperour, beeing
made proud with his victories, which hee sought to make all men feele, as well Catholikes,
as Protestants, vnder diuers pretexts; of some to be satisfied for the charges
of the warre, which hee saied hee had made for the libertie of Germanie; of others by
the waie of chasticement, for that they had reuolted, wherein hee saied that he proceeded
mildely, quitting much of his right to ease and spare them. By this meanes there
was neyther towne nor countrey, estate nor condition of men, amongst the Germanes,
which were not vexed by taxes, and by sower speeches and threats, if they presumed
to tell him of his duetie, or to put him in mind of his conuentions and promises.
Finally, hee would haue all depend vpon his owne will. Thus he heaped vp a great
treasure; and they say, that hee had wrested from the Princes and Protestant townes, aboue
fiue hundred peeces of great ordnance, wherewith he did furnish his places and
sorts in Italie, Flaunders and Spaine. In these discontents the Towne of Magdebourg
vpon Elbe,Magdebourg deliuered. which had beene proclaymed and streightly besieged, for that it resisted
his Edicts, was now more slowly prest, so as they had meanes to free themselues vpon
honest conditions, Maurice Duke of Saxonie thinking it best to compound this warre,
hee beeing the chiefe of it, and to attend the deliuerie of the Landgraue of Hesse his father
in lawe, whom hee had brought the Emperour, vpon a promise, that hee would
not detaine him prisoner, and yet hee kept him,League betwixt the princes of Germany and the French king against the emperour. and carried him vp and downe as it 
were in triumph: Whereupon hee often besought the Emperour to haue regard vnto
his honour, which was ingaged, and seeing him make no accompt to set him at libertie,
hee entred into league with Albert of Brandebourg, the Landgraues children,
and others, and all they with the French King, who marched speedily with a great armie
towards the Rhine,1552 giuing it out, that it was to restore the Germanes his good
neighbours, and auncient friends to the French, to their true and first libertie, which
was taken from them by Charles of Austria, tearming himselfe Emperour. The Protestant
Princes went to armes also, and committed great spoyles in Germanie. But that
warre was ended by the deliuerie of the Landgraue, and by some things that were granted
or promised to the Protestants.
The French King beeing come neere Strausbourgh,Metz besieged by the emperor and hearing of this accord
made by Duke Maurice without him, hee returned discontented, retayning for his
charges and paynes, Metz, Thoule, and Verdun, Townes belonging to the Empire:
And the Emperour finding himselfe bound to recouer them, hee stayed not, but came
and layd siege to Metz in the beginning of winter: What the successe was you may read
in the French historie.

The fathers being yet at Trent, Maximilian of Austria with his wife D. Maria of
Spaine passed there, beeing returned out of Spaine, who crossing from Barcelone to
Genoua, had beene in some daunger, being pursued by the gallies of Fraunce, whereof
Leon Strossy was generall. Alittle before hee had entred into the port of Barcelone,
and carried away some vessells which had beene prepared for Maximilians passage,Port of Barcelone spoiled by Leon Strossy. wherof
the imperialls complained, saying that there was no open warre.
Whilest the Emperour toyled both mind and body in Germany, betwixt the storms
of the Councell, the Protestants, and his owne affections, being also entred into a new
warre against the French king: the Turkes and pirats of Afrike spoiled the coasts of Naples
and Sicile, whereof Spaine was not free. The chiefe Leader of these theeues was
Dragut Rais (whom others call Orgut) who had surprized the towne sometimes called
Aphrodisium,Dragut a (...) pyrate. and in our time was named Afrike by vs, and Mehedic by the Moores,
belonging to the realme of Tunes, sometimes a rich towne opposite to Sicile. This
Dragut had succeeded Barbarousse in boldnesse and policie, and was bred vp vnder him;
of a poore gallie boy, hee grew a noble pirate: hee had beene taken about the Iland of
Corsica by Ian^tin Doria, and made a gallie slaue; but after some time he deliuered him
for a small ransome, to the great preiudice of Christendome. Being grow^e more insolent
than before, he committed infinite spoiles vpon Sicile, Calabria, Naples, and the
coasts of Genoua and Spaine, and thrust on with the like ambition to the two brethren
Barbarousses hee would haue a retreate for the safety of his thefts, and be also called Xec
or King. Whereupon hee surprized this towne of Afrike, which was then well peopled
and of great trafficke: by the wealth whereof he made himselfe fearefull to all the co^sts
of Italie and Spaine, and of late scouring the Tyrene Seas, whilest that the gallies were
busie to passe and repasse the princes D. Philippe and Maximilian, had sacked and burnt
Rapallo. So as the Emperour was daily importuned to chase him out of that dangerous
nest, who commanded D. Iohn de Vega, viceroy of Sicile, and Andrew Doria prince of Melfi,
the chiefe Author of this enterprize, to gather an army together with all speed for this
 action. Many voluntaries came to reuenge the publike and priuate wrongs,Afrike a towne in the realme of Tunes taken by the Spaniards. and to win
honour, but especially with the hope of spoyle, which they thought would be very rich,
for besides the great booties, which Dragut brought, he had with large rewardes drawne
many merchants thither, and namely the Iewes which were expelled Spaine and Portugall
were retired to that towne. Andrew Doria soliciting the preparation of the fleete,
whereof hee was generall, the Emperour hauing giuen the charge at land to the viceroy
of Italie: and for that he thought that before the whole armie should be ready to goe into
Barbarie, this cunning pirate might doe some harme vnto the Christians, he therefore
aduertized D. Bernardin de Mendosa generall of the gallies of Spaine, to stand vpon his
gard on that coast. Hauing then receiued three gallies from the duke of Florence, foure
from Malta, and three from the Pope, with those of Naples and Sicile, making in all
foure and fiftie gallies, well manned both with souldiers and mariners, in the end of Iune
they bent their course towards the towne of Afrike: hauing viewed it, and burnt some
vesselles belonging to the Moores, it was resolued first of all to take Munisterio a little
towne neere it with a castle, the which hauing few inhabitants, Dragut had fortified with
a good garrison of Turkes beeing to bee feared that whilest they were at the siege of Afrike,
he might annoy them continually from thence, if the pirate who was then abroad
should make his retreate thither with any number of vesselles, as hee was pretended to
doe, neither was hee out of hope to succour them. The towne was taken with small
toile, but finding it a worke of more difficultie, to force the castle, beeing brauely
defended by the Moores and Turkes, they caused D. Garcia de Toledo generall of the gallies
of Naples to land,Munisteri^ in Afrike taken by the Christians. who battering the Castle with eleuen peeces of ordonaunce,
made a breach, the which they defended long, but in vaine, for in the end they were
all slaine or taken prisoners: the Christians hauing lost aboue three score of their best
souldiers, besides a cannon breaking in one of the gallies, it split and suncke, yet
they saued all the men and furniture. Then they turned towardes Afrike, Doria hauing
furnished himselfe with munition at Goulette, and sent to leuie more men in Naples

and Sicile: and then did D. Iohn de Vega passe, hauing left his sonne D. Aluaro to
gouerne the Iland. They spent some time about this new prouision, so as the Turkes
within Afrike had more leisure to fortifie themselues, both with men and all other necessaries:
which made the siege tedious and difficult to the great losse of the Christians,
for that Dragut hauing an intent to draw the army from that enterprise, spoiled the coasts
of Italie, and burnt some weake places, doing the like at sea to the Merchants; so as Ber^ardin
of Mendosa had worke to defend the coast of Spaine, whilest that this pirate annoyed
the Ilands of Majorca, Corsica, and Elba: but this could not remoue Doria from
his resolution, who held it an vnprofitable thing to spend that summer in running after
Dragut. The Christians fleete being returned well furnished to besiege the towne of Afrike,
and the situation and strength thereof being well obserued by Vega and other captaines
of experience, there were diuers opinions among them, for the difficulties that
were propounded by one and other.Situation of the towne of Afrike The towne stands vpon a long tongue of land, right
against Sicile, being three miles in compasse, it lookes towards Malta, and Gerbe, and
is enuironed by the sea on three partes, the fourth beeing to be attempted by land, and
therefore it was so secured as it could not be battred with anie armed vessells, but on two
narrow flankes, the rest of the channell beeing so shallow, as no vessell of anie burthen
could approach; so as they found this enterprise more difficult than they did at the first
conceiue it. They held the wall towards the firme land to be well fortified, with fiue towers
of equall distance, and a great rauelin in the most eminent place, the which did
come farre forth, and was well flanked. The question then was, on which side they should
batter it, for to attempt it by sea they held it impossible, for that none but small gallies
could come neere it: some would haue the rauelin first battered by land, for that it would
annoy them much that should goe vnto the assault, if they should batter the curtine:
And others maintained that it was more easie to make a breach in the Curtine, and hauing
battered the defences which flanked it, to secure themselues with it, and with some
trauerse: for that it was not the custome of warre to attempt a place where it was strongest;
but weakest: with this aduice they planted their ordnance, and beganne to batter
from the breake of daie vntill night, finding that old wall more hard to ruine than they
expected: wherefore hauing viewed the breach, and finding it not sufficient, they left
it to make another: And in the meane time they had so battred the defences of the rauelin,
as the defendants could no more vse them, and the rather, for that the Spaniards
were so farre aduaunced with their trenches, as they ouerthrew any that shewed themselues
with their small shot, so as they thought they might well attempt it there by scalado.
They had already retired their ordnance from their first batterie, holding it fruitlesse,
and wholy relying vpon their second: wherewith the Generalls were much grieued
(not well agreeing among themselues) knowing what a blemish to their reputations,
and a losse to Christendome their retreat would bee: wherefore they laied hold
of that course, which was held to bee the onelie meanes to take the towne: They
had spent great store of munition in their batteries, and beganne to be scanted; and
therefore they were fully resolued to scale the rauelin, and to make a diuersion towards
the sea, the gallies should at the same instant make an offer to assaile the towne on that
side. Wherefore on the second daie of Iuly the Spaniards of the regiment of Sicile,
gaue an assault to the rauelin, with great courage and resolution, and entred it, where
they might haue preuayled, if they of the gallies had come forwards with the like courage,
or at the least with that order that was set downe: but hauing shewed themselues
too late, they made no diuersion, and they that had entred the rauelin, were repulsed
with great losse: which successe did wonderfully afflict the whole campe, not knowing
what course to take to saue their honours,Assault giuen in vaine at Afrike. so as there was small hope in this siege,
through the disagreement of the Commaunders, either of their seeking to execute
his charge apart, whenas the situation of the place required an vnion both of minds and
forces.
They wanted souldiers by their continuall skirmishes, the Moores and Turkes defending
it with an vndaunted courage; they wanted munition, and were shortened for victualles,
hauing none but what came from Sicile, which could be in time prouided.

It was therefore resolued to send Marc Centurione to Genoua for new men,1553 who brought
in tenne gallies twelue hundred Spanish foot, which were giuen him by the gouernour
of Milan, and some munition from the common weale of Genoua, and the Duke of
Florence, which fortified the campe and gaue them courage to make new enterprises.
They were aduertised by a Moore, that Dragut beeing retired into Barbarie, was resolued
to relieue them by land, who hauing made the Moores his friends, by his great
bounty and valour, gathered a great number of them together, which ioyned to seuen
hundred Turkes, hee thought might worke some good effect, who making often attempts,
and they of the towne sallying out at the same instant, did much annoy the Christians,
till in the end many beeing slaine in a furious skirmish, and many more hurt, hee
dispaired of euer doing good. It was not without losse to the victors, who had manie
slaine,Dragut seekes to releeue the towne of Afrike and of great valour; amongst which was Fernando de Toledo: Some say hee was
gouernour of Goulette, and others, marshall of the campe to the Spanish foot. Matters
being thus bettered within the campe, for that after this attempt, Dragut had retired
himselfe to Gerbe, to attend the ruine of his nest, they resolued to make triall of
their last force, and not suffer themselues to be surprized with the fall of the leafe, which
vpon that coast would hazard the losse of their fleete. They concluded therefore to
make three batteries, two by land, and one by sea, with a caualier or mount made of
timber and earth, and set vpon two gallies, whereon they might plant some peeces of
batterie.
This being brought vnto the wall towards the sea, wrought a wonderfull effect, and so
did those at land, for that vse had taught them better the nature of that place, where
they had made many attempts and spent much munition. On the tenth day of Srptember
they came to the assault with great resolution and good order in all three places;
where they found very great resistance, but it was first entred by the sea, where they
found the wall weakest, and therefore had made the greater breach: they wonne it foot
by foot, and in the end many of them being retired into the rauel in to make their last
resistance vnder a Turke, which was their leader, they neuer gaue it ouer, vntill death;
so as the slaughter was great:Afrike taken by D. Iohn de Vega. There were manie prisoners taken, some say aboue tenne
thousand, others but seuen thousand. The wealth was not so great as was expected,
for that euer since Dragut was Lord thereof, it was nothing but a retreat for theeues and
pirats. The prisoners were carried into Sicile, whereas the women and children were
sold good cheape, the men that were fit for labour, were distributed among the gallies.
The viceroy caused the breaches and ruines to be repayred, and left a garrison of Spaniards
there, vnder the commaund of D. Aluaro his sonne. Whilest that the armie remained
there for the finishing of the fortifications, they had a cruell storme, which continued
foure daies, and did them much harme, after which they returned all home safely, to
the great ioy of all Italie, for this victorie. Muley Hascen the dispossessed king of Tunes
died at this siege. Soone after the Viceroyes returne, it was resolued in the Emperours
councell, that the towne of Afrike should be rased, as a place lying too farre off, of great
charge, and hard to be kept.
13 This yere one thousand fiue hundred fiftie and three Ioane of Albret the presumptiue
heire of Nauarre,Birth of Henrie Burbon King of France and of Nauarre. was deliuered of a sonne, and he was named Henrie, who should
ioyne the rights of Nauarre to them of the house Bourbon which made him apprehend
the Crowne of France.
Dragut after the losse of the towne of Afrike, beeing retired into the Iland of Gerbe,
hee aduertized Sultan Solyman of his losse, who retained him into his seruice, and honored
him with charges. Doria beeing aduertized in the Spring, that Dragut was gone
to Gerbe, whereas by a long narrow channell, hee entred into a poole, where hee
might at ease trimme his gallies, and goe out to his theeuing at pleasure, Dorias armie
came sodainely vpon him and besieged him,Dragut besieged at Gerby by Doria escapes cunningly. who to defend his vesselles had a Tower
which garded the channell, and withall, hee had built a Bastion to couer him.
Notwithstanding they must in a short time haue all perished with hunger; both hee
with his Turkes, and the Moore which was Lord of that Iland, who beeing loath
to breake his faith, would not yeelde him prisoner to Doria, yet hee persuaded him

to finde some meanes to escape,1554 else they should bee all famished, for that the Iland
was but little, barren, and had small prouisions to liue withall. Being then
forced by necessitie, hee set all his Turkes, Moores, and slaues to worke, who
beganne to make a channel in a lower part, the which hee continued daie and night
vntill hee came vnto the sea, neyther was hee discouered by the enemies. And so
in the night time hee escaped this imminent daunger with admiration, Doria being
much discontented that the Turke had circumuented him with such a stratageme,
and moreouer that in his retreate hee had taken two of his gallies:Andrew Dorias gallies lost. but not so satisfied,
pursuing this pirate, hee lost seuen more, which were cast away in a storme,
with the death of aboue a thousand persons. The Turkes armie beeing then at sea,
and Dragut ioyned with it, beeing in all a hundred and fiue gallies, and thirtie other
vesselles, they entred into the streight of Messina, and tooke the towne of Augusta
in Sicile, which in auncient times was called Megara, from thence he landed
in the Iland of Malta, and attempted the strong Castell of Saint Angelo in vaine:
then comming to the Iland of Goze, they sacked it, and carried away many slaues.
Finally he came into Barbarie, and tooke Tripoly from the Knights of Malta, hauing
held it forty yeeres.
There was some discord betwixt Amida King of Tunes, and D. Lewis Perez gouernour
of Goulette, who pretended that the Barbarian after the vsuall manner of the
Moores had broken his faith with the Emperour, touching the accord made with
Muley Hascen,Amida a King of Tunes makes a new accord with the emperour. when he was put in possession, and therefore he annoyed him much;
so as Amida fearing worse, made a new accord, and bound himselfe to giue euerie yeare
vnto the Emperour twelue thousand crownes, to pay the garrison, of Goulette, and
moreouer fifteene Barbarie horses, and eighteene faulcons, to furnish wood for the vse
of Goulette, to release all Christian slaues within his realme, and not to suffer anie
more to be made, and finally, that hee should not receiue anie pirates, but should aide
and defend the Emperour with all his forces against any one that should seeke to offend
him.
The marriage of D. Iohn prince of Portugall, sonne to King Iohn the third, and of
D. Ioane the Emperours daughter,Portugall. was consummated in the yeere one thousand fiue
hundred fiftie and foure, the which confirmed the friendship and alliances betwixt their
houses and states. But this yong prince who was not fully seuenteene yeeres old, dyed 
within a yere after his marriage, leauing the princesse his wife with child, who eighteene
dayes after was deliuered of a sonne,Birth of D. Sebastian of Portugall. whom they named D. Sebastian, King Iohn and
Queene Katherine hauing not any more children remaining: D. Ioane being risen from
her child-bed, went into Castille to gouerne the realme in the name of the Emperour
Charles her father.
The Emperour finding himselfe much broken and troubled with many infirmities,
made his will about that time at Brussells, committing in the meane time the execution
of many things to his sonne D. Philip, for that which concerned the affaires of Italie: And
as for Flanders and the Countries adioyning, he himselfe with Queene Marie his sister,
widow to Lewis king of Hungarie, would gouerne.
15 This yeare a marriage was concluded betwixt D. Philippe prince of Spaine,Marriage of D. Philip and Marie Queene of England. and
Marie Queene of England, for the effecting whereof the Prince made preparation to go
into England, hauing foure score great shippes and fortie carauells, in the which, besides
the noblemen and knights which did attend the Prince, with their ordinarie traine there
were foure thousand foote, Spaniards to defend the fleete, and to serue in Flaunders,
in the warre against the French: he tooke shipping in Biscay hauing a prosperous wind,
leauing for gouernesse in Spaine D. Ioane his sister, who (as we haue said) was in the beginning
of the yeare, left a widow by the prince of Portugall. About the middest of
Iulie hee came within sight of Hampton, where there was a fleete of sixe and thirtie
shippes, some of the Queenes, some of the low Countries attended to gard him, it being
dangerous sailing vpon that coast; there came from Southampton a shippe royally
appoynted, being followed by tenne others, which were sent by the Queene to receiue
the princes person, and his whole Court, in the which were many noblemen of England

sent to that end,1555 and to present vnto him the order of the Garter, which he receiued
with a ioyfull countenance, and put the garter on his left leg. Hee would not haue anie
go into the ship with him, but the duke of Alba, Ruy Gomes de Silua, Antonio de Toledo and
Pedro Lopes, the first was his lord steward, the second lord chamberlain, the third master of
his horse, and the last a steward also; but afterwards other noblemen and the whole court
landed, with their furniture, which continued three days. During the princes stay there,
he was entertained with all the state that might be desired, from thence he went to Winchester,
where the Queene attended him, and where the marriage was celebrated. On the
25 of that month,Philippe made king of Naples. there was first read the renunciation of the emperour his father, by the
which he resigned vnto him the realme of Naples, and then the articles of the capitulation
made in regard of that marriage. The Emperour would not, neyther did the English
thinke it fit their Queene should marrie with any one that had not the tittle of a King,
so as the realme of Naples was assigned vnto him, and soone after the Duchie of Milan.
Whereupon the Marques of Pescara was sent to Naples, to take possession in his name,
which ceremonie was done the 25 of Nouember, with great solemnity in the presence of
cardinall Pacheco, then viceroy, and of the prince of Bisignano, who was created Sindic of
the city to that end.
In the yeere 1555 died pope Iulio de Monte,Death of pope Iulio the third. hee was of a quiet disposition, louing his
people, but irresolute in his greatest affaires; which grew of a desire he had to be friend
both to the French king and Emperour, who hauing not that art that was requisite to reconcile
their old quarrels, hee found himselfe often deceiued in his designes, and was
not beloued of any of them.Death of pope Marcel. He was succeeded by Marcel Ceruin of Montepulciano, cardinall
of Sancta Croix, a man of a verie good life, giuing great hope of his good gouernment;
but hee died within three weekes after his election, confirming a common opinion
in the people of Rome, that the Popes which change not their name, die presently.
His successour Iohn Peter Caraffa cardinall of Ostia, failed not to change his name, whom
they named Paul the fourth;Pope Paul the fourth. hee was called Chietin or Thietin, of the name of an Order
of religious men, whereof hee had beene the Author, at such time as hee was Bishop of
Chieti or Thieti in Abruzzo, he was also surnamed the Warrior.
16 The same yeare Queene Ioane mother to the Emperour died in the towne of Tordesillas,Death of queen Ioane the emperours mother.
hauing beene alwayes troubled in her sences, and distracted, since the death of
king Philippe her husband, vntill that she was threescore and fifteene yeeres old: this princesse
troubling her selfe infinitely for that she thought she was contemned, and that they
kept her as a prisoner, this ambitious humour of commaund would not suffer her to take
any rest, so as this sharpe and violent humor of melancholie, which she had as it were by
inheritance from the Queene D. Isabella a Portugall, wife to D. Iohn the second King of
Castille her grandmother, was continued and augmented in her.
17 Henry of Albret king of Nauarre died about that time at Pau,Death of Henry of Albret king Nauarre. in the fiftieth yeare
of his age. He ordayned as the Kings his predecessours had done, that he would be buried
in Pampelone, whose bodie was layd at Lescar in Bearne. To whose possessions, and
right to the realme of Nauarre, Ioane of Albret his onely daughter succeeded, beeing
married to Anthonie of Burbon duke of Vendosme.Gouernors of Nauarre. This realme detained by the Emperour,
was in the meane time gouerned by Viceroyes: about the yeare one thousand
fiue hundred and fiftie by D. Barnardin Cardenas duke of Magueda, in whose time D. Philippe
prince of the Asturies, and heire of Castille, Arragon etc. was sworne prince of Viana:
and in the yeare one thousand fiue hundred fiftie and two D. Bertrand de la Cuen^
duke of Albuquerque took vpon him the gouernement; it is hee that was in Guipuscoa
whenas the French held Fontarrabie. By him there were certaine light enterprises made
vpon the frontires of France, and vpon the towne of Saint Iohn de Lus in the precedent
warres, and by the diligence of the said Duke of Albuquerque, the prince D. Philip was
declared king of Nauarre with the emperours consent, by the Estates of the Countrey,
beeing assembled at Pampelone,Death of D. Pedro of Nauarre Marquesse of Cortes, in the yeere one thousand fiue hundred fiftie and sixe.
About this time D. Pedro of Nauarre Marquesse of Cortes, and Marshall of the realme
of Nauarre, died at Toledo, leauing for heire to his possessions D. Ieronima of Nauarre,
in fauour of whom her husband D. Iohn de Benauides, was made marshall.

The warre had beene verie hot these last yeares betwixt the French and the imperials,
vpon the frontiers of Artois and Picardie, and in Piedmont, the which had extended
into Tuscaine, whereas Peter Strossy, who commanded the French forces, was defeated
in battell by the Marquesse of Marignan Generall for the emperour. Sienna
had beene long beseeged by the Imperials,Sienna loseth her libertie. and defended by the French, but in the
end it was yeelded, and made subiect to the duke of Florence. But the French notwithstandingh
this bad successe in Tuscaine, began to grow strong in Piedmont, and
seemed to threaten the duchie of Milan, where there wanted a Gouernour, D. Ferdinand
Gonzague being called in Flaunders to iustifie himselfe, as hee did, of the slaunders
wherewith hee was taxed by D. Iohn de Luna a Spaniard, Castellan of Milan and
the Chaunceller Tauerne. Ruy Gomez de Silua imbraced this occasion, who beeing
much beloued by king Philip, and finding the duke of Alba to be a great competitor
in his Maiesties fauour, hee had practised long by all the policies of a Courteour to
send him from Court, besides hee was suspected to fauour them that did molest Fernand
Gonzague, to the end that being called thence, the duke might haue meanes to
bee sent thither, with a large authoritie, the which succeeded according to his desire
for the warre increasing in Piedment, and ill mannaged by them that commanded,
the king resolued, the emperours Councell being also of that minde, to send the duke
of Alba, to reduce it into some better estate. But he would not accept of that charge,
which indeed was great and weighty, if hee might not haue such authoritie giuen
him, as hee might gouerne with honour, and hope of good successe. Wherefore hee
obtained a title,Duke of Alba sent Viceroy into Italie. which was neuer before graunted to any of the emperours Ministers,
passing with full power and authoritie to gouerne the realme of Naples, and the
duchie of Milan, as well in peace as in warre, and to gouerne all as if his Majestie were
there in person. And for that hee knew how weake the forces were in Italie, for want of
money, before his departure he would haue great prouision made both from the lowe
countries, Spaine and Italie; so as with an opinion to doe great matters, not onely by
the same of his authoritie and valour, but by the great sum of money which was assigned
him, he gaue order for his speedy passage beyond the Alpes. Hee sent Commissions
before to haue men, artillerie, munition, victuals, and pioners in a readinesse, and himselfe
came in post the twelfth of Iune to Milan, the successe of that warre you may read in
its proper historie. The duke of Alba hearing of some alteration intended vpon the confines
of the realmes of Naples, was inuited to goe thither (notwithstanding that the king
had already sent Bernardine of Mendosa thither, with the title of Lieutenant, in the place
of Cardinall Pacecco, who went away hearing of the dukes arriuall in Italie) making Iohn
Baptista Castaldo his Lieutenant in the state of Milan.
18 The emperour this yeare one thousand fiue hundred fiftie and fiue,Emperour Charles resignes the Gouernment to his son broken with
toyles of the world, and willing to free himselfe of so great a burthen, and to satisfie the
desire of his sonne king Philip, to whom although he had giuen the title of King of Naples,
and afterwards of duke of Milan, yet the gouernment remained at the disposition of
the emperors councell, he resolued to renounce the absolute gouernment with the titles
of al those realmes and states, except the empire, to the which his brother Ferdinand should
succeed. So calling his sonne into Flaunders, he made this renunciation with great ceremonies,
in the town of Brussels, the fiue and twentieth day of October in a great assemblie
of the Nobilitie, Prelates, and deputies of towns, the Queene of Hungarie, and Meximilian
the emperours sonne in law, with some other princes being present, but all Spaniards,
officers and others of what qualitie soeuer, were put out of the hall, and not any suffered
to stay, but such as had business, or had beene called. So as from that time all matters
were handled by the said kings Councell, and he was called both king of Spaine and Catholike.
But before the resignation of all his realmes and estates in this honourable assemblie,
he gaue these instructions vnto his Sonne for the better gouernment of his estate.



The instructions of the emperour Charles, when hee resigned
his estates, vnto his Sonne Philip.
I Haue resolued (most deare son) to come now to the point of resigning into your hands
the full administration and absolute gouernment of al my estates and realms, as I haue often
told you; wherefore my pleasure is, that against the morning you giue order for the
performance of this act with all due ceremonies: you shall also giue order with speed, by
sending messengers into euery part, that both gouernors, inferior magistrates and people,
acknowledge you (as in duty they are bou^d) for their superior, yeelding you due obedie^ce,
and that al persons (except such as are subiect to the empire) take the oth of allegeance. The
like oth I wil haue the generals of armies and al the commanders of martial forces take, that
they may from henceforth in the point of loyalty depend vpon your selfe and no other. The
more rare this president is of princes which haue bin content to resigne their estates vnto
their successors, the greater are the signs not only of my loue to you, but of the assurance I
haue of your good inclination, and my great care to see your estate setled. I could defer this
act (as most princes doe) vntill my death; but hauing a desire rather to imitate the smaller
number of fathers in this point, I haue chosen willingly by this act in my life time, to make
my self a superior, rather than a co^panion to any. It is a weak trial of the valor and resolution
of a prince, to subdue kingdoms by force, in comparison of conquering himself, being thus
far co^tent not only to bridle al ambition and desire of rule, but to submit himselfe to a certain
kind of obedience. Against this course, sensuality doth striue with all her force, and in
exchange of al worldlie satisfactio^s which are enioyed by the prerogatiue of absolute authoritie,
setteth before our eies the rigor of the laws, to which as to a common bounder,
princes (setting their authoritie aside) must leuell all their actions, as well as priuat men.
To blind our vnderstanding farther with like vailes, the same sensuall consideration stirreth
vp by way of admonition a prouident forecast of diuers inconueniences whereinto
many fall, that haue made themselues subiect to the will of other men, by the diuersitie of
their conceits and censures, the which by the corruption of the care of priuat interest are
apt to swarue from the right rule of integritie. It may be that some wil be terrified with
this common supposition; that princes which are once possessed of authoritie may resigne
it at their owne pleasures, but they must resume it at the pleasures of other men.
Yet fatherly affection hath preuailed in me more than all these zealous considerations,
and duetie also in some part, for finding my selfe now aged (which may bee accompted
greater in regard of my sickely estate) my satietie of glory in this world, and wearinesse
of toile; finding moreouer that by my continuall trauell vnto this day, I could not satisfie
in any part the duetie which belongeth vnto the profession of a Christian; I find
my selfe inflamed with a most earnest desire to free my selfe from so manie troublesome
incombrances, and then retire my selfe to a meere religious kind of life, and more fit for a
Christian. On the other side the consideration of your age, being now ripe and fit for gouernment,
together with the expectation which you haue gotten in the world by managing
the greatest affaires of Spaine with great judgement, do moue me the rather to proceed
in my resolution. Being moued by all these good considerations, I haue thought it
fit to lay this weighty burthen vpon your shoulders, and to ease mine owne, which time
and trauell haue now weakened and disabled. I do confidently hope that the subiects of al
my prouinces shal haue cause to thanke God first, and then me, for this resolution, in respect
of the gratious vsage they shall receiue at your hands, succeeding in my place: neither
is it hurtfull vnto your selfe, that by his occasion during my life, you shall settle your
selfe more firmely in my dominions.
It remaineth then (my most deere Sonne) that with the same tender and fatherly
affection which hath moued me to this, I put you in minde also, that aboue all
things you set before your eyes, the feare of God, which ought to be the ground of
ciuill gouernment, and so to frame (as much as in you lies) the hearts of your subiects, keeping
carefully in mind that which wee cannot prouide (by reason of this short and transitory
life) by any other means, more worthily and more honorably, the^ by leauing vnto the world

when we are gone a good report of our commendable actions. Persuade not your selfe
(deare sonne) that because the prerogatiue of commanding many estates giues great satisfaction
and libertie in this world, which euer flattereth the sense of man, that it is not in
like manner accompained with many crosses, and often intermingled with a kind of subiection,
either by the restlesse iealousie with which the mindes of Princes that demeane
themselues disorderly are tormented, or in respect of the co^tinual care which they take for
the preseruation of their estates. Deceiue not your selfe in beleeuing that the regiment
hath any kind of proportion with those mightie burthens which are imposed on you by
my giuing place; for whereas Spain is a realme of ancient succession, and therefore firme
and secure, the estates of Flaunders, Italie, and Germanie, are more strange vnto you,
besides they are more variable and troublesome in their owne disposition, and their
opportunity of crauing aide from Princes which are mighty and busie which confine vpon
their countries is more dangerous. Ad hereunto that many kingdoms bring many cares,
for euerie smal addition (where the burthen was sufficient before) putteth al things out of
order, euen as a stomacke which hath once receiued what sufficeth nature, euery superfluous
bit causeth an indigestio^ and surfet of that which shold serue for sustenance. He makes
a great tryal of himselfe that gouerns one state well, but to gouern more than one well, is
almost aboue the force of man. No man can at one time attend diuers actions, for euerie
ship must haue her proper pilot, euery armie his general, and much more doth euery estate
craue a particular gouernor. But the greedines of ma^ hath so much exceeded these prefixed
bou^ds, and forced reason with such viole^t assaults, as the greater princes are the more desirous
they are to get. It is now held basenes, not onely to depart from any thing alreadie
gotten, being more than enough, but not to seek by al means to increase it. But seeing reason
is so far ouermastred herein by sensualitie, and that our age is wholy disposed to ambitious
designs, I wil forbeare to spend any more idle words, in persuading you to that, the
contrarie wherof is generally obserued. I wil rather yeeld this libertie to the worlds abuse;
with this excuse notwithstanding, that either all, or the greater part (and especially those
that are accompated generous) do the like, and would euer do, if opportunity and meanes
were answerable to their desires. But yet I require you with all loue, that you endeuour
by all meanes to correct this common error, and aspiring humor in your selfe, ayming at
a greater good, which is, to gouern wel those subiects that are vnder your command: the
which is honorable to the world, and acceptable in the sight of God. To this end I must let
you vnderstand that the liues of princes stand like glasses before their subiects eyes, who
looking daily into the same, as the liuelie mirrors whereunto they should endeuor to conforme
their courses with al obedience and loyalty, they discern more easily the good and bad
that is therein exemplified: wherefore how circumspect and powerfull soeuer princes be,
they must not thinke that their actions can bee concealed from the world; for although
during their own liues they may somtimes seale vp their subiects mouthes, stay their tongs
and restrain their pens, yet soon after they wil breake out with greater violence, and inueigh
more bitterly against their honors. Wherfore let your carriage be such towards your subiects,
that in respect of the great care they find you haue of the^, they may the better like of
your directions, repose themselues vpon your wisdom, and liue securely and contentedly vnder
the protection of your valor, for that the mutuall affection and loue betwixt the prince
and his subiects, doth vndoubtedly spring from this root. Remember alwaies, that it is fit
that he which gouerneth a state, shold be as vigilant and carefull of the quiet and safety therof,
as a shepheard is of his flock, or housholder of his familie. To giue a certaine rule concerning
this point, I would haue you to vnderstand that all the cares which princes take of
their estates are referred to the consideration of one of these two times, that is, either of
peace or war, betwixt which two al our actions are spent, and therfore it is wisely said, that
the maiestly of a prince hath as great need to be assisted with a councel of great policie and
wise fore-cast in time of peace, as of a great and strong armie in time of war. Wherefore a
princes whole care and course ought to be in the first time to haue a respect to his subiects
quiet and content, and in the later to their securitie, from whence groweth satisfaction on
both sides. And men without all question are more securely gouerned with good intreaty
vnder a voluntarie subiection, than by inforced seruitude, and more firmly kept in obedience

by loue than by violence. A Prince shold euer prefer the leauing of his dominions to
his successors by meanes of the people loue, lesse absolute and more durable, than by their
feare lesse durable, yet more absolute: It is feare that holds the subiects loues, and bridleth
their insolent desires, but no longer than some fresh occasio^ is offered to shake this seruile
yoake from their necks, and to settle their loues and loyalties vpon some other mightie
potentate, who shall bee both willing and able to protect them from all wrongs,
which being once done, they will neuer be willingly drawne to their first obedience. It
doth also often happen that the secret hatred which proceedeth from feare, inforceth
them without any respect to make attempts for their deliuerie. Some hold that the best
way for a prince to keepe his people quiet, is to keepe them poore: but in my opinion
they stray much from the path of policie: The reason is, for that euerie hope or
likelyhood of bettering their estates vnder other rulers, mooueth them to lay newe
plots, and to desire innouations. I doe as little allow of their policie, who to diuert
their subiects from practising any alterations hold them in continuall action, especially
if their imployments be barbarous and base; for besides that it breakes their
hearts, experience doth teach that for desire of ease they will affect alterations, for as
the end of feare deserues reproofe, so the meanes that leade thereunto are also reprooueable.
How much the way of winning the peoples loue ought to be preferred
before the course of keeping them in awe, may easily appeare by a due consideration
of the causes from whence these affections haue their beginning: The causes of the
peoples loue are justice, gracious vsage, and fauours, all which deserue praise: The causes
of their feare are grieuances, ill vsage and oppression, which merit blame. Looke what
the cause is, such is commonly the effect, whereby it followes necessarily, that as out of
loue is drawne a regiment more firme and stable, though more moderate, so out of
feare proceeds a kind of power more absolute in shew, but yet lesse durable: the like proportion
holdes in the peoples hearts, for where they loue there is all satisfaction, mirth,
sweet conuersation and dutifull respect, but where they feare, there is suspition, strangenes,
discontent, quarrels, melancholie. Out of the impressions which feare breeds wee
can expect no better fruits than hatred, but from that deuotion which loue kindleth assured
confidence, whereupon we ground the common prouerbe, Loue is among kinsfolkes,
and feare among enemies. The parts which beside respect of Religion, are required
in a Prince for the better gouernment of his estates, and setling in his subiects hearts a loue,
and reuerent respect both of his person and state, are chiefly three, Faith, Iustice and Continencie:
Faith makes him intire in all his proceedings, and a man of his word, for without it
no man would giue credit either to his practises or promises: Continencie makes him to
be reuerenced with respect, and imitated with commendation; it giueth him an excellent
aduantage in a large field; correcting seuerely the faults of subiects that offend in that degree,
the which he could not doe without blushing if himselfe were culpable: Iustice teacheth
a prince how to reward the good and to punish the bad, to giue euerie man his due,
to restraine men by correction that are apt to erre, and to incourage others by rewards that
are desirous to deserue wel: besides it makes the princes bloud, his honor, and his estate
secure, without which vertue no force is able to keep the subiects faithfully affected to
their Soueraigne, for it is the propertie of all people when as they neither find reward of
good deserts, nor punishment of offences, to grow first into distrust, and then into despaire,
which passions corrupt their mindes, hauing once gotten the masterie. Wherefore let
the due consideration of what is iust and honest bee alwaies preferred in all your princely
purposes, that being once setled in the subiects hearts, that iustice is duely administred,
they will euer remaine satisfied with your direction, especially if besides
this fauour, they liue in aboundance, hauing free traffike to all parts, and quietnesse
of minde, for men toile and trauell during the course of their liues, not only
for their Princes and superiors, but for themselues and families. Doubtlesse, to maintain the
people in aboundance of al things necessarie for the preseruation of their liues, is not only
commendable in a prince, but doth worke great effectes in winning the hearts of men,
the which may bee easily prouided for, by a carefull fore-sight of the times of dearth,
making diligent prouision for necessaries in due time, so as the benefitte may wholie

redound to the peoples ease, and not to the princes gaine, by inhaunsing of prices
and preferring of priuate benefit before publike content. A prince may alwaies hold
himselfe rich when as his subjects that liue vnder him, are rich; for vpon any extremitie he
shall bee frankely releeued by their beneolence: good vsage setleth their loues, and
bindeth their deuotions. Experience teacheth, that fauours of this kind are neuer forgotten,
that a small consideration in time of need winnes more vnfained loue than greater
benefits when there is plentie: And that those fauours haue alwaies had deepest impressions
in mens gratefull thought, which concerne maintenance and the preseruation of
life in time of necessitie. It is sufficient for a prince in this cause of prouision, to take order
that hee lose not by the bargaine, or if hee desire to gaine something for the releefe of other
charges, let it bee no more than an honest merchant with a good conscience may
gaine, for to these bounds may the politike prouision of princes ayme, but no farther,
either in respect of honour or authoritie. If a Prince will bee beloued of his people,
hee must giue them cause to thinke that hee loueth them; assuring himselfe that their
tha^kfulnes must grow from his desert, their loue from his prouidence, and their content fro^
the peace and securitie which they enioy vnder him; and that according to the fruits of fauour
which the people reape by the Princes policie, they frame themselues to liue contentedly,
vnder the gracious shadow and protection of his princely wings, relying vpon
his wisdome and carefull gouern ment. Otherwise there is no doubt but, subiection
being in it selfe both burthensome and odious, they would soone take some new course
to settle their quiet and securitie by some other means, freeing themselues from all cause
of feare, which (as I haue said before) is lesse durable, and lesse secure, and therefore lesse
pleasing to the state of a Christian Gouernour. Let no Prince imagin that with solemne
shewes and publike sights alone subiects are delighted and pleased in their own conceits,
for those things are not acceptable, but whe^ as their minds are satisfied in matters which
do import them more. Vpon this ground and to the same end I must also aduise you in any
case to vse that moderation which is fit in charging the people with tributes or any other
kind of impositions, for albeit that States cannot bee ruled without some kind of
releefe, in respect of the manie occasions and excessiue charges wherewith Princes are
burthened in times of peace, but much more in time of war; yet vnto euerie thing there
belongs a meane, which in all occurrents is the perfect rule of humane actions, especially
those which any way grieue the subiects hearts, considering that euerie princes power is
grounded vpon their conformitie to his directions and vniforme assent to serue and honor
him: wherfore this meane must be sought out with all care, and being found it must be put
in practise with great temperance; and worthily preferred before all other courses, seeme
they neuer so commodious and profitable. If the continuall toile of warre hath inforced
mee at anie time to holde a heauie hand ouer my subiects in this kinde, I protest
this course was alwaies against mine owne liking. Touching this point of obseruing a
conuenient meane in all impositions and taxes, you must consider that the reuenues
of a prince, whether they be publike or priuate, are raised two waies, the first by augmentation
of the old, the other by addition of new, for vnto these two heads all the inuentions
to get money which are put in practise by the princes of our age may bee reduced.
In like maner the waies by which mony may be drawn from the subiect and others, are voluntarie
or forced. The voluntarie may be contained in the sale of customs, offices, and other
like alienations of commodities and rents. That which is forced may in like maner
be exemplified in such taxes and ordinarie tributes, as are imposed vpon the people with
out recompence: the first hath in it a kind of sweetnesse, for that it is seldome vrged by necessitie:
wherfore it is requisit to limit the other kind by this, and when necessitie requires
rather to sel offices and rents, than to inuent any new grieua^ces to the people. I haue many
times resolued with my self to deale after this maner, but haue euer bin diuerted by occurrents
from bringing into my state that custom of selling of offices, and making magistrates
for life, which is vsed in the court of Rome, for it is a matter of great import, and a means to
bring a sudden gain into the princes purse, for the next vacatio^, either by remoue, imploiment,
or death, yeeldeth as much or very little lesse than the ordinarie rent, which by

their accompt is to bee answered. No doubt this was a course of great consideration,
and of especiall commoditie to the superiour, as may bee gathered by this reason
of experience: That the Popes in how great pouertie soeuer they finde the
Church at their first entrie to the Sea, yet they neuer want meanes to procure money
after the first beginning of their gouernment.
It is true that in the Court of Rome, as it should seeme, the sale of Offices, which
haue annexed vnto them ordinarie administration of justice, brings not so great danger
vnto the State, as it would doe in other Realmes, for that auarice is not the chiefe
obiect in that place, of mens intents, but rather hope to raise themselues to greater
honour from this ground, and accesse at all times vnto the Pope, vpon this occasion,
which carrieth with it many other especiall commodities. But the Princes of the
world may in like manner deuise to set ambition in the eye of Officers, as the obiect
and end of their offer to buie Offices, by rewarding such as carrie themselues
well with great honours, and disgracing those that shall deale otherwise. By this
meanes you may change the object of your Officers, from couetousnesse to a desire
of rule, and to supply the humours of authoritie, which is alwaies accessarie to Ambition.
The second meanes to seeke reliefe from the subiect (which I tearmed forced) is
heauie and odious, yet by the good discretion of Ministers which deale in those affaires,
and by the presidents of other countries lying neere about, where they are oppressed
by their Gouernours, this griefe may bee much qualified. The Prince in this
case may doe much good vnto himselfe, by giuing easie accesse vnto his person when
occasion doth serue; for hee must take a fit time to acquaint them with his occasions,
hee must seeke in some fort to free himselfe of their hard conceite, and ease
the other part by fauours of an other kinde: hee must justifie his actions in the iudgement
of the world, eyther by prouing the cause of this grieuance to bee verie vrgent,
or colouring the same so cunningly as it may at the least appeare so, or endeuouring
to send some away satisfied, if it bee possible. This not voluntarie, or forced
way, is subdiuided into two other parts, into perpetuall burthens, as customes, or
temporarie: as subsidies: and this later at the time of the first imposing, makes
people to grieue for a while in respect of the paine which pincheth them, but this
greefe cannot long endure, for that one instant, and one paiment freeth them, especially
if the prince make protestation of his vnwillingnesse, and with all make apparent
to the peoples meane capacitie, the necessarie cause that vrgeth him thereunto.
The other kind is farre more grieuous and offensiue, albeit in time the people grow
better acquainted with that course, and beare it as well as they can, for that there is no
remedie. Sodaine impositions, although they seeme grieuous at the first, yet by a prince
whose lineall succession is not well setled, ought to bee preferred, as potions which are
more sharp and yet more quicke in operation, are before those that are more gentle, yet
long and tedious in curing the sicke; and the rather in this case, for that Princes cosers
are suddenly replenished. Aboue all things you must haue a great care, that during the
leuie of this aid, your Officers adde nothing to the burthen, either by extremitie, discurtesie,
or demaund of fees, for we find daily that by such extraordinarie extortions, men
are more incensed in respect of the wrong and violence, then with the principall, which
is disbursed for the satisfaction of their Soueraigne: The subiect is much impouerished
by this hard course, and yet the Prince reapes no benefit thereby; nay when hee shall
haue need to craue a new supply and aide from them, hee findes them more feeble and
lesse able to relieue his wants. Rents increase by raising new impositions vpon occasion;
by bettering the trade, by reducing forfeitures to the princes pleasure, by limiting
all necessarie charges, and cutting off such as are superfluous. The field of raising new
rents is exceeding large, yet the prince is bound to walke in it with all possible respect, so
farre as it concernes the peoples grieuance: hee must especially abstaine from imposing of
heauie customs vpon such things as his subiects are inforced to send abroad, as Sicile doth
graine, and the Realme of Naples wine and Silke. The like consideration is to bee had
of things brought in from foreine parts for the supply of other wants at home: for

vpon these two reasons experience and time hath grounded the ordinarie traffique that
holdeth betwixt countries for their naturall necessities. Wherefore in these causes princes
ought to haue a care that their reuenues may bee aunswered in a meane, rather than
by excesse; for the more moderate customes are, the greater store of needfull things are
brought home vnto our doores, in respect of the great gaine which marchants make by
selling at the second hand: and for the like respect the greater store of superfluous things
are transported by the subiects into foraine parts. By this meanes the rent is raysed farre
aboue the measure which a great imposition would yeeld: The people want no foraine
commodities for their reliefe, and yet their purses are filled by the vent of superfluous
things at home; so as they may be the better able both to satisfie their princes custome,
and contribute also vpon such reafonable occasions as shall occurre in policie: vpon other
things which are rather brought in for wantonnesse and pleasure, than for necessarie
vse, a more weightie imposition may bee layed, for the estate (which may well forbeare
these loosse commodities) is not damnified thereby, if some, to satisfie their humors, will
needs buy, it skilleth not though they pay somewhat deerer for their fantasies. Besides,
some are discouraged sometimes with the great price, which otherwise would acquaint
themselues too much with the pleasures which make men effeminate. Princes that
seeke to increase their old rents, by raising of their woonted impositions, must be careful,
that they doe it rather with a limitation of the customers commoditie and gaine, that leuies
it, than with the peoples losse, that aunswers it: for a grieuance in this kind were in
effect as ill as any other imposition. There must be a care also taken, that a conuenient respite
may be allowed the subiect for the payment of his taske. As for example, if the
prince haue need of money in Summer, then to sesse the subiects the Winter before; for
they are apt to take the time of this delay for a kind fauour. This leuie of money must
be put into the hands of ordinarie officers, and not to appoint any new to disquiet them,
or to rifle their wealth, vnder colour of seruice to the State; for such parts are most hatefull
vnto them. But, as I sayed before, a prince ought first to consider, whether it be
possible by selling or ingaging some part of his reuenues, to supplie the vrgent occasions
of his estate, before hee seeke to helpe himselfe by the purse and sweat of his subjects:
for otherwise, as the wiser sort perceiue that, whatsoeuer they doe or say, they
shall bee still forced to contribute to their superiour; that on the one side their old burthens
are increased, and on the other, all meanes cut off, by which they might haue vent
for their commodities; all traffique either ouerthrowen, or much decayed, by the which
they were woont to releeue their wants with foraine commodities, it is not possible but
they will eagrely desire an alteration, and attempt it by all meanes possible. Touching
this point of molesting the subiects with impositions as little as may be, it importeth
much, that they be agreeable to the nature of the countrey where they liue, that the
people may beare the burthen more easily; for from those places which yeeld nothing
but men, princes may not demaund money. England yeeldeth an example of this kind;
for on that side which lyeth next to Scotland, they sesse not their borderers. You your
selfe may draw some money out of Spaine, Germanie, and Flanders, when occasion
doth serue, but out of Italie both men and treasure. Moreouer, when you impose any
burthen, it is not amisse to set the rate in the beginning high, that the people may hold it
as a fauour, when as, at their request, it is brought to some reasonable tearmes. They
may bee ea^ed also, by admitting their excuses which they make in respect of time, and
giuing eare with patience to that which they are able to alledge for some tolleration;
you must alwayes haue a care to leaue them satisfied in some sort, at the least to comfort
them with kind words, and make them capable of the just cause that moued you. You
must lay before them the times, the reasons, and the occasions which inforce this course,
prouiding alwayes, that all gracious dealing may be thought to proceed from your selfe;
and whatsoeuer is offensiue, sharpe or odious, referre it to your officers. You must moreouer
haue an especiall care, that all profits so deerely purchased with the peoples grones,
be brought to your owne hands, and not imployed or distributed to the priuat vse of persons
that are put in trust to gather it vnder you. It importeth also your estate very much
(deere sonne) to keepe credit with the marchant, which will alwayes succeed happily, so

long as you assigne vnto them conuenient commodities, in consideration of their bonds,
and maintaine them euer in securitie, especially with the state of Germanie you must take
this course, for the holding them thus ingaged in your estates and realmes, by reason of
their interest and bonds, without erecting of any forts, which they detest much. You
may no lesse assure your selfe of that Estate which is of great importance in Italie, than
the French king held the Florentines tied vnto him by the trade of Lions, as wee haue
found by plaine experience. Now seeing it is not possible that a prince of many estates
and countries should alone be able to gouerne them all, nor any one of them (all things
considered) it is requisite that this defect be supplied by the meanes of ministers and deputies,
that may helpe to support so great a burthen: Whereupon it followes of necessitie,
that to chuse such as be worthie and sufficient in all respects, is a matter which doth much
import the State; wherefore I will speake vnto at large of this matter, to the end you
should not want a rule to know them, and imploy them in the seruice of the State. I
would haue you consider, that the properties belonging to worthie ministers are these:
First and principally, wisedome and vnderstanding how to manage their affaires that are
committed to their charge; secondly, loue to their superiour; and lastly, vertue in themselues:
to the end that by wisedome they may haue knowledge, and by vertue disposition
to execute the trust: for otherwise, either through ignorance they shall not know, or
by frowardnesse refuse, or through malice grudge, to discharge their dueties. These are
the qualities without the which the prince cannot relye vpon their worth, nor the people
be pleased with their actions. But as there is great difficultie both in finding out and
obseruing such, so experience doth teach, that all princes which haue been serued by men
of such sufficiencie in these degrees, haue ruled happily, with great contentment to their
subiects, and eternall glory to themselues, notwithstanding that they haue themselues bin
somewhat dissolute: for what made the name of the Emperor Iustinian immortal, besides
his profound knowledge, but the great worth of his counselors and ministers, both in peace
and war; for by their helpe in both seasons he effected great matters. Doubtlesse it is an
argument of great wisedome in a prince, when as nature hath not enabled him in the first
kind of perfection, which is, out of his owne sufficiencie to rule the State, yet at the least
to marshall himselfe in the second ranke, which is, of such as imploy men in their seruice
that are capable; for thus they draw the quintessence of many pregnant wits to their own
vse, and grow to vnderstand more than a number that know by themselues: as foure eyes
must needs see more than two, by the course of nature. But wee may hold that prince vnfortunat,
which resteth in a third proportion, being neither able of himselfe, nor willing
to giue eare to others that are more sufficient. A prince can neuer want meanes to replenish
his owne Court with men fit for his seruice, if he will be carefull to seeke them out
where they are, esteeme them, and acknowledge their deserts, by good effects. Let him
rather make the first motion, and not depriue himselfe by daintinesse of a worthie seruant:
for that prince is rather proud than politicke, who persuadeth himselfe, for that his
treasures are greater than other mens, therefore euerie man should creepe before they
call, especially the wise and vertuous, who many times carrie minds as hautie as
princes, and in that respect desire not to submit their liberties to the will of any
man, preferring the freedome of a meane fortune, before the golden fetters of a prince
that either knowes them not, or regards them not. The reason is, for that wisedome
and vertue are in themselues a king of superioritie, or rather the verie true superioritie it
selfe, for that we see that Empires, treasure, fortunes, fauours, and natures ornaments, are
subiect to corruption and change, by alteration of time, or accidents, as it pleaseth God
to dispose: But the riches of the mind, such as wisedome and vertue are, can neuer be diuided
from the partie that possesseth them. The minds of honest men are much estranged,
when they find how little their superiors esteeme them, preferring a wicked and lewd
person before a loyall heart, a flatterer before a faithfull minister, a man puffed vp with
vndeserued fauours, before him that seeketh to purchase grace by desert, an idle drone
before a painefull officer. Those princes erre exceedingly, which want judgement to
conceiue, that vertue cannot bee valued, that it deserueth more than any one can
giue: that all fauours which a prince bestoweth vpon worthie seruants, are both honourable

and profitable, and that a prince cannot imploy his treasure with greater gaine by
interest in any trade, than by rewarding such as are both vertuous and politike. Nothing
can bee made more plaine, nothing can be found more necessarie, considering
how impossible it is, that any prince should either winne great honour, or atchieue
great matters, without able ministers. Beware you erre not in this point, but seeke
for worthie seruants, and retaine them in your seruice with all honour and preferment,
setting this downe for a Maxime, That in a matter of importance a resolute and wise
Counsellor shall stand you more in stead with his sound aduice and judgement, than
your legions of souldiers with their armes, or whole mountaines of treasure in your
cofers.
Doe not beleeue, for that a prince is wise and vigilant himselfe, he therefore needs
not any able ministers; nay, you may obserue, that the greatest princes of the world haue
alwayes sought to draw vnto them the greatest number of rare men. Who was euer
attended on by a greater number of this qualitie, than Caesar? whom I hold to haue
beene the greatest prince that to this day, both in peace and warre, hath either ruled
ouer prouinces, or commaunded armies. It seemeth rather, that these proportions
and qualities are linked together with an indissoluble knot, that when the
prince is valiant and wise, so are his officer, when the prince is faint-hearted, so are
his ministers.
If we allow a grounded excellencie in the prince, it is to be presumed, that the same
can neuer brooke an insufficiencie, in those that attend on him, whereas the weakenesse
of the princes judgement cannot be capable of his seruants excellencie. From hence
our common prouerbe taketh his first originall; Like will to like: Equals are most apt
to consent in loue; and hee that will ghesse probably of the disposition of a stranger,
whom hee knoweth not, must consider with whom hee keepeth companie. Consider
of this poynt of imployment and election with an especiall care (my most deere
sonne) and herein it shall be sufficient for you to imitate and follow me, your father, alone,
who during the course of my life haue indeuoured to haue about me men of greatest
esteeme, both for counsell and execution. To the care which is to bee had in respect
of them, for their vertue, wisedome, integritie, and loue, I would haue you also
for your owne part bee carefull to imploy such persons in the affaires of Italie, as are
best acquainted with their humors, and are most sutable to the conditions of that
State; prouiding that they may bee throughly instructed in those points, without respect
of any priuate interest, or speciall loue or bond to any. The like course I would
haue you take in Spaine, and your other Estates, especially in chusing the leaders of
your armies; for vndoubtedly the fitnesse of your ministers for those places which they
hold, is a matter of verie great importance in all actions of gouernement. We read
of Hanibal, That he was most fortunate at land, yet verie vnhappie in all actions belonging
to the sea. And how many doe wee find in generall experience, which are
exceeding fit for the nature of one people, and vnfit for another. Sometimes wee meet
with persons absolutely wise, and that carrie themselues with great commendations in
all places, and at all times, and vpon all occasions that are incident to their charge; but
wee find them rare: of others that are onely fit for speciall affaires there is no great plentie
in the world, and therefore they must bee imployed in that facultie wherein they
are held most sufficient to serue: for it is a matter of no small importance, to make
choyce of such a minister to any end, as is found most excellent in his owne profession.
Make your speciall choyce out of diuers ages, and diuersitie of gifts, for so shall
you bee sure to light on those that are most fit. Bee carefull that vnder your most
trustie and most sufficient Counsellors, some may bee trayned and instructed for the
seruice, when their date is at an end, least otherwise the fortune of your great gouernment
seeme to be bounded within the terme of their continuance; for priuat persons haue
their periods, but policies in States well gouerned should be perpetuall. Let the Romans
serue for an example in this case, who to preuent the danger that might grow by committing
the burthen of direction to one onely man, assigned by way of succession (in case

he should perish that had the chiefe commaund) sundrie gouernors vnto euerie armie. In
any case beware you do not lay your most important causes in a time of danger, vpon the
shoulders of such persons as were neuer made acquainted with affaires of equall weight:
When any such occasion doth happen, your safest course is, alwaies to preferre the judgement
of your eldest counsellors, who speake out of experience.
Aime not at honor in the choice of your couusellors; respect those of a middle age,
where gifts are answerable: for as the yonger sort is commonly euer credulous and bold,
so others that are neuer called vntil their later daies, are suspitious, incredulous, irresolute,
and commonly leaue the world before they can be made fit for their calling: but they that
haue made proofe of their sufficiencie for the space of many yeres, and vpon verie dangerous
occasions, waxing white headed with the toile of seruice, and the cares of gouernement,
ought euer to be reuerenced and respected, as a necessary wrest to turne the jarring
strings of disagreeing humors at a councell boord, to perfect harmonie. I would also haue
you in this point of imitating the militarie discipline of Rome, to make a medley of your
councell, betwixt wise old men, and yong men of great hope: for such a speare, like vnto
that of the Pithagorians, consisting of so many sundrie parts, as treble, meane, and base, will
yeeld that sweet consent which is to be wished in all policie. By this meane princes shall
not need to make their musicke of one string, they need not build vpon one hope, nor addict
themselues to one certaine qualitie: for many times among those that are young of
yeares, we find persons old of vnderstanding, and among aged men, counsellors that haue
greene heads, and flourish both in wit and fortitude. In this case, such young men are accounted
old, and such old esteemed yong: The middle sort are to be marshalled on either
side, as their conditions and qualities incline to one or other, more or lesse; for ministers
ought not to be respected for their yeares onely, but for their judgements, manners, and
conditions in the execution of their charges. And yet, besides these ordinarie obiects, according
to the age and qualitie of euerie one, seeke also to haue knowledge of their natures
and priuat affections: for it is not sufficient for a generall that conducteth an armie
through any countrey, to haue a generall Idea of the countrey in his mind: but it is requsit
he should haue a particular knowledge of the countrey it selfe, whether it abound
with water and other necessarie prouisions, or be in want, which first of all causeth a dearth,
and then ruine. A prince must euer presuppose, that although the quicke conceit of some
ripe heads, makes them soone to take instruction of a new charge, recommended by superiors,
and to grow fit for the managing thereof, the greater part notwithstanding is for
a time vncapable, and during that time may commit disorders, and offend the subiects in
their customes, priuiledges, and rights: which, seeme they neuer so sleight, either in respect
of themselues, or of any other accidents of lesse account, yet must they needs be valued
according to the rate which they had in generall opinion, and the great disturbance
which is bred by want of obseruation; for small sparkles may kindle a great fire, if they be
not quencht in due time, with moderation.
Now that you may the better know who are the wise and worthie ministers, that deserue
imploiment in your estate, you must vnderstand, that true wisedome may be gotten
by foure meanes especially: The first is, by experience of occurrents in the world; wherefore
it is said, That they which practise much, must needs learne much: And this kind of
wisedome our auncestors exemplified in their owne kings, the Greekes especially in Agamemnon
and Menalaus: who by varietie of matters put into their hands, and by occasion of
that which by their accidents and consultations they generally vnderstand, may easily
grow wise, and learne (as the pronerbe faith) at the charges of other men. The second
meane is, by the instruction of histories; for thus they come to knowledge both of actions
and reasons, in times past; they marke their applications and effects, and thereby setting
downe rules vnto themselues, for the direction of their owne affairs, not onely purchase
honor and reputation by their knowledge, but wax great by the toile of other men.
Of this kind we may find paternes both in Solon and Socrates. The third course is, by trauelling
into diuers countries, and by obseruing the diuersitie of lawes and policies: for this
particular collection of foraine wisdome, may be sensibly applied to particular occasions
of their owne. And this kind of wisedom is ascribed vnto Vlisses by Antiquitie. The fourth

meanes to attaine vnto it, is, by long life: for although a man should learne but one good
lesson euerie yere, yet time, at length, would make him generally wise. Nestor may stand
in this degree for a faire president, of whom it is plainly said, that he vnderstood very much
for that he had liued very long. And I cannot see how a young man may be capable of any
of the other three first kinds of wisedome, both for that he cannot in a short time gaine
so great experience as is necessarie to this effect; and moreouer, youth wanteth that well
seasoned consideration that is requisit: neither are a few yeares sufficient for men to trauell,
and to obserue that which breedeth judgement. Lastly in respect of the defect and
want of time, he cannot draw a true picture of that apprehension which old age hath gathered.
I denie not, but by the meanes of some prudent ministers and counsellors, a young
prince may attaine to all foure kinds at once, if he retaine about him a conuenient number
of men, wise in their degrees, and not onely vse their counsell in his great affaires, but
with all regard follow it.
Wherefore there ought to be great regard had in the choice of these men, especially
to chuse wise men, which by way of instruction and historie, can conceiue, especially with
any small experience of the affiars of the world, and the benefit of their many yeres, which
is the most secure, and least deceitfull mixture, of these kinds of wisedome, that can be limited;
sauing that those persons which are best furnished with all these kinds, ought to be
preferred before all others. The wisedome of ministers ought to be referred to the same
two times we haue formerly spoken of, of peace and warre, whereunto all the considerations,
forecast, and prouisions of a prince, ought to be directed.
The goodnesse of ministers and officers, which is the second part that is required in
them, may be judged of by the good name which they do carrie, and by their good behauiours.
A man is said to do well foure waies, by chance, by cunning, by the beginning of
the habit it selfe, and after that by vse and practise, if it be fully perfected. Good workes
done by chance, or to a cunning end are distinguished from those that are done at the first
beginning of the habit, for that they neuer spring from any vertuous intention, as the other
do, though both may be indifferently accompanied with good effects. And for that
the secrets of the mind are hard to be discouered by the judgement of man, for that God
alone doth see the inward part of our hearts: wherefore men do greatly erre in making vse
of them, being impossible to attaine to a perfect knowledge of those persons, but by a continuall
obseruation of their actions with speciall care. In the first kind, which is of things
done well by chance, it is not possible there should be any good intentio^, for that the partie
neuer thinks of that he hath in hand. Much lesse in the second, where all is directed to a
cunning end, for that malice bears the sway. The third and fourth degrees, where men either
begin a vertuous habit, or haue attained it, the intent is alwaies good; yet the effects
and operations of the third doe not alwayes fall out so happily as of the fourth: for the
third proceeds sometimes from a sence not sully setled, not throughly corrected by the
restraint of reason, and raines of vertue, which onely ruleth their intents, and accompanieth
their actions, else there should be more difference betwixt the members of this diuision.
They that by cunning will seeme vertuous, in respect of endlesse feare least their ill meaning
should be brought to light, standing in the mid way to the marke which is common
to all men, like a bow drawne from the other extreame, they are heauie, melancholie, and
full of doubts, vpon euerie rumor of the vulgar sort, they cast false shadowes of suspition,
linger in mistrust, and affright themselues with fancies: their daies are troublesome, their
nights vnquiet, their cares infinit, and therefore our Sauiour might boldly say, Haeparietes
testes. But they that are sincerely and intirely vertuous, relying onely vpon their bountie
and worth, liue in continuall peace, with content of mind, and without all feare of oppression.
It resteth in the will and power of the prince himselfe, to incourage faithfull ministers
to shew their loue and duetie to their superiours, either by binding them by rewards
and fauours, or by contenting them with honour and authoritie, or by fitting them
with such commodities and pleasures as they most affect, or by setling their inclinations
to deserue well, in offering occasions whereby they make proofe of their fidelities:
For as it is most proper for mans nature, to proceed with courage where they
find their seruice thankefully rewarded vpon iust cause, so princes are apt to trust

vpon due triall of their ministers integritie. But the way to make them constant and sure
against all assaults, is, to tye them, not with any single bond, but with all these together,
if it bee possible. Let no prince thinke, that it is more safe, in consultation touching
his affaires of Estate, to trust domesticals, and such as are most deere vnto him
for other ordinarie causes, but lesse able to aduise, before others that bee farther off,
so as they bee more fit, onely of feare to seeme more vnthankefull to the first, and depriue
them of their due: for the end will be, that by this opinion hee shall preferre
men of no worth nor vnderstanding, before others that are more sufficient and necessarie;
which is the most absurd and sencelesse errour which hee can commit, touching this
point of election of ministers. I would haue all other considerations of riches, fauour,
and all other gifts of fortune, yeeld in your esteeme to vertue and worthinesse: for where
a prince finds qualities agreeable, it is his part to thinke how to inrich and aduance them;
for the meaner their estates are whom the prince shall raise to high degrees, the greater
shall their bond appeare, and the more sincere and firme their dueties and affections. In
rewarding your seruants good deserts, I would wish you to endeuour as much as you
may to gratifie them according to your desires, and to haue an eye to their owne ends:
for some seeke ease onely, and aboundance of commodities belonging to this life; others
hunt after honour and authoritie; and some couet satisfaction in other kinds, according
to their seuerall humors, or as such fauours either are indeed, or at the least are held by
them most sutable to their conditions and qualities: without respect of these affections
of men, a prince should often loose the thanks which bountie expects: for many desire rather
to fast than to be crammed against appetite. Among other rules it shal not be amisse
to note, that nothing bindeth loue more firmely, than when a prince bestowes a benefit
out of his owne free choice, without the instance or soliciting of any fauorer. The first we
must ascribe to the fauour of our Soueraigne alone; the second we may diuide betweene
the prince that giueth, and the friend that moueth it. Some haue commended and allowed
a distrust and disagrement betweene ministers of State, as if it were the best meanes
to acquaint a prince with the truth: but this course was neuer pleasing to my humor, neither
could I euer find how so bad a cause as discord, could euer produce any commendable
effects in a princes seruice. A kind of emulation is not amisse, so as it tend onely to
incite honourable minds to shew themselues more worthie of the princes fauour, to deserue
better in his seruice, and to be fit for a better place when time shall serue, as we read
of two of Caesars Corporals: but in no wise let it grow to malice or mislike; for the prince
may neuer shew more fauor to one than to another, as it falleth out sometimes, for that it
will not be possible alwayes to keepe the ballance euen, but the partie which receiueth
lesse is tormented with jealousie, fretted inwardly with spight, blinded with disdaine, and
all, in the end, turneth to the prejudice of the princes seruice, and the publicke action.
Among these, and out of these, ought the prince to make choice of a sufficient number
to serue him in the place of councell, and imploy the rest in other seruices belonging to
the State: for being guided by their aduice and counsell, he can hardly erre, but may rather
rest assured, that his worthie acts shal purchase honor and immortalitie to his name; wherefore
striue to abound in these rather than in any other treasure whatsoeuer: and feare not
least facilitie, in being led and directed by the aduice of worthie men, should rob you of
the honor which belongeth to your rare deserts; for that the chiefest commendation is
not ascribed vnto him that either giueth counsel, or hath charge to execute, but vnto the
prince, vpon whose resolution all depends, and who out of his judgement and discretion,
assignes to euery man that part for which he is most fit, in his owne opinion: for although
there may be aptnesse in the timber, yet to make choice of the best for building, and imploy
it to the best vse, shewes the skill of a good workeman. Besides, if the prince, out of
a jealous and suspitious humor, be mistrustfull in this point, how easie a matter is it at all
times, vpon diuers colours and pretences, to change, alter, or deferre his resolution, so as
whatsoeuer they inuent shalbe ascribed to his own perfectio^. A prince can neuer want occasions
to sound their opinions, and to make profit of their deep judgements, without imparting
the secret of his purposes to any one of them.
My meaning was to discourse with you about this point of chusing able ministers, at

large, for that, in my opinion, the weight of this subiect required no lesse: wherefore I repeat
it againe, That a prince can neuer become great, nor maintaine his greatnesse, without
the seruice and assistance of sufficient counsellors and officers: And therefore (my most
deere sonne) I require you carefully to open both your eyes and eares in this respect, and
to be diligent in searching out the qualities of men, for your better instruction. All offices,
administrations, and gouernments, which are giuen for a short limited time, are most
secure from those suspitions and jealousies which long continuance in office and authoritie
doth breed; being impossible, in so short a space, to make parties, or to procure followers.
And although this course be not alwayes free from those dangers and discommodities,
which are incident to gouernors, who either want experience, or acquaintance with state,
yet a moderate exchange ought, in my conceit, to be preferred before a perpetuitie: for
the people (be the gouernors neuer so religious and just) feele a kind of safetie at the least,
and as well in this point as in others, delight, in change; vsing the same as a counterpoise
to that irkesome loathsomenesse which groweth out of the continuall vse of any one
thing without alteration.
Let your maner in giuing audience to suitors be easie, liberal, and ordinarie, wherby not
only the subiect is pleased with the same, reputing this accesse as a restoritiue, for that it
giueth them opportunitie to ease their grieuances by their superiors fauor: but on the other
side it maketh the prince more wise, when euery day by this means he co^meth to the
knowledge of new accidents, new impressions, and new opinions. The prince also commeth
to vnderstand all the affairs, humors, passions, and plots of his own subiects, and their interest,
which is, as I said before, one kind of wisedome. To this end therefore, and for a thousand
other good effects, a prince ought to visit all his estates often, but in such sort, as many
progresses and extraordinarie charges which belongs vnto them, may not be burthensome
to his subiects, and a blemish to his owne authoritie: for things that are accounted
excellent, if they be made common, they loose a great part of their estimation in the eyes
of the world. If their progresses be seldom, in like maner, they giue some suspition of neglect,
and carelesse regard of the peoples good; they giue incouragement to deputies and
magistrats, to follow their own humors: and moreouer, they make their subiects despaire
of all hope of refuge to the princes presence, and of recourse to the same in time of necessitie:
for, as I said before, this is a meane to ease the subiect, and to curbe the magistrat. In
giuing audience, let your care be to send euerie man away with some satisfaction, or at the
least with good liking of your affabilitie. Heare such as offer you petitions with patience,
and answer them with compassion. Prouide alwaies, that the power of those that are most
mightie ouersway not the right of them that are miserable; haue no respect of persons, but
looke only to the justice of the cause. If any man appeare before you in a rightfull matter,
who is otherwise ill spoken of, regard not at that time his conuersation, but his complaint,
not what he is in life, but what he speaketh. Now to the end the parties which haue recourse
vnto you, appealing from your officers, or charging them with corruption, may
be more throughly conuinced by due proofe, and more easily induced of themselues to
confesse their faults, stretch out your hand as farre as in honor you may, in granting them
new Iudges, or Commissioners, who together with other ordinarie officers, will be more
carefull to carrie themselues vprightly in such offices as are assigned to their cares. The
way to plant a firme resolution in your officers, to deserue well, is, to reward them bountifully
that haue shewed their worth: for by this meanes, by the discharge of his duetie
in a meane place, he will endeuour to be held worthie of an office of more esteeme: notwithstanding
there is great reason why the prince, vpon these occasions, should haue
due respect to the credit and honour of his officers, and to vse such moderation in this
kind, as without wrong to the plaintifes, their reputations may be tendred. Examine
weightie causes with deliberation, but be carefull to giue quicke dispatch to matters of
small moment, especially if they concerne persons that are in miserie. Vse the like expedition
in matters concerning poore men, orphans, dowers, churches, education, maintenance,
charges left, tutorship, debts, and such like charitable causes, of which you are in
conscience bound to haue an especiall care, and to protect them in necessitie. That state
can neuer prosper where such causes are neglected, for that God which makes no difference

of persons, but assureth vs, That he will alwaies haue one eare open to the sortowful
complaints of simple soules which suffer wrong, will punish kings and magistrats for their
contempt euen of their Christian subiects. I would exemplifie this danger by some speciall
example of Gods justice in my time: but the verie ground of charitie set downe in a
word or two, may serue, and for the rest I leaue you to the tendernesse of your owne conscience,
and the counsel of your Confessor. The like course must be taken with tradesmen,
artisans, marchants, and husbandmen; for these kind of people can neuer follow the court,
nor without ruine to their estates, spend their goods, labour and time about suits: for it
were better to be speedily dispatcht with some losse, than to be tired with a world of Proctors,
Aduocates, and Notaries, in hope of getting all; considering how much the losse
of time, in regard of their trade, importeth them. Whatsoeuer may be ended at one hearing
by your selfe, dispatch: what you are not able of your selfe to rid, recommend it by
way of tables and memorials in other affaires. It shall not be amisse, for quicke dispatch of
causes, to assigne to euerie officer his particular taske; for otherwise it were not possible
for one man to run through all. In case of necessitie the prince may commit his office, for
his owne ease, to his faithfull ministers, in imitation of the knife which in old time was vsed
in the sacrifice at Delphos: for there was such a fashion deuised for the reliefe of poore
men, which could not long attend without great losse, as one man alone was able by the
helpe of its many parts, to serue all the priests. In criminiall causes, where there is question
of life and death, and other capitall punishment, proceed benignely with seueritie, and seuerely
with benignitie, according to the state and qualitie of the cause. Applie you sences
to the circumstances of the person, time, and place, the maner, and such like considerations.
Be content to imitate the rule of Lesbos in this case, which was apt to bend according
to the obliquitie of the subiect vnto which it was applied by art: So must princes follow
occasions, if they will rule with commendation. This is not to make difference of persons
touching the right it selfe, but to judge of right with wisedome and diseretion, according
to the sundrie indifferences that are aptly offered; proceeding notwithstanding,
where we find the like respects in all degrees concurre with like consideration: for the
people are not grieued with setting downe any resolution, how grieuous soeuer it may
seeme, but diuersitie of punishments for one and the selfesame fault, where no certaine
reason can be found of the diuersitie. If any conceiues this counsel to be in any sort repugnant
to this Maxime, That all lawes should be equall, inflexible, vnchangeable, etc. hee
must be answered, That it is onely vnderstood of the dead letter of the law which as it euer
speaketh and resolueth in one manner, so ought it in respect of it selfe, to be indifferently
interpreted and executed: But there is another reason of the liuing law, which is
the prince and his ministers, especially touching Commissions which bee receiued from
him: for they ought to execute the dead letter of the law with such respect and moderation
as hath beene mentioned before, so as they bend it with equitie, but breake it not
with wilfulnesse: Wherefore there is a certaine power giuen vnto the prince aboue the
lawes, and by the rule of conscience which is imprinted in the heart of him or them that
are set vnder him, the cause is qualified according to the reason of the circumstance; for
rigor is not alwayes right: neither may we say, that they rule best, which vrge the letter
without respect to the reasons; that rather follow the words of a text which is mute, than
the due consideration of a quicke interpretation, which is more sensible. Prouided alwayes
for the preseruation of Maiestie, and maintenance of lawes, That howsoeuer it
may please a prince out of his owne conceit to dispose, in ouerruling any matter, with
respect either of the person or time, augmenting or abating the reward of any good desert,
or punishing of any fault, the same be not drawne to consequence, or inforced as a
president to those that shall liue after him. They that gouerne know better how to moderate
these cases, than the lawyers that plead; and many things are incident to politicke
direction, which neuer come within the compasse of an ordinarie Aduocate. Contention
betwixt husbands and wiues, masters and seruants, parents and their children, neighbours,
kinsmen, friends, and such like, conjoyned in the strait linke of ordinarie officers,
ought rather to be ended by a friendlie arbitrator, with spare of charges which belong
to suits, than by a seuere judge, who decideth all things by extremitie. The best course for

a prince is to censure causes by due circumstances without partialitie; and that the difference
which shall appeare betwixt his moderation and the written law, may rather seeme
to arise out of a right in equitie, than an error in affection. I would haue all the courts of
justice offend rather in compassion than rigor or crueltie, vnlesse there be a notable example
to be made for the terror to the multitude. In all kinds of rewards be bountiful aboue
the common course, and alwaies chuse rather to leaue a light offendor (whose crimes are
not manifest) vnpunished, than to condemne an innocent, or to leaue a peece of seruice
vnrewarded, at the least with fauorable words, with praise and cause of hope, vntill time
and opportunitie may yeeld a more ample satisfaction. Be carefull that compassion and facilitie
in remitting punishments, be tempered with such a reasonable meane, as it neither
incourage men to offend, nor giue occasion of many errors which grow by too much lenitie.
Let it suffice, that your subiects liue vnder you with industrie, and as becommeth men,
without giuing scandall or ill example to the world Proceed not to that kind of curiositie
which makes many rules to inquire and search what men doe in the most priuat and secret
places of their houses: this humor is many waies offensiue, for both a breedeth trouble to
the prince, and oftentimes great harme to the party, without desert. Though some be not
absolutely chast, yet so they be found wary in auoiding all cause of scandall and manifest offence,
the prince hath reason to referre the judgement of the secrets of mens hearts vnto
God, and the correction of secret sins to his diuine Maiestie: for where our eyes can no
way pierce, there is no reason that our hands should execute. Keepe one eare alwayes open
for the aduerse partie beware of setling your judgement, especially in causes of justice
vpon the first impression; for time traueleth for truth, and oftentimes graue deliberation
easeth her of her burthen. In those occasions a moderation shold be had in such regard, as
neither the subiect be induced by too great facility to attempt any practise of vnlawful action
for the furtherance of his intent, nor discouraged by too great rigour for expecting
reason at your hands; for both extremities are dangerous. Whilest that you are in choler,
or haue made your selfe a prey to any other passion, or respect of priuat interest, be verie
carefull neuer to giue sentence, or at the least not to put the same in present executio^, least
afterwards appeales be made vnto your selfe from such vniust sentences and executions,
by the parties that are wronged, when you are come vnto your selfe. You may read in histories,
of a poore woman that appealed from king Philip, being transported with passion,
to the same king Philip, qualified with a due consideration: and of the penance which was
injoyned by S. Ambrose to Theodosius, after the massacre of Thessalonica.
Touching the orders of your familie and Court, I haue discoursed with you at other
times, out of which you may draw rules for the direction of those affaires: be alwayes
mindfull that your gards be entertained about your person, according to the wonted maner,
rather to set forth the maiestie of gouernment, than in respect of danger of your life
for euide^t necessitie. Touching the wearing of your apparel, there is no doubt but princely
garments, fit for your estate at certaine times, doe both grace your person, and strike a
kind of awe into the peoples hearts: Notwithstanding to sute your selfe ordinarily more
plainly, and according to that fashion which is most generall, doth win great loue, as I haue
obserued by mine owne experience: for nothing pleaseth the subiect more, than to note
sometimes a carelesse contempt of those outward complements, in which some princes set
their princelie felicitie. The like consideration must be had touching your die^, and other
necessarie things belonging to your person and your Court, with a carefull regard, that
neither hatred be purchased by excesse, nor contempt by too great equalitie.
To the time of peace likewise belong diuers kinds of workes worthie of a princes care,
which draw the subiects eyes to admiration, and his heart to thankefulnesse. In this
degree we marshall whatsoeuer princes either build or repaire for the peoples good, as
adorning cities, amending highwayes, repaying bridges, making riuers nauigable, charges
in bringing waters, in repairing of churches, hospitals, guild-halls, publike places, and
towne walls, taking order for the reformation of abuses in religion, Vniuersities, Colledges,
and judiciall places, in limiting the fees of Counsellors, excluding auarice from
courts of conscience, and corruption of magistrats in the bringing vp of orphans, mariage
of poore maids, and redemption of prisoners. Blessed is the heart that thinketh on those

things, and the hand that putteth them in execution; for by this meanes the subiect shall
not onely be prouided for in the common course of life, but the pleasures and commodities
of persons, places, and conditions, setled in happinesse: Yet in these cases also care
must be taken, that the people be not ouer burthened; for it is all one to them, whether
oppression creepe in by this or any other meanes, which they cannot remedie, and where
the people themselues are vrged to an extraordinarie charge, they hold not the prince to
be an author, but an executioner. To the time of peace also belong many considerations,
prouisions, and forecasts, concerning war; to the end that whatsoeuer accident happens, the
prince be not taken altogether vnprouided on a sudden, or driuen to seeke shelter when
the storme is imminent. But to auoid confusion about these times, I must warne you, for
a conclusion in this point, that as an honorable peace is the end of war, so must your peace
be gouerned by such great discretion and diligent foresight, as the war may also be secure
to the state when it happens. I come now (my most deere sonne) to discourse with you of
some points belonging to the time of war, whereon it standeth you in hand to thinke aduisedly,
as wel in consideration of your present estate, as also for the increase therof, whensoeuer
just occasion shalbe offered. To these ends of preseruation and inlargement by way
of counsell and aduice in time of peace, and of armes in time of war, a prince ought wholly
to addict himselfe, and neither spare paine, diligence, nor danger, in any enterprise, that
enable him to attaine them happily. A prince ought to be more heedful to looke into the
accidents and occurrents of war, than peace; for that war aboundeth more with vnexpected
actions, with disorders not foreseene, and when they happen, for the most part, are irrecouerable:
Againe, for that war is lesse restrained by the curbe of ciuile lawes and officers
than peace, depending co^monly vpon the will of him that is most powerful, as most commonly
it is kindled by a greedie desire of one to raigne aboue the rest, and is afterwards
maintained by the feare of a necessarie defence: both which affections are so forcible in the
mind, as they will rather constraine you to make the satisfaction of your will the obiect,
than to looke into the means wherby you may compasse it. These cares and preparations
for war, are most necessarie for princes and potentates, whose vnquiet estates are often troubled
by foreine enemies, who lay plots to annoy them. These and such restlesse neighbors
giue euerie day just occasion to be offended by them. This is your case, who being seated
betwixt the power of the Turk, and the jealousie of Christian potentates, could not design
a matter of any great effect, though you gaue your selfe to rest. But let not this scruple
greatly trouble you, for that discotinuance of prosessing armes, wil in time do you more
harme, than the maintenance of your reputation by them can any way trouble you. Experience
doth teach, that all men feare to incese an enemie who hath his armes readie
drawne to strike. Besides, as men wax old with time, so states are weakened with sloth, and
in effect consumed by the canker of idlenesse, whilest that others that co^tned with martial
enemies, are not onely maintained in health, but augmented daily more and more in force
and vigor, as mans bodie is by exercise. Vpon the laying downe of armes, and discharge of
troups, the subiects grow wanton, and wild at home, finding so great a part of their wonted
burthen eased: and this we daily see, that hauing bin long accustomed to this pleasing
ease, you shall hardly bring them again in awe, to haue the patience to endure your impositions,
and their former franknesse and readinesse to supplie your necessities. On the other
side, the multitude of souldiers tainted with the libertie of ambition and other humors of
camp, wil hardly frame themselues to lead an honest sober life at home, which hath often
bin the cause of tumults and vprores in monarchies. Besides, I cannot see how a prince that
ruleth many estates, can euer settle any resolution to liue in peace, in respect of their ambition
and greedinesse that are about him, their emulatio^ and jealousie that are equall to him,
and their feare and suspition that are vnder him: For they that are of the first sort dispose
themselues to giue occasion of offence, out of a desire to subuert the estates of other men,
the second, to settle their own fortunes; and the third, to preuent oppressions and injuries:
wherefore it is wel said in our prouerb, that he which ca^not take hard measure at the hands
of other men, must keep them low that are most apt to offer it. It is therfore necessary for a
prince, especially being possessed of so many estates as you are at this time, to dispose your
selfe effectually to a care of such things as belong to warre, whereof hauing fit occasion

to discourse at this present with you, and taking my beginning from the chiefest parts therof,
I say, That this care standeth chiefly vpon arms, forts, and garrisons, vpon order for prouisions
to be made for them, knowledge of the qualitie and conditions of States, and of the
people that inhabit them. The care of an armie consisteth in the setting downe of a certaine
and conuenient number, and in giuing good orders and directions for their maner
of fight. The number must be such as will suffice for any braue attempt their Leader will
vndertake. The rate will fall out fitly, if no error be committed either in too much or too
little; for too little will not serue, and excesse is euer a cause of confusion. Opinions haue
differed exceedingly concerning this point, but the best and most expert agree, Than an
armie consisting of 30000 foot, and 4000 horse, is sufficient for the execution of any worthie
enterprise. The reasons that are brought for proofe hereof are many, and of great force;
for this proportion is reasonable, neither superfluous, nor wanting. According to this
proportion an armie may be better disciplined, it may be better entertained with pay, and
supplied with victuals and all other things necessarie. It is more easily repaired after some
great losse, either by sicknesse, or any other accident, and it may be better imployed and
maintained in all places. The people that receiue them find more ease in their charges. A
prince may better stand vpon his gard with such a force; and a victorie gotten by a reasonable
number is more honourable. To conclude, it is in all respects most agreeable to the
maner of seruice in our age, as they can best judge that haue often had proofe thereof by
their owne experience. Whereas huge armies are, we see few come to fight, and therfore
a lesse number might serue the turne, as it did the Romans in their warres in many countries,
when as they brought multitudes of men: As it serued Alexander in ourrunning Asia,
and might, perhaps, haue serued Hanibal against the greart force of Rome, if either he
had receiued due supplie from home in due time, or could have made the souldiers which
he was driuen to leuie in other countries, as resolute as his owne, which was not possible.
The Romans during the state of the commonweale, afterwards the Emperours, and the
Turks as this day brings greater forces to field. To which presidents many answers may be
giuen, especially, That this both was and is done rather for a kind of glory, to extend their
forces ouer all, than for any other need of helpe in war: for an armie so proportioned, as I
haue said, is sufficient of it selfe for any notable attempt, as may be proued by many effectuall
reasons: for hardly shall you find a place whereas a greater number than I haue mentioned,
can be put in battel, by reason of impediments which grow by ditches, riuers, lakes,
mountains, woods, and such like, whereas a reasonable armie may escape them by the conduct
of a discreet General. This proportion is to be kept exactly by such princes as resolue
and are euer inforced to stand vpon their gard, and keep their forces in a readinesse, whether
their occasion be offensiue or defensiue: for by this meane they shall be able to beare out
the charge, and dispose at all times of their companies, as aduantage shall be offered. The
Turks policie is worthy to be imitated in this point, who notwithstanding his great numbers,
hath drawne the resolution and glory of his forces to his Ianizaries alone, which are a
certaine number, and more easie to be satisfied. These standing fast, the rest are kept in order
by that means, whereas otherwise it were very difficult to content all the companies. In
the same respect Caesar gaue most honor to the tenth legion, but with another kind of moderation
and respect to the rest than the Turke vseth. Some thinke, that in respect of many
occasions to diminish the prefixed number, either by drawing some into garrisons, or by
imploying them otherwise, or by some accidents that may fall out, an army should consist
of a greater number of sufficient men: but to one that hath the perfect skill of warre, this
number doubtlesse may suffice, so as the companies that are withdrawn for other seruices
be instantly supplied: for thus shall the number and the armie be the same, as the tenth legion
was euer one and the same, notwithstanding accidents. Neither would I haue you to
persuade your self, that by often changing armies wax weak, but rather, if supply be quickly
made, more gallant and more couragious: for thus we reape the benefit of those forward
and resolute men, which being newly come, are far more ready to hazard their liues, for that
they know not what the danger means, nor haue not the consideration and stay which time
brings: on the other side the valor of old soldiers is more throughly refined by experience.
By this meanes also the readie wayes are opened, to recompence and honour those that

deserue well, and for correction and infamie for such as deserue otherwise. These meanes
are most expedient for the maintenance of armies in the field, and there is not doubt but
euery one of those that are valiant and tried, will exceed ten that want experience in any
enterprise. Next to the proportion of the number, I could wish you to be prouident in
seting downe good rules for the campe, which ought chiefly to be grounded vpon conscience,
in obseruing those things which belong to religion, and leading an vpright and honest
life. Next to this you must dispose your souldiers minds to dutifull obedience, and
due respect, not onely to their Generall, but to their commanders. The best meanes to
ground this respectiue awe, is by incouraging with hope, and rewarding vpon good deserts
such persons as are chiefly noted for their forwardnesse, and disgracing others that are otherwise
affected. The first attempt of mutinie must be presently corrected; for the remembrance
of sharpe punishment will sticke longer in a souldiers mind, than any earnest
exhortation of a Generall. Out of these meanes of preparation springs a disposition in all
men of valour, vertue, and obedience. Besides the ordinarie exercises of the campe, to
keepe their minds from idlenesse, and their bodies from sloth, you must prouide, that by
parties made, and shadowes of true fight indeed, the profession of armes may grow familiar
vnto the souldiers, and they made fit for any sudden attempt. Moreouer, it is fit to dispose
the minds of commanders, as well in campes as garrisons, to commaund with judgement,
and to serue with discretion: In the souldiers likewise willingnesse to obey, and a
readinesse to execute; the which may the more easily be effected, if order be taken that
the captaines account the souldiers their companions, as Caesar called them Commilitones
in this respect, and take an especiall care of them in all things that belong to their profit,
reputation, and loue. And souldiers for their part, the more courteously their Leaders intreat
them, the more humbly they ought to obey their commands. An armie being thus
prouided for, in that which concerneth the proportion and discipline, you must imploy
your care effectually in setting down good orders touching fights; for without great care
you may not hope for any prosperous successe in martiall affaires, nor presume of any victorie.
I know that circumstances alter rules sometimes in all professions, and in those
most of all; notwithstanding Maximes grounded vpon reasons and experience, will make
a man more apt to take his best aduantage. Surely it would seeme a labour worthie of so
great a prince as you shalbe, to vse all possible diligence to find out a better way than that
which is vsed among the Christians of our time, wherby an armie may be often releeued,
and come to trie the fortune of the fight: so as the first ranke being forced to retire, it may
not fall vpon the second, nor the second vpon the third; but that they which are behind
aduancing to releeue the first, being tired, and forced to recoile, may performe that seruice
without disorder, in such sort as the first may no way hinder them: for although the first
be inforced to retire, yet the other that are fresh, making vp the bodie, by stepping into
their places, may come to handie strokes with their enemies. Herein consisted the chiefe
perfection of the Roman discipline, and hereof, among my notes, you may find many
strange conceits, for that I had an earnest intent, if time and leasure would haue giuen me
leaue, to haue set downe some plot, and made this ground one of the chiefest labours in respect
of warre with the Turkish Infidels. But in respect of my continuall affairs, and being
euer turmoiled with endlesse businesse, I could neuer effect what I intended, nor applie
my mind intirely to this singular inuention. It may be that God hath reserued the credit
of this stratagem to you, wherein you may be somewhat assisted by that briefe collection
which I haue made for memorie. Surely it is a great disorder, and a foule discredit to the
Leaders of our time, that all the force and power of a mightie armie should consist vpon
three or foure of the first ranks of the battell. This error groweth from the defect of our
rules in the marshalling of our battels and squadrons in a direct line, euery man in particular,
and all the rankes in generall, standing one directly behind another: for in a direct line
it is not possible to giue the first any meanes to rerire, but they must disorder them that
follow. Wherefore for an introduction to a better methode than hath been hitherto practised,
it shal not be amisse to put those three bodies into which an army is diuided, namely,
the foreward, battel, and rereward, into three squadrons, so placed one to anothers side,
as they may meet together in forme of a triangle.

The first squadron must represent the point, the other two the sides, for being thus disioyned
and disseuered by art, it is an easie matter to bring forward the second to fight with
out disturbance to the first, and the third without trouble to the other two: Thus co^ming
to succeed their fellows side long in continual fight against their enemies, another aduantage
wil arise, which is, they shall trie the fortune of the field thrice in one incounter. I doe
assure my selfe, that from this beginning men may proceed to a more perfect knowledge
how the squadrons themselues being also diuided into lesser squadrons might one retain
another by the same proportion. A man may aime at such a mysterie by orderly degrees,
for the matter being so intangled, as experience dothteach, it were no more possible to
bring this than any other art at the first inuention, to perfection in an instant.
It is the labour of a beare to licke mishapen fruit to fashion, and of a Lyon to
bring militarie rules to certaintie. The want which men may iustly find in direction
of an army at this day, proceedeth farther yet, for they put the best and most resolute
souldiers in the formost rankes, who being forced to giue backe, they cause all the rest
by their example to doe the like, as if it were lawfull for them to imitate their actions
and thoughts. In some sort they may be excused in their imaginations, yet wee see that
from this error doth commonly grow the ruines of all Companies. The Romanes were
farre more discreet concerning this point of marshalling their men, for the first front was
made verie strong with yong men of great force, whom they called ^ but a third
part of their old and best souldiers were mingled with this head-strong youth, both to
defend them, and to temper the^. The second squadron, to the which they gaue the title Primary,
co^sisted of two parts of old soldiers only and a third of yong. The third was ancie^t old
soldiers called Triarij. By this means neither the second depended of the first which were
yong for the most part, nor the third of the second in which were also some yong. Besides,
the first incou^ter was alwaies very furious by the forwardnes of yong spirits, who the lesse
they knew of danger in this kind, the more resolute they were and aduenturous: experience
doth teach that to withstand the furie of a fight, we cannot make our head better
than of yong men, so as they may be tempered with a third part of old; the second shall
be better gouerned, and the third more furnished with valour, Iudgement and consideration.
Such ought the distribution of our forces to bee in this age. Wherefore let no man
presume to prefer any before this discipline of Rome; for it is verie likely that they which
with such prosperous and long continuance of time made the onely true profession of
armes, marshalled their forces in this manner, would euer haue forsaken it, if there had
not beene some speciall cause; and therefore we may rest assured that they had reason on
their side; for proofe whereof I note that when soeuer those Phalanges came to ioine
with the forces of Rome, being ordered as we haue said, they neuer sped happily. The
reason will appeare plainely by comparing both disciplines, for the Greekes by marshalling
the best men in the formost Squadron, had a meaning to put valour and resolutio^
into the rest which could not be expected generally of all the companies, the greater part
being a multitude void of experience, and guided onely by their sence: wheras the Romans
had as well regard to preparation of minds, so as it was not hard to bring those that were
guided by sence to execute things with good consideration: wherefore it was sufficient
that onely bodies of men were assigned ouer to the corporall whome Scipio left with S^phax,
the better to braue the foot of Cartharge, for albeit at the first they were lightly esteemed
by the enemie, yet by a course of good discipline, they became afterwards the
meanes whereby the Romanes conquered. Euerie man is able to consider with him
selfe to what great vse this forcing of bodies by good order was, and how much it
was esteemed at the first. It were friuolous to say that those rules can hardly bee now obserued
with any hope of good successe, for that artillerie is crept into our warres;
for if those squadrons had in those daies, and would haue (in case artillerie were not
in vse) an aduantage ouer our men, considering that this aide is common to both sides,
it followeth that the perfections of those squadrons remaine in the same adua^tage which
it had and should haue without artillerie. Besides it is euident to sence that those
collaterall Squadrons, are not in halfe the danger of great shot, that ours bee, which are
ranged this day by a direct line: for a volley of shot comming from the head of one

battel to another, scoureth throgh al the ranks. Let vs ad the deceitful vse of late artillery
and chiefly to offend the bodies of men in field. But for that the smal shot may be made to
play with great aduantage, where those squadrons are close, and other rules of that Romane
discipline carefully obserued, you shall seeke out particular instructions among my notes:
And moreouer what fit considerations may be vsed in the choise of commanders to an armie,
what moderation should be obserued in causing the common souldiers to depend
vpon their Generall, and other commanders put in trust by him; besides other meanes for
the setling of your best securitie.
I will now passe vnto other things which come into my mind to aduise you touching
the carriage of your selfe in this time of warre: but by the way I must once againe
put you in minde with great earnestnesse, that this care of finding out the best way
of marshalling your forces in the field, ought in reason to bee one of the chiefest that
you must imbrace, as well for occurrents of warre, as to make your name immortall among
all nations. Your fleets at sea ought in like maner to haue their particular respects,
touching which there seldom chanceth any cause of innouation. The chiefest care is, that
all necessarie imployments that belong to Nauies, be alwaies in readinesse: That the vessels
be rigged, augmented, and imployed euer in some seruice for the state, so far as is conuenient
with securitie. Aboue all things settle those affaires in such a certaine course, as
your gallies and other shipping may bee properly belonging to your selfe, or to the state,
and not to your captaines, officers, or other priuate men, for hauing reposed the whole
weight of your fortune and reputation vpon the safegard of those vessels, they will not
easily or willingly be brought to hazard them where the smallest daunger shall appeare.
The charge of getting ships of price into their hands, together with the difficulty of repairing
and supplying them in case they should miscarrie by any mischance, doth make
men so feareful of the worst, as oftentimes a publike opportunitie is lost, while priuate respects
are tendred. By taking of this order you shall bring all men to depend vpon your
selfe, and you shall neuer need to depend vpon any: I speake not of the large allowance
which will be made by officers, when they serue themselues for their owne commoditie.
Cause your forces to be viewed and surueyed, and their munition to be reuiewed and repaired:
where you find the rate superfluous, abate, where too scant, augment it. Auoid extremities
in any wise, either of too much or too little; discretion must be the measure of these
considerations. Be carefull alwaies to furnish your places of strength, with sufficient gouernours
and trustie garrisons. Let your number rather offend in excesse than want, for of
both there is lesse danger in an ouer-plus, both for that the onely valour and resolution
of the souldiers hath often supplied the weakenesse of the place, in respect whereof the
Romans euer trusted more to the courage of their men, than to the strength of the place;
as also in respect of those that fall sicke and die, or runne to the other side, or are cut off
by any other meanes, so as the whole number is neuer seene to fight at one instant: fortifie
your selfe with sure forces against the enemie, with your tents pitched, trusting rather
to forts raised in the field, than to the situation of townes. On the other side when you
beginne to quarrell and inuade, you must rather assaile your enemies by the help of forts,
and sconces, built of purpose to annoy him, than seeke to win his places of strength, with
losse of time, and an intollerable charge. This course is secure and certaine, as the other
is deceitfull and dangerous: whereof you shall find further profes among my notes for
memorie.
Touching the maner of erecting forts with speed and little charge, and the best
meanes to settle a wauering estate, the best way is to marke aduisedly the whole position
and situation of the place, and to fashion out of it the frame that shall be fit; applie
your industrie to the plot of nature, with such certaine reasons and vndoubted
rules, as both the whole may answere to the parts, and the parts vnto the whole in due
proportion and workemanship. Thus must you proceed from one estate vnto another
respectiuely, standing alwaies thus far resolute touching the rules of fortification, That
although no place can be impregnable, yet it shall bee sufficient that ours be such as the
enemie shal haue small hope to win them, either in respect of long time, or the great expence
which such a labour will require, being threatned by many misfortunes and disaduantages,

The prouisions of war consist in victuals, artillerie, munition, supplies and coine,
which altogether in effect import no more than an abilitie to mainteine continually so
great a force of trained men, as out of the same an armie (when great need requireth) may
be drawne by the Soueraigne, or forces sufficient in all respects for the vses aboue mentioned.
Hereupon followeth, that a prince, who either resolueth or is inforced to stand vppon
his owne defence, must think vpon a kind of warre with which he may be able to rule
both the charge and weight that goes with it. Wherefore I had a meaning to set downe a
certaine order in my armies, which might be sufficient to bring this to passe, but I could
neuer find any fit opportunitie to put it in execution. My intent was first to leuy a gallant
army of Flemings, Spaniards, and Italians intermixt; being thus assembled, I meant to
keep them euer in one estate, either in warre against the Turke, or some Christian Princes
which I could not auoid without great danger, or great dishonour: Then I did thinke it
good to capitulate with this armie, that al booties of great matters belonging to the publike
state, as artillerie, munition and such like things, being gotten either by the sacke of
Townes or spoile of the Countrie, should be properly reserued to the princes chamber,
the rest left vnto the souldiers. Notwithstanding I resolued to bind the Souldier to sel and
deliuer vnto the Princes officers at a reasonable price set downe, all victualles, garments,
houshold-stuffe and other goods pertaining to their necessarie vses or their commodities.
These things I would haue kept in store vntill the Souldier should haue need of them againe,
with some conuenient profit vnto my selfe. By this prouision both Prince and Soldiers
should be supplied, but the souldier most: for besides the comfort of receiuing readie
money at all times for that they get, they shall be also sure of all necessarie things at
an easie price. If we compare it with their losse, who buy all things from the Merchant, or
the stranger who still followeth the campe, it ought not to offend the Souldier, that his
Prince should draw some little portion to his owne releefe of that vnmeasurable gaine
which otherwise would be diuided among cormorants. I thought moreouer that it wold
proue profitable to the souldier, and safe for the Prince, if a certain officer were appointed
in the campe, into whose hands the souldiers (being imploied in any dangerous seruice)
might confidently commit their money or the pillage of the best price with full assurance
that in case it chanced to them otherwise than well, all should be deliuered to their heires
or to such persons as they would appoint; imitating in this point those captaines which
to be the better assured of their souldiers, take vp money of the officers in presse to pay the
companies. Caesar vsed the same policie, and thereby was free from all feare, either of the
officers, whose credit he had by this means ingaged, or of the souldiers whose pay was alwaies
readie. Besides other obligations, a reasonable gain might be afforded after so much
in the hundred by the yere vnto the soldiers, who being assured of a sure place where to
leaue their armor or their stocke vpon any dangerous imployment, and that their contracts
and directions touching those things shall be faithfully performed, whatsoeuer happen
vnto themselues, they wil hold it for a greater aduantage to leaue their substance in a trustie
hand, rather than to carrie it about with them. If any chance to die without heires in
bloud, or limitation, in warre, who should succeed him; the goods may iustly be assigned
to the Princes chamber, as wee see by the ciuil Law, the prince inheriteth their estates that
die without any certaine heires. It may be jealousie, (which the baser sort is euer apt to
conceiue of the princes policie, to inrich himselfe) may discourage some, supposing vnder
euerie bait to find a secret hooke, vntill that experience hath cleered the clouds of this
false imagination, wherefore the way to breake this ice, is to appoint a certaine, number
of the chiefest of the campe, whome we may most boldly trust, to beginne this order, and
to bring in their shares; for who is either so suspitious or foolish, be he either priuat soldier,
captaine, or Colonell, that had rather carrie all his goods about him, in continual hazard
both of enemies and boores vpon euerie sinister accident, than leaue it in safety, and
with some aduantage to themselues, or to their heires who may recouer it. It may be said
that prouision for the carriage of these things will be chargeable, but that may be holpen
by another meanes, if the souldier out of the gaine and interest of his goods laied downe
in trust, be bound to answere it, for that the goods doe still remaine his owne, and the
charge is satisfied with ouer-plus. Touching these carriages, you shall find a modell and

memoriall among my notes, for the priuate souldier is greatly eased by this new inuention,
hauing nothing to care for but his armes and himselfe, so as the whole campe in generall
should be more light: besides the greatest part of the treasure and goods of
value belonging to the campe should rest euer in the princes hand, so as hee might
vse them for the furtherance of his attempts in warre, as wee see the proofe of things left
by like trust in the hands of merchants. Thus by the money which shal remain in the princes
hands, by their decease without heires, either by descent or disposition of will of such
as were the right owners of the same, and by the gaine which doth accrue vnto the prince
by selling victuals and other implements at the second hand (but yet to the souldiers ease,
in respect of that which he should pay vnto the merchant or victualler for the like, the
prince may make himselfe more able to maintein a mightie armie long, as you shal discouer
more particularly by my notes. But as I haue said before it is expedient that with this
the prouision of valiant souldiers able leaders, and good orders doe concurre, although
the vulgar sort doe accompt money to bee the sinewes of all warre. I haue oftentimes
had cause to iudge of this comparison, and therefore may be the better beleeued
in setting downe a difference: It is a strength where other parts more needful are co^pleat,
but a sillie sinew where the chiefest members are disordred. Allow me those abilities
and politike prouisions in a princes armie with perfection, whereof I spake before,
and no doubt but the warre will maintain, it selfe: for we cannot find that a worthie Generall
and leader of a good and well directed armie, euer wanted courage to beginne, or
meanes to maintaine the warre, as well with pay by meanes of pillage and such other
gaine, as with victuals euen out of the enemies countrie. Besides a prince may alwaies
keepe his troupes in heart, by putting them in hope of honour, profit and all kinds of
reward, when time doth serue, although prouision for the present bee scant, so as
they know the princes abilitie and fortune to bee sufficient to performe his promises.
Then may the Prince, imitating the Romans, repose greater trust in souldiers that are
both valiant and well affected to his gouernment, then either in deepe trenches, or
places strongly fortified: I meane such a Prince as either hath a will or is inforced against
his will to hold his sword alwaies in his hand, and to looke for hard measure.
If all the charges of warre should bee drawne out of a princes cofers, it were not possible
it should continue long. To preuent this inconuenience, it seemeth good to some,
to haue the warre made to a profitable end, but it is not verie easie as I thinke to giue
an instance of this aduice, considering experience doth teach, that by offensiue warre
the countrie is ruined, the people spoiled, and the prince impouerished, and in a defensiue
warre, of what qualitie soeuer the gaine be, men may not expect that it should
answere the charge that doth grow thereby. Imagine that this inconuenience may
bee eased by good counsell, and applying batterie to the chiefe places onely,
which either by their wealth, or the releefe which others bring in by their meanes,
may yeeld satisfaction and recompence for any charge, without being forced otherwise
to fight in vaine, or for the opening of a passage which is alreadie giuen you,
into the enemies state: yet it cannot bee denied but for many other respects, and in
sundrie other cases, the warre, which without such a kind of releefe is no way tollerable,
by meanes thereof is made secure and free from all dangers and disorder of any
moment.
Now for that supplies are necessarie for the maintenance of a continuall armie in one
and the selfe same estate; I thinke it verie requisite for the seruice of your campe,
that throughout all your realmes and estates, the which in your choise are fittest to
set out men, a particular muster bee taken, and a Register precisely kept of all the youth
that are able to beare armes, so as it may bee done without offence to the people,
or incensing the hautie hearts with rage and malice against their Soueraigne.
As I said before, your tried Souldiers must bee kept in practise, least their spirits
grow dull and their bodies vnable by sloth and discontinuance, so would I wish
those young souldiers were trained by sufficient leaders, that they may be the better
able to serue when they are called for. In this generall muster especiall choise ought
to bee made of such men as by nature are giuen to the warres, and apt of their disposition;

that are in good estate to liue, and especially that haue families, for of such, a man
may looke for better proofe, and relie more on, for that they haue somewhat to lose at
home, they esteeme their reputation, and feare shame and punishment more, the which
they that haue lands and goods to answere for their good behauiour, cannot so easily
auoid as they that haue nothing: Besides they are incouraged by a respect of bloud to a
care of their owne houses. These persons may in no wise be drawne out of families,
that haue but one man in them, or so few, as the pressing of one man may indanger the
whole familie for want of food, but you must presse them where they may be spared without
danger, and incourage them besides with the hope of credit, and commoditie to bee
gotten by their merits in the campe, for otherwise wee see that being brought with
discontentment to the field, their deserts proue according. Thanks be giuen to God,
you are soueraigne ouer many great realmes and great estates, in which you may
raise such martiall troupes without offence, as they may not onely bee sufficient
to defend, but to offend others if you liue in vnion of good correspondencie, with
your friends and kinsmen of the house of Austria: by this agreement you shall settle
your owne power, and become a comfort and support to those that loue you, and a tertor
to such as enuie you: On the other side assure your selfe that discord among neere allies,
will blemish your authoritie, put heart into your enemies to make designes against
your greatnesse, and so distemper your friends, as they shall not be able to resolue which
way to bend their affections. Standing thus vnited, you shall haue great oportunitie (besides
the Italian and Spanish forces) to dispose of the Germanes, as your need shall require,
the which is a martiall and a verie honorable nation. I know that this mixture doth oftentimes
cause disorders in a campe: but yet by one that knoweth how to temper this light
discord with a moderate emulation, they may be imployed to most excellent and rare
effects, in respect of the great difficultie and almost impossibilitie that euer they should
ioine or agree together in offensiue mutinies, distractions and disobedience of any kind.
I cannot forbeare to report vpon this iust occasion what I haue often aduised you of before,
that you respect with all due regard your cousin the king of Bohemia, to the greatnesse
and inestimable value of whose mind, the greatest empires are too narrow bounds;
and doubtlesse vpon euerie fit occasion, you shall see effects answerable to this conceit
which the world hath of his worthinesse. Beleeue this confidently, that there is more
good to bee expected from the loue which springeth from consanguinitie (although that
sometimes causes of vnkindnesse may arise, than from the fairest shewes and greatest professions
of good will that can bee made by any stranger. Now for that all offences and vnkindnesses
are most bitter, growing among persons that are neere in bloud, if they be not
quenched in due time: to preuent a greater inconuenience, cut off all iust occasions on
your side, setting downe this lesson for a rule, that it is an art more worthie commendation
to yeeld in some sort to those that are allyed, to continue their affection, than to end
quarrels and vnkindnesses with other persons, by inforcing them to yeeld to our authority.
But to conclude my councell touching the care which must bee taken of this trained
youth, is, that it may alwaies serue as a Spring to supply the armie: for the better pleasing
of their humors, and winning of their loues, it shall be fit to priuiledge them with a libertie
to weare weapons, especially on those daies that are appointed for their exercises, and
to make the best shew they are able of their forwardnesse. I would also haue them graced
with some speciall fauour, as occasion serues, and exempted from all seruile burthens in
Countries. Then would I wish you wholy to direct your care to a due consideration of
your estate in general, and of the countries in particular vnder you: Look vpon their condition,
situation and qualitie, consider both of their aboundance and wants, and of sufficient
meanes to liue, as water, wood and graine, that supplie being made from other
places that haue greater store, all loue and kindnesse may be entertained among people
that are subiect to one Soueraign power. Though policie did not prescribe this care, yet
christianity wold challe^ge it. Cause plots to be drawn of al their greatest riuers, mou^tains,
streits and passages, that by repairing vnto your map vpon any accident, that shall happen,
you may dispose of things with greater certainty. Be careful not only to know the dispositions
and humors of the^ (which is very necessary for great princes) but also their alliances

and factions, whereby you shall be alwaies able both to bridle their vndutifull affections,
and to preuent their practises, if they breake out into extremities. The balance of authority
is in your hands; all credit comes from your selfe, and therefore gouern the scales with
some moderation, so as that side may be heauiest which is best affected to your party. Prouide
against al dangers, and serue your tum by all such oportunities, as may further your intention.
If any countrie doth liue in danger of an enemie, that doth fronter vpon them, secure
them in such sort by captains, officers, and garrisons, as they may be freed from feare of
al wrong. To be short, I would haue you cast vp an euen reckoning, and make a iust acco^pt
of their inclinations, their power, their wants, their store, their agreement, their diuisions,
their alliances, their habits, their customs, their affections, their dependances, their affinity,
their co^modities, and their disco^modities, that by easing one and charging another, you may
turn al things to your best content. Then wil it be time to turn your eye to the like consideration
of their accompt. In this point you must resolue with ripe iudgement and great
care, making fit proportions by comparing sundry circumstances of persons, places, times,
natures, customes, neighbours, officers, adherents, and other accidents, as are incident to
so strong a knot of ciuill policie. These things being vnderstood and wisely pondred by
him that hath the helme in hand, there is no doubt but he may euer march vpon a firme
ground in amy enterprise he takes in ha^d; for in knowing our own and our enemies strength,
in weighing circumstances with an equall hand, and being able to apply the best aduantages,
that wisdom and experience can find, to profitable vses, consisteth both the hope and hap
of victorie. I know that diuers courses must be taken according to the diuers qualities
of the nation, and the situation of the countrie. Touching the first, whether it be peopled,
or scant of men, armed or naked, valiant or cowardlie, pleased or discontented.
Touching the second; whether it be full of mountaines, valleyes, plaines, woods or riuers,
whether it abound with victuals and al other commodities that are fit for war, or is
barren or beggerly. Aboue all things be sure you neuer be drawn into quarrels, with any
mighty potentate for the reliefe of such as rather burthen than ease, indanger than helpe
your estate, which else may turn to your great disadua^tage. Besides these rules, I wold prescribe
a nu^ber more of like effect, the which long experince (the mother of true wisdom)
hath imprinted in my heart, which other men perhaps which go more by aime than by art
make small accompt of. War ought alwaies to be vndertaken vpon a iust quarrel, and directed
to no other end than to a safe and honorable peace which ca^not be purchased without
wars. In war he that spendeth most in accompt, spendeth least in want; doubt of this
opinion who list, my selfe can warra^t it. It is not good to enter into a quarrel without forecast,
how to make it good, but after it is once begun, there is neither dalliance nor delay
without danger. To him that hath best skill and vnderstanding how to manage war, it will
maintein it selfe, so as good order may be taken from the first beginning; and the proofe of
euerie peece of councel that experience maketh good, may serue for sound direction in other
things that happen afterwards. Let prouision of all things be made in the best kind, and
euer with an ouerplus, for in that which is left can be little losse, and althogh there were, yet
there is no proportion betwixt it and the dangers that may grow in weakening braue attempts
with scarcitie. Let al your proceedings and inuentio^s tend to victory, for that is the
final end of the art of war, to which men attaine with seasonable prouisio^s, discreet orders,
and wise gouernment. In the beginning wisedome, diligence, and warines is required, courage
in the pursuit, and a constant resolution vnto the end: you must euer giue the first assault, rather
then attend vntil you be set vpon: And althogh your fortune shold be so bad as to be
preuented in this course, yet must you seek by al meanes to diuert that force by the great
aduantage that is gotten by making warre vpon some other princes countrie, or doing
some good peece of seruice to stay the frowns of fortune. Repose not the only staie and hope
of your martiall proceedings eyther vpon your companies of horse by land, or your fleet
by sea, for they are things without sence or reason; and we see that at sea the greater number
preuaileth co^monly, besides the deceits and vncertainty of the sea. But touching these
instructions thus scattered and other considerations to bee obserued in the whole course
of war, I wil refer you to my noates which wil giue no smal light, how to demean your self
vpon all occasion, the which (considering your present estate) are likely to happen.

I will now speake first of the warre against the Turke,1550 as that which I hold to bee of
greatest importance, most certaine, and most daungerous, as well in respect of your
profession and faith, which ought to bee preferred by a Prince of your religion and conscience
before all other ends, as also the Turke is the mightiest enemy, that either at this
day you haue, or are like to haue. You may assure your selfe that he is a certaine enemy,
not only through the malice which he beareth to your self and faith, but by the grounds
of his owne politike, or rather tyrannous estate, which presse him to bee alwayes readie
and in armes to withstand all attempts. It is hard for him to worke any great effects in
Hungary, as well in respect of the long course of the riuer of Danow, and of the champaine
country, as of the situation of Vienna, and the neighbourhood of Germanie. In
other places likewise his next neighbours are either mightie or troublesome, and such
as in processe of time may bee more easily brought vnder than at this instant, standing
alwayes with their swords drawne to defend their liberties: They are not like vnto the
Sophie, whose deepe wisedome and great valour makes his forces to bee feared more
than the greatnesse of his owne estate: But God knoweth whether his next successours
will be able to supply the want that is found in his fortune. In other places the borders
are not all inhabited, for they lie waste most commonly vpon the greatest parts of the
dominions and realmes that are possessed by this tyrannie for these respects: And for his
soueraigntie vpon the sea side, besides the discord and diuision which is among the Christian
princes of our age, there is no doubt but hee shall be drawne to turne his whole forces
vpon the Ilands, and your estates in Italie. It is not probable to thinke that hee will
breake with the Venetians before hee breake with you, for doubtlesse hee will imagine,
that in warring against Venice, your forces will come in to aide: but beginning first with
you, it may be hee will hope that the Venetians will remaine neuters. One reason may
be giuen in this respect, which is, their discontinuance from all exercise of armes for so
many yeres: Another, for that commonweales consisting either of popularitie or peeres,
in respect of the long life which they presume to be most certaine in their estates, and
their hope of preferrement from degrees of good to better, which is euer greene, do
euer trust more in the aduantage of time, and such accidents as may fall out in the changes
and alteratious of the world, than in anie warre that is attempted by great Potentates,
and will either not at all take armes, or so late, as they had done better, not to
haue medled. Moreouer, hauing alreadie fastned their tallons in his sides, and put a
sharpe bitte into his mouth, by the possession of the Ilands of Cipresse and Candie, it
is likely they will stand long vpon their gard, before they will hazard themselues to offend
or defend any man. Adde hereunto that the estate of Venice standing wholy vpon
merchandize, they can not forbeare the trafficke they haue in the Turkes Dominions.
Now wee see that the Turke is by little and little growne proud, hauing multiplied
your daungers by the greatnesse of his power, which is now so aduaunced to the toppe
of Fortunes wheele, as wee may rather hope that it will breake with its owne burthen,
or that it may be weakened by policie, or warre, than looke for an ouerthrow by some
miracle from heauen, or by the power of Christendome, for as men are sinfull, so God
is iust.
No doubt but the Turkish Empire hath a period, but in Gods fore-knowledge, not
in mans fore-cast, and therefore vntill wee chaunge the course of our euill liues, wee
striue in vaine to moderate the plagues of his deserued indignation. I know many haue
beene of the mind, and are yet at this day, that it is impossible for anie Potentate in
Christendome, to set downe any course by his owne force to keepe vnder this aspiring
miscreant. And therefore by a generall league and combination of all princes this worke
must be effected. Notwithstanding, when I consider by the light of long experience
what poore effects haue issued from this deuice, and what fraude doth often lurke amongst
such consorts, I am of opinion that you should wholy relie vpon your owne
strength: and before the attempting of anie famous enterprise, examine what your
owne estates are able to performe, and then those which your neighbours and allies
haue promised. I haue found, and you haue reason to remember how the French king

carried himselfe concerning these occasions vpon a causlesse iealousie,1555 and a priuate
spleene: men will haue humours whilest they mannage the affaires of this world: your
wisest course is to prouide that they may not preiudice you. The way will be more easie
by conferring the good will and affection of your allies of the house of Austria alone.
But for the full accomplishment hereof with commendable effects, you must resolue according
to the proper and true meanes, which are, wisedome and infalliable conclusions
out of the grounds of long experience.
The first point is to consider aduisedly what kind of warre may most auaile you, to
defend, offend, peruert, or diuert. Touching a defensiue warre, my opinion was alwayes
to haue it absolutely excluded, for what is it else but a laying of our selues open to a
manifest consumption of strength from time to time, not without great hazard of the
whole in a short space, or by long delayes, as things fall out, and with despaire of
any satisfaction or restitution. This kind of warre hath beene generally held by all men
of experience that made profession of armes, to be the most vnprofitable and most daungerous
of all the rest: but when as men are inforced thereunto by necessitie. An offensiue
warre which reason persuadeth to be made against him in Greece, both in respect of
our inferioritie by sea, and for many other reasons which concurre, I hold it very hard
and in a manner impossible to bee brought to any good effect, seeing that diuersions are
so easie and commodious vnto him: for as it is impossible to make preparation for
such a warre, without discouerie, great charge and losse of time, so the Turke will
plainely foresee our designes, and frustrate our executions. The warre which wee
call preuentiue ought to bee esteemed the more fitte, for that the multitude of souldiers
which the Turke carrieth alwayes with him to maintaine his owne designes,
and to frustrate our purposes, is infinite. The course of diuersion can auayle as little,
presupposing that offence goe before which I haue specified: whereupon I may
conclude, that none of these simple kindes are for your good: I might proceed
and discourse particularly, and according to their seuerall tearmes and differences
touching euerie one of these; but by the strengthening of this discourse with sundrie
other reasons of importaunce that concurre, it will appeare that out of the conclusions
of these seuerall kindes, there arriseth a mixt kind of warre, most fit for your occasions:
for seeing there is no remedy but you must haue warre against the Turke as I saied before,
since wee can neither make a warre meerely offensiue for the reasons I haue set
downe, nor ought once to thinke of a preuension without ports, wee must presuppose
that such a warre may bee defensiue in act, but offensiue in proofe, yet simply neither
offensiue nor defensiue, according vnto the speciall rules and notes of both in simple
tearmes.
Let this warre thus tempered goe forward with a wise care to diuert, and so by little
and little it will take a safe course to preuent; and in the end prooue meerely offensiue
to the enemie. But before I come to exemplifie this paterne, and set downe my
plot, I must put you once againe in mind, that in making warre against the Turke,
you must relie more vpon stratagems and the Art of warre, than in multitudes of men,
watching all opportunities, his troubles and incumbraunces in other warres, his losses
and ruines by them, the partialities which fall out oftentimes betwixt the successours
of the State, and the diuisions amongst themselues: All these things may induce a better
knowledge how to make our partie strong, but aboue all things bind vpon Gods fauour.
But for that this fauour ought to bee procured, partly by such meanes on our
side, as are incident to the discretion of reasonable men, you must vnderstand, that nothing
can bee more expedient for you, than agreement and intelligence with your
friends of the house of Austria, as on the other side proprtionally it standeth them in
hand, for the better effecting of any enterprise, to bee firmely vnited vnto you, and
to acquaint you with their purposes. These things prouided for, you may easily come
to the knowledge of the true course which it behoueth you to holde in maintaining this
kind of warre: for if by any fit occasion which shall be offered, the Turke beeing either
ingaged in other warres, or his estate declining at home, you shall see reason to beginne

the quarrell, and to preuent his resolution. You may doe it best towards Hungarie,
making your vncle now designed Emperour, acquainted with your intent, keeping
the warre out of the champane Countries, and farre from the riuer of Danow, whereof
the Turke standeth in great neede, in regard of his carriages for such an armie: Besides,
forcing him to passe by places which are not fit for his great troupes of horse and
multitudes of foote, there is no doubt but you may hope for a verie happie end of
your designes. But in case not any one of these occasions be offred, yet you may procure
one by your owne discretion, making the yeere, wherein he maketh his preparation
to serue your turne, by temporizing warily and frustrating his designes by delayes
and shifts, according to the circumstances and aduantages which shall be offered.
The next yeere when either hee doth not, or perhappes can not so speedily aduaunce,
or arme his troupes as hee desireth, in respect of the great prouisions hee is inforced
to make, then would I haue you to aduaunce, and to fortifie that part of the
Countrey which you haue gotten before that hee can bee readie to impeach your courses
vpon the frontires, and defend it with the like resolution. Againe, vse the matter
in such sort, as when hee beginnes to cassiere his companies, and to retire his forces,
you may bee ready to renew the warre, and thereby force him to make a new defence.
By this meanes you shall inforce him to continue his great armie still in pay, which hee
is not able to indure, or else to bring such meane forces to field as hee may bee easily
dealt withall, and by consequence change the manner of his warre, which were no
meane step to an honorable victorie, for thereupon setting downe a new and discreet
course for direction, you may presume of a most fortunate successe. Wherefore you
haue reason both to graunt and offer all kinds of aid, both of men and money, I meane
to the King of the Romanes, who shall fitly serue your turne, to keepe the ballaunce
euen, till you finde a fitter opportunitie. And for that wee know, that vpon anie
worthie peece of seruice the Turkish forces are verie apt to shrinke, for that they relie
wholy vpon their strength, being also apparent that this blow must be rather giuen by
stratageme than by force, it shall not be amisse to touch those meanes which are likely
to aduaunce our purposes: you must be very carefull to drawe them into streit places,
where the warre for want of carriages and other necessarie prouisions may proue
verie cumbersome, as both I haue specified before, and experience hath taught in the
warres of Albania. Againe hee must bee encountered with so strong an armie of foot,
as it may bee able to withstand his troupes of horsemen. Which in respect they are
for the most part vnarmed, might bee easily effected. It is a point of especiall consideration
also to put forth a squadron of choice men to entertaine the Ianisaries in fight,
from the beginning vnto the end of the battell, leauing in like manner conuenient forces
to incounter the rest of his armie: for whereas the manner of the Turkish discipline
is alwayes to reserue the valour of the Ianisaries for the last supplie and recourse to victorie,
when the rest of the armie shall see that they haue beene charged from the
beginning of the fight, they will, no doubt, bee much troubled with this alteration,
and the Ianisaries themselues amazed and disordered with a stratageme vnlooked for.
It can not bee obiected, that this deuice will serue but once, for in trueth it will force
them to forsake that course for euer, when they shall see their policie preuented, by
which they haue many times preuayled against the enemie. It cannot be denied but
by meanes of his prouision Haniball more than once defeated the Romane Legions,
and the Romanes themselues vsing the like stratageme against the Latines, in the
verie bowelles of theyr owne estate during the time of their dissentions and warre,
obtained victorie. Aboue all things bend your care to stirre the people to rebellion
against their Gouernours, by good vsage, exemption etc. This may bee brought
to passe more speedily, by remouing campes, and erecting forts in the Countrey,
both for defence and offence, than by places inhabited, as you may find set out at
large in my Memorialles: I haue there set downe the meanes to make them speedily,
and with small charge, the true reason by which they may be brought to good effect,
the way to hemme in, to cut off, and to subdue securely with good prouisions, the

forces of any great estate, with very few of them; as we find that Cesar himselfe dwelt in
France, by the report of his Commentaries. The least beginning of good successe, will
presently draw downe the Turke, to make warre against them, where you shall bee best
prouided to incounter him: for it standeth him in hand to be iealous (as hee is) of that
reputation in armes, and opinion of superioritie aboue all princes, which hee hath hitherto
held, for feare of disorders and reuolts, which euerie little declining of his fortune
might cause in his mightie estate, by reason of the discontent wherein the people liue in
respect of his tyrannous gouernement.
You haue likewise to consider of your warres with the crowne of Fraunce, the which
are of great consequence in respect of the solide and vnited forces of that realme, and the
coniunction and league which they may easily continue with other Potentates of Christendome,
and chiefly with the princes and states of Italie, for the iealousie wherein they
liue of our greatnesse. But besides that point whereof I warned you before, speaking of
the danger that is in leagues, and the small effect that comes of them, you haue besides
this one secure and sound prouision in readinesse at all times for your further comfort in
this verie case of France, that so often as you shall assault that king within his owne dominions,
which is not hard to doe, considering in what manner his realme is enuironed
on euery side, you shall be sure to draw him backe, and so diuert him both from Italie,
and from other enterprises. Surely the French king warreth in Italie to his great aduantage,
as well in respect of the peoples disposition to innouations, as of the great gaine
he sometimes makes by one only attempt, in comparison of his small expences: we should
haue seene the proofe not many yeares since, if the French could haue made vse of that
aduantage which they held at Cerisoles, or at the taking of Cassal, after the great ouerthrow
which immediately after the reuolt of Siena the Turkish fleere gaue to ours in the
Sicilian sea. Besides, the Italians are so much grieued, being curbed by Milan, Naples,
and Sicile, as they are glad of any oportunitie to weaken our suspected forces, and doe
willingly offer themselues to any one that will promise to ease them of their burthen, and
to set them free, not forseeing that the French, if they were once masters of the like forts
within the body of the state, would be as much, or more offensiue to their liberties.
The warre of Piedmont will make the French king wearie in a short time, if you indeuour
to fight hand to hand as they do: for by a custome which they haue long obserued,
to leaue no enemie behind, you shall verie easily bring this to passe, if you hold some
strong towne well fortified against their force, proceeding there from hand to hand as
you find occasion: If they diminish or abate their armie, increase yours, so as you may be
able to take some place of importance, which being weake you may fortifie. Thus by the
helpe of places, and of so great an estate on your backe, you may make warre in winter.
And to these ends if you be prouoked by occasion, I had once resolued for their speedie
riddance and dispatch to cut off their passage out of France to Turin, raising two or three
forts betwixt Turin and the Alpes: for when they shall be forced to maintaine a mightie
garrison, and their prouisions on this side the Alpes cut off, it would be hard for them to
furnish themselues with sufficient store of victuals and munition out of their owne countrey.
In assaulting the French King at home, there are two kindes of warre which promise
prosperous successe; the one is by the commodity which you haue to draw your forces
sooner together, and to enter into the heart of his Countrie, where you shall find abundance
of victualls and other things to maintaine a sufficient army. Before the French
king come into the field, I would haue you seeke to make waie for your selfe, and so to
aduaunce, inlarging your owne course, and cutting off your enemies best oportunities
by forts built in the Countrey, as I aduised you before speaking of your warres against
the Turke, which course Cesar himselfe obserued, when he made warre in that country.
Sometimes oportunitie may be giuen either by the declining of the aduerse partie vpon
some braue attempt of yours, or by your good successe and their misfortunes. Whereupon
you may so preuaile as afterwards you may lay plots to compasse that which is not
yet conquered. Diuisions may happen in the countrey, and a thousand other accidents,
especially in this age, whenas loue and charitie so decay, whereby an enterprise begunne

with iudgement, may be greatly furthered; wise men must not disdaine to goe forwards
by insensible degrees, for so goeth the Sunne about the world; for it is impossible that
a kingdome of such strength, and at vnion within it selfe, should bee at one instant swallowed
vp by anie foreine enemie. But if the least part which is one, bee drawne from
them, and added to a stronger part than their owne, the oddes will grow within a while
to be so great, as they that find the want will smart for it. Surely, if I had vnderstood
the reason from the first. beginning of my proceedings against Fraunce, which I haue
learned since by long experience, and the consequence of manie braue attempts which
I haue made against this realme, vndoubtedly I would haue brought some rare effects to
passe: But it may bee that God hath reserued that for your greater glorie. One onelie
difficultie is to bee thought on this case, which is, that the French may sooner enter
into Italie by certaine months, considering the season of the yeere, and forwardnesse of
the Countrey, than wee can enter into Fraunce: But this aduantage must be preuented
by another stratageme: for as soone as you find that the King hath entred into his charge,
and made his prouisions, deuise to trouble him in Fraunce with so sufficient an armie,
as hee may bee constrained to increase his forces on that side, and so giue ouer all other
intended enterprises. It is needlesse to set downe anie other rules for your proceeding
in this course, so long as you are Lord of the Lowe Countries, and firmely vnited to
your friends and alies in Germanie. Against this mischiefe I find two certaine remedies,
the one by entertaining the French King in Italie, and assaulting him in France, at one
instant. The other in making shew to be readie, and to set forward in so good time, as
hee shall haue other matters to thinke on than his attempts against Italie. You shall easilly
attaine to your desired end, in proceeding after this manner, as well in respect of the
jealousie which the King in his absence hath of that estate, as to auoid the daunger that
may follow, if hee leaue his frontire townes behind his backe enuironed both with forts
and troupes, as Cesar dealt at Marseilles, making warre against Affranius and Petreus. By
this meanes smaller forces may serue your turne, and all the brauerie and terrour which
the French intended in their comming forward, shall turne to your aduantage, and hauing
an other armie ready to aduance, you shall be master of the passages and force him
to abandon that garrison which hee left enuironed with your forces vpon the frontire.
The other way to inuade France, is to set vpon the frontires, and then goe forwards;
but this requireth too long time, and serueth rather to diuert the French Kings course
from Italie, than to feede our hope with gaining by the match, in respect of the little
likelihood to winne anie great townes vpon the frontires, for the French king is mightie,
and will come armed to rescue rather than leaue it in daunger: Besides, the winning
of a towne by batterle, requireth a long time, and a wanton charge. It is verie true that
the difficultie may be recompenced in some sort, by making choice of such places as import
the cause wholy, or in the greatest part; but of all these waies the first hath most
valour, and is most likely to prooue successefull. I remember well, that when I assaulted
Fraunce towards Landersey, my intent was to haue entred into the bowells of that
Realme, before the comming of the Suissers, but after that I had made some staie about
the winning of certaine townes vpon the frontire, the facilitie that I found in preuailing
against the first that were attempted by my forces, made mee to change my mind,
and to ingage my selfe there, with an assured hope that I might with the like successe go
through with the rest, before the King should be strong enough to march: but beeing
staied there longer than I either thought or expected, the King had oportunitie to make
himselfe stronger with ease, to defend himselfe with greater securitie, and to constraine
mee by force to retire, and to yeeld to an agreement which was then made rather (to
tell you plaine) to colour my retreat, than for anie good effect that followed.
Now if in making warre against France you should preuaile in your attempt, to the
which (for that it were against the skill of Armes) I can not beleeue you will be euer
drawne without great likelihood of victorie; you must labour effectually to bring it to
that point: Pursue your aduantage in such sort as I haue said, for by this meanes the king
being forced for the most part to supplie his wants from countries farther off, before he
shalbe ready with new forces, you may come vpon him with a fresh enterprise: But if the

worst should happen vnto you, (which God forbid) you shall alwaies haue leisure to repaire
your strength, and so much the more freely, both for danger and all other inconueniences,
if you can put off the hazard nere to the point of winter, so as the credit which he
getteth in that action may not further his affaires in Italie: To these ends a gallant armie
consisting of a reasonable number, shall auaile you more than huge multitudes. And against
France also you may greatly strengthen your estate, by maintaining a continuall
number of foot, to match their ordinarie troupes of horse, as you shall find it set downe
more plainely in my Reports, with full consideration of all accidents, augmenting your
proportion against the Turke, according to the rate wherein he exceeds the French king
and others, princes of Europe, in force. It standeth neither with your iudgement nor skill,
in any of these cases which I haue set down, to giue your first onset vpon anie place which
requireth long time, great forces, and excessiue charge before it can be won, vnlesse you be
first sure of some secret intelligence within the towne, or priuie to some great defect or
want which pincheth them, whether it be of men, munition, leaders, victualls, and such
like necessarie things which they can not forbeare; or haue some certaine knowledge of
the vnsetled humors of the people, or of some chiefe magistrates, or of diuision within the
bodie of the state it selfe, so as you may assure your selfe before the cardes be dealt, to win
the great rest by setting it vp.
These occasions ought not at anie time to be neglected, vnlesse you meane to abandon
the due consideration of the Art of Warre, for otherwise the enemie gaineth too much
time for the preparing of his forces, and brings his desires to passe; whereas on the other
side, it is hard to maintaine an armie long with victualles and other prouisions at a
siege without making some roome at the first for the passage of his conuoies. I remember
well that I once vndertook an enterprise against Prouence in France, my Rende-vous
was at Marseilles, which was the cause that my hopes were made frustrate, and my charges
lost, and withall, my retreat was exceeding daungerous: And which is worst of all,
the eyes of Francis the French King were opened by this meanes, so as hee plainely discouered
the daungers of his realme, and forthwith sought to settle himselfe at Turin, and
to make his residence in Piedmont where the French did afterwards make warre to their
best aduantage, discouraging the ready meanes of diuerting all attempts on that side against
Fraunce, besides the credite which they got by the action with the States of Italie.
If they had knowne (as I haue said) how to vse this prosperous successe to their best
aduantage, I doubt not but they had often put all the estates you holde thereabouts in
daunger: Seeke therefore alwayes to assault the French King in his owne Realme, and
to preuent his first attempts, for otherwise you cannot when you will ridde your hands
of him, by making a diuersion from Italie, if hee may be suffered to put in his foote, for
then the difficultie of repairing your armie with supplies of Spaniards, considering the
situation will be verie great, wherein all consisteth, for they beeing defeated by anie
mischaunce, it giues great incouragement to the States of Italie, to laie new plottes,
especially the Venetiant whom euerie little blast doth easily awake. Persuade not your
selfe that your deerest friends in Italie, seeing your power decline, will euer adhere to
your misfortunes with the hazard of their owne estates, but rather secretly reconcile
themselues to him that hath the vpper hand, and follow the Victors good fortune. I
would not wish you to applie vour whole care about the recouerie of Siena, which will
be hardly effected. I graunt the Duke of Florence hath beene jealous to that State, considering
his oportunity to annoy them, both by neere neighbourhood, and the power
of his authoritie: This plot if it might take effect, will bee a notable president to all
States, and make them warie how to intermeddle against your power: And which
importeth your cause most of all, you shall by this meanes cut off all intelligence betweene
the French Kings forces, and the States of Italie, who finding the French setled
within the heart of their Countrey, will be more apt to ioyne with them in friendship,
and relie vpon their strength, rather than when they see them farre off in Piedmont;
and much lesse if they can bee drawne on this side the Alpes, whereas their fauour
cannot bee commodious, nor their displeasure daungerous. It shall also much auaile

in your dealing with the Crowne of France, to bee fully informed of the humors
and affections of all such persons as are in greatest fauour with the King, or that stand
for the best offices; thrust your hand secretly into all their competitions, and drawe
the strongest partie vnto you with all the Art you can: for neuer can the Theater of
publique Actions affoord more fauourable shewes in your behalfe, than when it shall
bee moued vnder hand with inuisible deuises. If euer Fortune fauour you so much, as
that either by alliance, or anie other kind of agreement, you shall bee able to remooue
the French out of Piedmont, wincke at all other things. Doe the best you can whereby
the Realme may bee induced to desist from armes; so shall you bee secured from tumults
and many other kindes of crosses, which are more daungerous, and not knowne
to euery man; if afterwards anie occasion be offred of doing your selfe good, forbeare not
to lay holde of it. Thus shall you euer be most secure concerning causes which belong
to Italie. This is the ground vpon which in the end it behoueth you to settle the strongest
sinews of your foreine power, and therefore haue alwayes an eye vnto it with an aduised
consideration.
The reason is not all one for the French to bee now put out of Piedmont, and as if
they had neuer held it, for in the opinion of the world it will be more disgrace vnto them,
than the winning thereof before did yeeld them profit. Wherefore in all your capitulations
and agreements let your eye leuell directly at this end, and your plottes of policie
aime alwayes at this marke. For beleeue me son, and I assure you out of my long experience,
that Piedmont alone will benefit you more, than if on that side which lies next
vnto Flaunders, you had berest him of the third part of his owne kingdome. Seeing
then wee are entred so farre into the State of Italie, and ingaged in the highest mysterie
of State, wee must proceed a little farther in this politique discourse. I will tell you
once againe, that by the life of this one artere the pulse of all your great power doth
beate. This waie your eyes must bee euer bent and open to all oportunities: First I
would haue you vse all deuotion and curtesie to the holie father, and the apostolike Sea;
I would wish you to bee verie kind to the members of the same, as the Cardinalles, Bishoppes,
Prelates and other of the Clergie belonging to the Court of Rome. Be euer
readie for the defence of them and the Catholike profession. In all elections of Popes,
see that you labour not by anie vnchristian, vnlawfull, and indirect meanes to preferre anie
of those Cardinalles that are your especiall friends: Striue not to make one rather
than an other, so as all Competitors bee worthie of the place, for in these sacred
actions the holie Ghost doth worke: And it is better to submit our likings to the
prouidence of God, which turneth all things to the best, as wee may vnderstand by
that which is recorded of Mathias in the Text, than to follow humours or respect particulars.
There is no question but anie of them may bee wonne by due respect, and admit they
should become strange, yet after you haue sought to reconcile your selfe into their fauours
by such meanes as are prescribed you by the holie Ghost, hauing your territories
included in the middest of theyr Countrey, you can neuer want the choice of manie
meanes belonging to the world; by which for your last refuge, when there is no other
meanes, you may insinuate your selfe more easily into their good opinions: I meane either
by alliance with their chiefest friends abroad; or bestowing pensions and sundrie
curtesies vpon such persons of the Clergie as they most affect at home, with a thousand
such like complements, as may pleasure them daily, without anie hinderance to princes
of your qualitie. This is the waie to make the Pope you friend, though at the
first hee were elected by a faction of Cardinalles which depend not on your affection, for
hardly shall you find anie hawke so haggard but hee will prey vpon all apt aduaunxstages:
Hereof you must haue an especiall care, the end whereof is the general good of Christendome,
rather than anie respect of your owne priuate interest; though manie perhaps
doe not so much regard those bonds which ought to moue them simply to make a Pope,
as they doe the profit when a Pope is made to their purpose.
The territories of the Church lie (as we may say) in the very heart of Italie, but so inuironed
with yours, as they may serue for a garland: if Siena were once recouered, they

should then be compassed in on all sides with your forces. So as the way which you shall
take, according to the rule set downe before, shal be made more easie by your diligence,
and the fauours which you meane to bestow, shall more readily bring forth those good
fruits which you desire among them. So long as godly men are preferred to that Sea, ther
is no doubt but charitie, religion, and care to keep the seamlesse coat of Christ vnrent, will
moue them both to tender and deserue your loue. If men delighted more with worldlie
honours should hold those places (which God forbid) yet would they be alwaies glad to
make a friend of one who^ they are not able to incounter with hospitalitie, besides his deuotion
to the popes the^selues. The curtesies which you may likewise vse to the cardinals
your speciall frends, wil much fortifie this warie and discreet co^sideration. Apply your care
fro^ time to time to win many friends amo^g the cardinals aswel old as yo^g, the which may
be easily effected, in giuing the^ preferme^ts and such dignities as they desire. The like course
I would haue you hold with the Bishops and other prelats of that Court: but haue a care
to deale most bountifully with such persons as are most inward with his Holines.
Aboue all things ground your selfe vpon the conscience and equity of your demands,
in dealing with the cardinals and other friends; but in cases that require grace and fauour,
see that you rely vpon the bountie of the Pope himselfe, lest you be deceiued of your expectation.
Sticke not to afford all commodities out of your estates to the court of Rome,
with a bountifull and a willing heart, and if necessitie inforce you to breake with the Pope,
yet vse the matter with such temperance and warinesse, as the world may rightly vnderstand
the reason: and acknowledge that the cause of this stratageme grew not from your
desert, but that you were inforced thereunto for your owne safetie. Religion is the bond
of loue, and therefore nothing is more contrarie to hope and expectation of good successe,
than to leaue an ill opinion in the minds of men of your affection towards those
that hold the place and credite of Gods ministers.
In matters pertaining to acco^pts in general, conforme your self at al times with obedience
and humblenes to the certen and infallible determination of his Holines, and howsoeuer
causes of vnkindnes may arise, yet let the world see your religio^ is vncha^geable. Touching
the Venetians you may easily take order, if you find it good for your selfe to continue in
the league with the^, being (as I said before) so disposed to rely wholy vpo^ time as they wil
wander between these vaine and idle expectations, suffring the^selues willingly to be drawn
on from day to day, and consuming stil with a soft fire of ambitio^ till at length they become
a prey to some martial power without any great difficulty. Moreouer the Turke, hauing
shut the^ from Corfu, wil soone bereaue the^ of Cipres and Candie, and restraine them much:
And considering that the trade of Venice standeth wholie vpon merchandise, you may
neuer vndertake anie enterprise vpon hope of their assistance, especially against the Turk,
if it be not at such time as they are very lowe, and you in great prosperitie; and yet euen
then also it might be thought that ielosie and feare of your good fortune wil work more in
their suspitious conceits, than any other due consideratio^, or respect whatsoeuer. Experience
hath taught that these mean conceits, whose humor is to apprehend more than anie
can containe, lose more by emulation than they get by policie; but whensoeuer you haue
cause to break league with them, assault them first, and with all celeritie, for as they do lie in
wait to worke vpon the first aduantage that their neighbors miseries doe afford, so states
which haue often had proofe of this strange inclination, look warily to their attempts, and
hold no stricter league with the^ than stands with their owne necessities. If then you shall
begin to plie the^ lustily before they ca^ haue leisure to combine with other states, or make
prouision for war, a matter so long neglected by their sloath, as it will appeare they haue
quite forgotten their first alphabet; and as in popular estates fear breedeth infinit confusio^s,
so may you make your profit of their ignorance. If this be doubted of, you can desire no
plainer proofe, than their want aswell of carriages, as of policie in letting shippe so many
braue occasions as these late yeeres haue offred. It seemes that they presume out of their
sloathfull humor to maintaine their dignitie by certaine quiet ordinances, and sober institutions
made by their gowne men: and herein fortune hath bin more fauorable to them;
but yet it may be said without offence or error, that commonweales so qualified, doe neither
know nor vnderstand in what sort to vse their power to their best benefit.

This weaknes being found, in setting first vpon their estate, I do assure my selfe, that with
that sodaine alteration, and many other troubles and disorders that will ensue, you may
bring some great enterprise to passe, before they be awaked from sleepe, or resolued among
themselues what to spend, or whom to relie vpon, what Leaders to imploy, or
haue reuiued their old discipline or manner of making warre so many yeeres neglected in
their gouernement. Their couetous desires to cut off all cause of charge in time of peace,
their ignorance in training men that may be fit to serue when need requires, their want
of leaders in the bodie of their owne estate that may withstand the violence of any mightie
potentate, that maketh head against their force, will alwayes giue aduantage to your
policie, in taking the first start of them: you may boldly imagine that by this means you
shall inforce them to their owne defence, whereas if you giue them leisure to beginne
the warre, and to assault you first in the realme of Naples, they might doe great harme,
in respect of their kind vsage towards them, and their ciuil gouernment which is yet fresh
in memorie. If you find no likelihood that they will fall to their defence, inforce them
what you may, and seeke to preuent their purposes by meanes of diuision in some good
sort, for herein consisteth the greatest aduantage of your actions. I must now let you vnderstand
that in seeking to assault them first, your greatest care must be by all means possible
to thrust into the verie centre of the State, for hauing forced them to put garrisons
into all the strong places which they hold, it is not possible they should bee able at the
same time to keepe the field. In the meane time you cannot but find some great want in
one or other of their forts, either of leaders, garrisons, prouisions, or paies; you may find
out the striuing humors that are set a worke by faction in generall, or of persons discontented
in particular. In any one place that your fortune shall be to take, vse your happy
beginning as an extreme to further good, and leaue a president and incouragement to others,
by your princely dealing with those, so as they may more easily bee brought to
yeeld vpon reasonable conditions and honourable offers made to Burgers, Leaders, souldiers
etc. with other meanes which circumstances, time and place shall present to your
discreet consideration. If you be once master of the field whatsoeuer is not strong will remaine
at your deuotion, or they shall be inforced to come to field, where they can not
long continue their garrisons being prouided: for hereupon a battell must ensue, which
in respect of their long discontinuance of armes, and want of knowledge and experience of
the seruice of these times, will be greatly to their disaduantage, and disgrace, so as they
may be diuerted first from the realme of Naples, which is one of their best hopes, when
they may approch without opposition.
Be carefull also that no other prince in Italie grow too potent, although he seeme to
depend wholy vpon your crowne; for in this case you must be no lesse careful to contain
those which make shew to be your friends within reasonable bounds, than to keep downe
your enemies; holding it for an infallible ground, that they which make profession to follow
you, and are most forward in your seruice, would be the first (vpon the least disaduantage
and declining of your fortune, and hope to better their owne) that would turne
vnto the other side. But as the many diuisions and factions in Italie doe make the labour
hard, to keepe that which you now hold, as sometimes it happened betwixt the States of
Greece and the Romans, you must euer presuppose this principle, that the Estates of Italie
desire aboue all things to see a Duke setled at Milan, and a King at Naples; to this
end tend all their practises, for that is a meanes to weaken your incroching power, and
withall to free themselues from forreine seruitude: The reasons are, for that with petie
princes they may treat at all times vpon euen hand, with you they promise faire in iealousie,
and perseuere in dissimulation. Againe, a Duke of Milan, or a King of Naples,
which had no more estates than that alone to build on, would feare and hope with them,
and euer tie himselfe to them in a firme league of friendship, against forreine forces for
his owne securitie, which is the strongest bond.
But with you they neither dare enter into league, lest thereby you should grow more
strong, nor warre, lest with an ouer-match you should weigh downe their policie.
Besides, a doore well kept is a defence for all that liue vnder one roofe, and in one familie.
The Venetians aboue all wish for this, because they might haue great choice in

setting downe their plottes, and more helpe at their need. The Pope hath also beene
as apt as others to combine and practise to this end: but your best remedie against this
humour will be to take aduantage of the diuisions and factions which happen daily among
themselues, and to maintaine by continuall action, your reputation in armes,
holding good intelligence in euerie state, appointing able and sufficient ministers to attend
the Pope; by fishing with a golden hooke where the streames are troubled. As for
Italie you need not feare anie daunger, if you can deuise to keepe them from combining
craftily within themselues, and especially with the French King on that side the
Alpes, which is not hard to doe, for him that standeth euer watchfully vpon his gard,
and hath in his head discretion to see, and in his hands meanes to preuent their purposes.
The safest course as I haue aduised you before, is to nippe off the first buddes of ambition
before they ripen to your preiudice, or seed to the hazard of your gouernement.
These briefe notes (my deare sonne) I thought good to leaue with you, as certaine
grounds and principles, whereunto you may resort for resolution of doubts as occasion
shall be offered. I am not ignorant that many circumstances may change the rules, but
yet the reason of them well obserued will direct you, in what sort to deale, howsoeuer
fresh occasions may inforce you somewhat to digresse and varie from my former obseruations.
Touching the manner in particular of fashioning your policie, both in time of
peace and warre to the best vse, with extraordinarie plots for the performance of greater
actions, rather sensibly conceiued in my head vpon likely grounds, than warranted
by certaine proofe during the time of my flourishing in the world, I referre you to the
compleate discourse which shall euer witnesse both my loue to you, and my trauell for
your happinesse. For a conclusion of this point, I charge you by the interest which by
nature I may claime, and by the duetie which by the lawe of God you owe me, that in
all enterprises you set the rule of conscience before your eies, and what stratagems and
policies soeuer you vse to attaine vnto your desires, yet let the ground and end be iustifiable
in his sight who weigheth all things, not by humane passion, but by his most holie
ordinance.
Be kind in naturall affection to all the branches of your honourable house: Continue
league and friendship with your ancient allies: Preuent the first beginning of your enemies
attempts: Beware of sugred words, where reason maketh you to suspect ill deeds:
Be sure of sound aduertisements from euerie state: Be iust at home, and bountiful abroad:
so shall your end be sutable to your entrie, and both to that vnfained wish which your fathers
loue affordeth you. I will neuer cease to pray for your good successe: in you it resteth
to proceed in such a course as praise may sound your purposes.


D. Philip the second of that name, and 23.
King of Castille etc.
AMong other aduertisements which the emperour had giuen vnto the king D. Philip
his sonne,1556 he had exhorted him much to make a peace with the French, and to keep
it; Mary Queene of England did also affect it, being desirous to haue him by her to haue
some issue: whereupon they entred into treatie, and there was a truce concluded for 5
 yeeres, by the which it was agreed that euerie one should remaine in possession of that
he held.Truce betwixt the French and Spaniards for fiue yeares. By this truce which was both profitable and honourable for the French, Octauio
Farnese duke of Parma returned into fauour with king Philip. But soone after the Pope
falling in quarrel with the king of Spaine, touching the Colonnois whom he had excommunicated,
and depriued of their goods, as rebells to the Church, hauing made his nephew
Iohn Caraffe duke of Paliano,Bre^^h betwixt Pope Paul the fourth, and the king of Spaine. and giuen vnto his son, but yet an infant, the castle of Caui, belonging
to Marc Anthonie Colonne, with the title of Marquesse; the D. of Alba viceroy of
Naples, hauing commandement from his master to presse the restitution of the Colonnois
to their possessions, had protested that he would do it by force, who (hearing that the Caraffes
did fortifie Paliano, vpon the confines of the realme of Naples) sent the erle of Sanvalentino
to the Caraffi, exhorting them that they would not attempt a thing so preiudiciall
to his Maiestie, and that they should doe all good offices to pacifie the Pope, and to

take away the occasions of these tumults, seeing that they might expect more from
the King of Spaines bountie,Earle of Sannalentino at Rome to treat at accord. by quietnesse, than from their vncle, by such daungerous
and not durable Innouations, which could not produce any thing but warre and
ruine. The Earle complayned also in the Duke of Albas behalfe, that his Holinesse had
vsed all them sowerly that were friends to the Emperour, and to the King of Spaine, and
that hee daily gaue new occasions to thinke,Duke of Alba complaines of the Popes actions. that his heart was estraunged from them,
for that to wrong the fauorites, friends, and dependants of the house of Austria, without
respect of anie, was a signe of much hatred which was borne them, and small accompt
that was made of them: besides arming and leuying new troupes daily, the
which were sent vnto diuerse places of the frontire, and finally causing a fort to bee
built vpon the confines of the realme of Naples, and imploying men therein, that
were suspected to the house of Austria, did shew plainely that hee had done them
wrong, or meant to wrong them, and then defend it by force. But this was against
the quiet of Christendome, seeking to ouerthrow the hope of a generall peace, which
with great toyle was lately grounded vpon a truce: and to receiue into Rome, not only
the enemies of his King, but open rebelles, was nothing else but to approue their
treacherie, and to haue an intent to vse their councell or seruice to preiudice his Maiesty,
seeing they were so familiar, in his Court. The which hee should beleeue hee could not
long endure, beeing of so generous a mind, and of so great power as hee needed not
to feare anie man; and if hee had endured vntil that time, it was onely in respect of the
holie Sea, desiring peace aboue all things, whereunto the Pope should bee more inclined
than he, in regard of his dignitie and charge.
The Pope answered pertinently to euerie one of these points, shewing that it was
not fit for anie man,Answer made by the Pope to the duke of Albas complaint. much lesse for a Catholike King, or his ministers to seeke (vpon
anie colour whatsoeuer) to hinder the Popes authoritie ouer his subiects, that he might
not take knowledge of their offences and punish them, for the respect hee should beare
to anie Potentate: and that hee (although that the King of Naples were feudatarie
to that Sea) tooke no care for that which was doone in that kingdome, much lesse
should hee with such vehemencie seeke an accompt in Rome of the Popes actions, who
was a free and absolute Lord: But touching that which was spoken of armes and souldiers,
it was neither in that citie nor anie where else, a preparation to warre, but for
the safetie and defence of his person and State, seeing that hee had cause to feare secret
treason, and that which they could not doe by poison, they would seeke to effect by
the sword, and they that could not depriue him of his life, would with ignominie spoile
him of his estate, hauing before his eyes the example of Clement the seuenth by his too
great trust. And as hee could not altogether blame his Maiesties royall conceptions, so
hee could not excuse the malice of some of his followers, who haue thought therein to
please him, whom hee also blamed, for entertaining anie hard conceit in the Kings
mind, causing him to suspect his Holinesse actions and his nephews, so as happily he
had commaunded him to send some troupes vnto the frontires of the territories of the
Church, vnder Bernardin of Mendosa, and that they had made other demonstrations
nothing conformable to the peace, which the Duke seemed to desire, according to
the intent of the King his master. Touching enemies and rebelles which he saied he had
receiued into Rome, hee answered, that hee might well know, that that Citie had
beene alwayes a common Countrie, wherewith the King should not be grieued: Besides,
the Duke of Alua, who made all this noyse, should consider how much the Pope
of Rome was reuerenced and respected by him, seeing that hee had receiued and fauoured
Marc Anthonie Colonna, who had beene excommunicated by him, with
all those that should receiue or assist him. And as for the Kings well taking of it,
it was well knowne, and of what power hee was, seeing that hauing scarce taken in
hand the gouernement of his Realmes, hee would haue soueraigne Princes respect
his Maiesties fauourites, the which hee entertained in other mens estates: But notwithstanding
hee did hope that God would fauour the iust cause, and that beeing forced
to take some other resolution, hee trusted to find them that would helpe the oppressed.

But after this they fell to open armes: the Pope apprehending the preparations
which were made by the Spaniards in the realme of Naples,Truce broken betwixt France and Spaine. had recourse vnto the
French King, and to the forces of Fraunce, the auncient refuge of Popes oppressed.
This was an occasion to breake the truce, and to bring Fraunce and Spaine againe to
armes. There had been a league made by the procurement of the cardinall of Lorraine
(before the conclusion of the truce) betwixt the Pope, Henrie the French king, and the
Duke Ferrara, whereof the Duke should be generall in Italie, in qualitie of the Kings
lieutenant.Cardinall Carraffe legate in Fraunce. Cardinall Carraffa the Popes Nuntio was sent into France for Legat, who
brought a sword vnto the king, in signification of warre, at whose instance there were
three thousand foot appoynted to bee sent to Rome, whereof part were speedily imbarked
in those gallies which brought this Legate to Marseilles. The Pope hee stood vpon
his gard, entertained captaines, and gaue commissions to leuie men, causing the places
about Rome to be fortified. The duke of Alba seeing the French king ingaged in this
quarrell, entred in hostile manner into the territories of the Church, where hee tooke
many places, and brought his army neere to the gates of Rome, which made the Pope
to importune the French King for succours. Afterwards hee tooke the towne of Ostia,
and the castle; the which had wonderfully amazed the Romans, if Peter Strossy had not
beene, who since his defeat, being no friend to the Spaniards, had liued in Rome, and
had accompanied Cardinall Carraffa into Fraunce, and returned with him to Rome by
the kings commaundement, who imployed himselfe wholy for the Caraffes who had all
the authoritie, wherefore hee was verie pleasing vnto them. By his industrie and valour,
Ostia with some other places were recouered from the Spaniards.
The king desirous to rleieue the Pope,Duke of Guise sent into Italie. sent Francis of Lorraine Duke of Guise into Italie,
as the Popes souldier, with whom, and with the Duke of Ferrara hee had made
certaine conuentions, for the entertainment and safetie of the armie, consisting of twelue
thousand foot, French, Suisses, and Grisons, and two thousand horse, with the which he
passed the Alpes in the heart of winter.
About this time D. Iohn de Luna was in Flaunders, who (as wee haue said) had been
called thither touching Fernand Gonzague:Iohn de Luna flies into Fra^ce. hee seeing himselfe very seuerely handled by
the Kings ministers in that businesse, seeking a strict accompt of him of the munition of
the castle of Milan, being accused to haue imployed it to his owne priuate vse, hee resolued
to flie from Brussels, who comming into Fraunce, was graciously receiued by
the Christian king, and an honourable pension giuen him for his maintenaunce. Hee
wrote from thence to his sonne Diego, that hee should deliuer the castle of Milan (where
he remained in his fathers place) to whomsoeuer his king should commit it, and that neither
hee nor his brethren should euer swarue from his seruice. And so it was deliuered
by way of prouision to Alonso Pescioni, by order from the catholike King, and afterwards
to Alonso Figueroa, who was sent Castellan thither, fearing the danger.
The Emperour Charles hauing the last yeare made a resignation of all his realmes and
dominions, shewing a rare President of his fatherlie loue, and of a wise and temperat
mind, hee resolued also to write vnto his brother touching the gouernement of the Empire,
and, leauing the gouernement of his states more free vnto his sonne, retire himselfe,
and spend the remainder of his life in a free and quiet contemplation. Wherefore on the
seuenth day of September this yeare one thousand fiue hundred fiftie and sixe he sent doctor
Saler into Germany to his brother Ferdinand with a resignation of the gouernement
of the empire with the Crowne,Charles resignes the empire to his brother. Scepter, and other Ornaments; pretending, that being
vnable to vndergoe that burthen, by reason of his age, and the infirmities which did
afflict him extraordinarily, hee persuaded the Electors to confirme the said Ferdinand in
his place, being yonger, stronger, and more apt to beare the burthen of such an empire, to
whom there was giue^ by the prouidence of God, for a naturall enemy the Turk, who was
mighty and alwais watchful, the which was now most to be feared, for that he heard he was
making a great preparation for war. He did write particularly to euery one of the electors
touching that busines, and a very familiar letter vnto his brother, recommending his son vnto
him, that he would direct and assist him in all occasions, with his councel and help. On
the 14 day of the moneth he went from Gaand into Zeland, his ships attending him at

Flessingue, but for that the wind was contrary, hee was forced to staie many daies at Zuytbourg
a village betwixt Flessingue and Middelbourg,Charles the fifth passeth into Spaine to a solitary life. which turning faire, hauing taken
his leaue of his sonne, and giuen him his blessing, and imbraced all the Princes and Noblemen,
he tooke shipping with his two sisters Mary widow to Lewis King of Hongary, and
Leonora first widow of Portugal, and then of France, who would needs accompany him
in this voiage.
He came in a eleuen daies to the coast of Spaine, and landed at Laredo in Biscay, where
before that he receiued any of those Noblemen that came to doe their duties to him, hee
kneeled downe, and gaue God thankes, for that in the last yeeres of his life, hee had suffred
him to come and die in that country, which had alwaies beene most deere vnto him, and
by whose meanes he knew he was come to the hight of that honour and greatnesse: And
then imbracing those Noblemen and Grandos of Spaine very louingly, he past by Bourgos
to Vailledolit, whereas his Nephew Don Carlo was, to whom he gaue many good instructions,
putting him chiefly in mind of religion and Iustice, where resting some daies,
and leauing his sisters there, that he might haue no let to attend the life which hee had propounded,
he retired himselfe to the Monastery of Saint Iust of the Order of Saint Ierosme
de la Vera, neere to Placentia, a desart place, in the Prouince of Estremadura. Here, with
foure seruants onely to serue him in his necessity, hee past his life in continuall contemplation,
giuing great almes and doing other good deeds of charity, for the which hee had reserued
a hundred thousand ducats yeerely out of his great possessions. Pope Paul the
fourth hearing of his resignation, was much troubled, thinking that the Emperor could not
doe it, seeing it was necessary, that beeing desirous to leaue off that degree, whereunto hee
had beene aduanced by the Popes authority, hee should resigne it into the Popes hands;
whose office it then was to write vnto the Electors to prouide one that were worthy of
that dignity, who was to obtaine the ordinary confirmation from him, wherein Ferdinand
afterwards found some difficulty.
Queene Leonora being in Castille shee had a great desire to see the Infanta,Enterview betwixt the mother and the daughter. D. Maria of
Portugall her daughter, who remained at Lisbone, wherein there was some difficulty vpon
the point of honour and conuenience, whether the mother should goe into Portugal,
or the daughter into Castille, so as the Emperour was forced to write somewhat sharply vnto
the king D. Iohn. In the end the daughter came to see the mother in the city of Badajos,
which was the last time of their meeting.
The king of Algier with the helpe of an army at sea of Turkes,Oran beseeged and valiantly defended. of two and forty gallies,
and many Moores at land, did much annoy the coast of Afrike, and in the end came to Oran
thinking to take that towne from the Spaniards. Being incamped there the seuenth
day of August, and viewed it where they might plant their battery, they beganne to cast vp
trenches about the wall, planting some peeces to batter the castle of Alchaizer, but it was
very indiscreetly done, for they lay open both to the artillery of the fort, and to that of the
port Tremisene, so as very many of them were slaine. Whereupon they were forced to
make new rampars, and to find out a better seat for their lodgings, the which were on euery
side discouered, their army being great, for besides 12000. Turkes, there was an infinite
number of Moores, both horse and foote. They staied there some daies before they
resolued to batter it, for that they could not find a conuenient place, but that they should
be wonderfully annoyed by the ordnance from the fort, which standing high discouered
the country round about, and shot into their trenches. In the meane time the beseeged
sallied forth dayly to skirmish, and carried away the honour in a manner alwaies: and although
there were not aboue two thousand souldiers in the whole garrison, which were
diuided in Mersalcabir, the castle Alchaizer and the towne, yet the Earle of Alcauderte the
Gouernor sent them continually forth to annoy the enemy. But the Moores resoluing in
the end to batter it, and come to an assault, on the fifteenth day of August they beganne
to batter the castle in two places, where they themselues receiued the greatest losse; for besides
many others, all their gunners were slaine, so vnskilfully they had planted their batterie,
so as at night they withdrew it,Turkes and Moores flie from Oran. knowing that all their endeauors were vaine. The
next day the Turkes began to retire towards the sea with dishonor, making all possible
speed to get into their gallies, which lay at Sorzet, and the Moores on horse-backe sauing

themselues by flight. The reason why they receiued no more losse by the Spaniards
in their retreat, was for that they heard thereof laie, when as most of them had recouered
their gallies, or were fled away on horse-backe.
There was some slaughter made of the Moores that were footm^en, but the greatest
part of them were pardoned, for that being of the country, the Spaniards would incense
them as little as might bee, notwithstanding that they were treacherous and of no faith.
The Earle tooke some of their baggage which the enemies had left behind them for hast,
with one peece of Ordnance, and if they had had three or foure hundred launces to follow
then sodainely, few of the Turkes had escaped, for that they were all in a confusion, and
most of them without armes. This sodaine retreat of the Turkes at the enterprise of Oran,
eased the Catholike Kings army of much toyle, hauing beene many daies doubtfull,
whether they should goe and releeue this towne, or carry the Spaniards into the
Realme of Naples, to the Duke of Alua.
After all the broiles in Italy,1557 betwixt the Pope and the King of Spaine, and the taking
and retaking of many townes, in the end both parties seemed to incline vnto a peace. The
Pope being a man of a small discours and ignorant of his owne affaires, fearing to bee abandoned
by his foraine forces, which hee could not entertaine but with great charges,
which his meanes would hardly supply, suffring himselfe to bee gouerned by
men which deceiued him,Pope yeelds to treat of a peace. and applied all to their owne priuate profits, with supreme authority,
men of no faith, and which had many practises; hee therefore yeelded to their
persuasions which did mediat a peace betwixt him and the King of Spaine, amongst
which were the Duke of Florence and the Venetians, desirous to diuert this warre, which
could bring nothing but spoiles and ruines. The Duke of Guise lying neere to Rome
had newes of the battaile of Saint Quentin lost by the French; wherefore hee persuaded
the Pope to take some course for himselfe for that hee should bee forced to returne
with his army or the greatest part thereof into France, to succour that Realme, which
he saw in apparent danger.
King Philip did in like manner write vnto the Venetians,King of Spaine disirous of peace with the Pope. shewing how weake the Popes
hopes were growne, yet he offred all honourable conditions of peace to his Holinesse, referring
the composition to the Iudgement of their common-weale, if the Pope and Viceroy
should disagree: Hee did also send commaundement to the Duke of Alba, that
hee should procure a peace with all conditions; and so as his friends and seruants might
not bee opprest, hee should accept any accord from the Pope, with whom hee meant
not to bee any more in disgrace, and that hee desired no greater fruites of the victory
which hee had newly gotten, than to be at peace with his Holinesse. The Duke was then
ready to inuest Paliano, but the Cardinall of Santafiora continuing to negotiate this peace,
had often sent Alexander Placidi his Secretary vnto the Viceroy, to let him vnderstand,
that the Pope at the intreaty of many Cardinalls, had yeelded to a peace, and sent him
these conditions.
That the Pope was well pleased to receiue Philip king of Spaine, and the Duke of Alba
into fauour, pardoning all the iniuries they had done vnto the Church, so as the Duke
with all his troupes did within tenne daies depart out of the territories of the Church leauing
the townes and forts taken in that warre free vnto the Pope: and that hee in like manner
would cause the Duke of Guise to depart for France within tenne daies. The Duke
of Alba although he knew the king his Masters mind, and were himselfe desirous of peace,
yet would he make vse of the occasion,Duke of Aluas answer touching a peace. and haue it with all aduantages: And therefore
hee answered the Cardinall, that those propositions were to be propounded to men that
were vanquished, and not to victors: But if the Pope would haue peace with the king
of Spaine, he should accuse his owne iniustice, for spoyling the Colonnes, and his error
hauing imprisoned so many of his Maiesties vassalls and seruants; making warre against
him, and calling in the French to preiudice his states, for the which hee should craue pardon:
a proposition which shewed rather the pride of that Nation, that the mind of the
Prince, to whom it was no small blemish.
The Caraffi seeing the present danger, and doubting the vast designes of the Spaniards in this
great prosperity, according to the which they doe commonly guide their passions, either

insolent or deiected, they persuaded the Pope to retire into Fraunce, or to some
other place of safetie, leauing garrisons of Frenchmen in all the forts belonging to
the Church, to kindle such a fire in Italie, as neither the Spaniards nor their partisans
should euer bee able to quench. But the Pope who naturally did not loue
strangers, and had receiued small seruice from the French, reiected it as a desperate
Councell, yet being resolued rather to imbrace any partie than yeelding to the Viceroys
propositions, to do a thing contrarie to his mind and dignity.
At such time as they treated of this accord, the Viceroy (the more to terrifie the
Pope) began to aduance with his armie towards Rome, with an intent to giue an assault
to the Citie, and then retyre, yet it was giuen out that hee had a meaning to
take it, but his designe was made frustrate by the vigilancie of the Caraffi. The duke
hauing relation from Palazzo and Moschera (two of his Captaines, whom he had sent
in the night to view the citie) that giuing a sudden assault towards Port Maior, with the
helpe of some peeces of artillerie, it might bee easily forced, hee remoued with the
armie,Duke of Alua goes to assaile Rome. and staied at Colonna, where the sixe and twentieth day of August at night,
hee caused his armie to march in this order. The light Horsemen were in the foreward,
hee made a great Squadron of all the Spanish foot, which serued for the battell, and
the Dutch had the rereward, and on their flankes they had other troupes of horse.
And for that they were in some doubt of the French which were at Tiuoli, they sent
some troupes of horse and foot on the right hand to stay the enemie, if they should
haue any notice of their enterprise. Hee then sent aboue three hundred before with
ladders, and other instruments to climbe vp, and to breake open gates if need were,
that being brought by some neere way neere vnto Port Maior, they might giue a sudden
assault, and being seconded by some horse which were neere them, they might enter
the Citie, and keepe a port vntill that the rest of the armie arriued.
The order was that they should present themselues vnto the wall about the seuenth
houre of the night, but there falling a small continuall raine, the waies were so broken,
as being constrained to take a longer course, it was breake of day before they
arriued, so as being discouered by some of the Countrimen, they aduertised them of
the citie, which made them retyre speedily, leauing their ladders against the walles,
and many cloakes wherewith they had couered themselues from the raine, yea, and
some armes, but the slackenesse of the enemie in the pursute was the cause that
there were not aboue fiue and twentie or thirtie taken.
Cardinall Caraffy had intelligence by the Secretary Placidi, when he came from the viceroy,
that the armie began to rise; whereupon hee doubted they would assaile Rome,
or Tiuoli, and take the French vnprouided, so as hee gaue them warning ouer night,
and hee himselfe (not making it knowne to the Romanes, in whom he had no great
confidence) wach^ all night with the duke, and was in armes, doubling the sentinels wheras
they most doubted the enemie. Ascanio de la Corne, who commanded the horse that
went to second the 300 foot, seeing the lights about the wall, and the gards in a readines,
held the enterprise to be discouered. And to confirme this opinion, foure light horsemen
went forth earelie to get some bootie, they thinking by reason of the darkenesse of
the night, the number to be greater, and that they had laied an ambush, whereupon
they retired.
The duke of Alba comming neere vnto Rome, and seeing his men had not done
any thing, thought that they stood readie within to receiue them. And for that he
vnderstood by certaine spies, that Strossy had led foure hundred Horse and twelue
companies of Gascons the euening before out of Tiuoli, it confirmed him in his beleefe,
that they were entred into Rome,Rome in danger to be sackt. hauing notice of the Spaniards comming, wherupon
he caused the armie to retire to Colonna from whence it came: without doubt
if hee had but attempted it, Rome had beene taken and sackt. The citie was so ill
garded, as a lesser armie would haue forced it, for that the Romanes were enemies
to the Caraffi, for the wrongs they thought they had receiued of them, and of the souldiers
that were within the citie; of the which the Gascons did not spare their goods

nor honors, and the Germans, enemies to the Pope, spoiled the church and altars. The Pope
considering of these things, and lamenting the miseries of the time, being forced to countenance
and not to punish those wretches, who called themselues defenders in name, but
in effect were destroiers of that miserable citie, beganne to bee fully resolued to peace;
and the rather for that hee did visibly see the danger wherein hee was, being certified
that the Citizens of Rome had resolued, that if the duke of Alba returned, they
would send to capitulate with him, and open him the gates vpon honest conditions.
The duke of Guise, and Peter Strossy entred into Rome after this tumult, who talking
with the Pope, aduised him to accommodate himselfe vnto the time, as wisemen
doe commonly. They laied before him the vnfortunate losse of the French king,
whereby there was no hope of any greater succours, and that hee should remaine
without a Generall, for that hee was to returne speedily into Fraunce, which would
bee no small preiudice vnto him, for that his Nephewes, who were to gouerne the
warre, were of small experience, neither would they beleeue them that vnderstood
more in that art, but intreated them ill, keeping backe their entertainment, so as seeing
his holinesse without money, and without Captaines, they did not thinke the
warre could continue long: wherefore they counselled him to make the speediest
and best accord he could with the king of Spaine. The Pope gaue an attentiue
eare to the free speeches of these Noblemen, and resolued to make an end of the peoples
miseries, wherefore he called the embassadour of Venice vnto him, intreating him
to goe and informe that Senate of the estate of things, and to exhort them in his
name to make some good accord with the imperials.
After manie treaties, in the end a Peace was concluded by the Cardinals of Santafiori
and Vitelli; and afterwards by Caraffa and the duke of Alba, who met together
at Caui. And so by either of them hauing full authoritie from the Pope, and the king
of Spaine, the following accord was published the 14 day of September.
1 That the Pope should receiue from the duke of Alba in the name of the king of
Spaine,Peace betwixt the Pope and the king of Spaine. the submissions that were necessarie to obtaine pardon from his Holinesse, but
afterwards the Catholike king should send a man expresly to that end. And so his Holinesse
should receiue the king into fauour, as an obedient Sonne, admitting him to all
the graces of the holy church, like vnto other Christian Princes.
2 That the Pope should renounce the league contracted with the French king, and
remaine a Neuter, louing them both equally, as his Sonnes.
3 That his Maiestie should cause the townes and Cities demanteled, which had
beene taken and held since the beginning of the warre, to bee restored, if they did in
any sort belong vnto the Apostolike sea.
4 That the ordnance taken on either part in that warre should be restored.
5 That his Holinesse and his Maiestie should forgiue all offences that had beene
done them, and remit all spiritiuall and temporall punishments, graunting them a gerall
pardon, with restitution of their honors, dignities, faculties, and iurisdictions, wherof
they had beene depriued, in regard of that warre. From the which were excepted
Marc Antonio Colonna, Ascanio de la Corgna, and other rebels, the Popes vassals, who should
remaine in the same censure and disgrace, during the Popes pleasure.
6 That Paliano should bee deliuered into the hands of Iohn Bernardino Carbone, sonne
to the Popes Cousin, but faithfull to both parties, deliuering the fort as it was at that
time: and that the said Carbone should sweare fealtie to the pope and king of Spaine,
and to obserue the articles concluded betwixt the Cardinall Caraffa, and the duke of Alba,
hee hauing the gard of Paliano, with eight hundred foot, which should bee paied equally
by the Pope and king.
Besides these there were (as some write) other secret articles concluded betwixt Caraffa
and the duke of Alba, concerning Palieno and that duke.
During these broiles betwixt the Pope and the king of Spaine, the warre was as violent
vpon the frontiers of Artois and Picardie: where the duke of Sauoy being general for
the king of Spain,S. Quentin taken. entred with an armie of 40000 men, he beseeged S. Quentin, defeated

and tooke the Constable which came for to relieue it, and then tooke the towne:
after which the duke of Guise was called home out of Italie.
The duke of Sauoy hauing taken Castelet, and some other places in Picardie,
dissolued his armie: after which the French king hauing raised a great armie commaunded
by the duke of Guise,Calis taken. hee tooke Calis, Guines, and all the land of Oye,
from the English in the heart of winter.1558 Soone after the Marshall of Termes went
with an armie into Flaunders, where hauing taken Bergues and Dunkerke, and beseeged
Grauelin, hee was charged by the earle of Egmont, his armie defeated, and
hee himselfe taken.Marshall of Termes defeated. After which rout the French king leuied new forces, and came
and camped about Amiens: And king Philip on the other side being nothing inferiour
in forces, lodged neere vnto Dourlans. Whilest that these two mightie armies
which lay so neere one vnto another, held all the world in expectation of some
bloudie battell, God inspired the hearts of these two great Princes with a desire to
quench this warre without effusion of bloud, and to preferre an accord before a doubtfull
victorie: wherefore their Deputies being assembled in the Abbaie of Cercampe
vpon the Marches of Artois, hauing propounded certaine Articles, a peace was more
easily concluded at Castell Cambresis,Peace betwixt France and Spaine. vpon the newes of the death of Marie queene
of England. The conditions were:
1 That king Philip being a widower, should marrie Elizabeth eldest daughter to
king Henrie.
2 That Marguerite of Fraunce the kings Sister, should bee giuen in marriage to
Emanuel Philibert duke of Sauoy, and that in consideration thereof, all his country,
townes, Castles and iurisdictions of Sauoy and Piedmont should bee restored, except
the towns of Turin, Quier, Pignerol, Chiuas, and Villanoua of Ast, which should
continue three yeares in the French kings hands, and that in the meane time the king of
Spain should retaine Ast and Verceil.
3 That all the Townes and forts which had beene taken in these last warres,
should bee restored on either part, whether they did belong to those kings, or to others
which had followed their parties, and namely the Island of Corsica to the Genouois,
Montferrat to the duke of Mantoua, and the towne and castle of Bouillon to
the bishop of Leege.
4 That they of the house of Longueuille should bee put in possession of the countie
of Saint Paul, and the king D. Philip of the country of Charalois, the Soueraigntie referued:
but there was no mention made of the Siennois.
5 That the two kings should doe their best endeuours to entertaine the peace of
Christendome, and should procure the continuance and ending of the generall councell
begun at Trent.
This yeare one thousand fiue hundred fiftie and eight,Death of Queen Leonora. queene Leonora sister to the
Emperour Charles the fift, died in Februarie, at Talaberuela three leagues from Badajos
shee was first wife to Emanuell king of Portugall, and then to Francis the French king, she 
was honoured with a royall funerall pompe: And in September following, the emperour
Charles ended all his toiles,Death of the Emperour Charles the fift. and past to a better life in the monasterie of Saint Iust,
where hee had remained two yeares: his bodie was left there to bee afterwards buried in
the monasterie of Saint Laurence, which king Philip his sonne did since build with great
charge and state, in remembrance of the victorie gotten against the French, and the taking
of the Constable on Saint Laurence day, the tenth of August. Hee left an immortall fame
of his valour,Praises of the Emperour Charles. more than any of his predecessors had done in many hundred yeares before,
for that in him all those vertues might be seene, which are to bee desired in one, that shold
gouerne his people iustly, and commaund armes and manage warre iuditiously: He was
verie religious and pitifull to the poore, wherein he seemed rather prodigal than liberall:
In his eating, drinking and apparel he was very temperate and modest, so as he might wel be a
president to any priuat ma^, as wel as to great princes, in the practise of that vertue: He had
a care of justice, to haue it duly administred, although the continual wars wherewith he was
afflicted made him to endure many defects: He not only spake the language of euery nation

on where hee commaunded in Europe, but also those that were not vnder his gouernment,
for hee spake the French and Sclauon tongues readily. In other things
hee was not learned, but eloquent, shewing great grauitie in his speech. It seemed
that his good fortune did strue with vertue to fauour him: Hee was prompt
in execution, and constant against any apparent daunger, little esteeming death.
Hee was so accustomed to the toyles of warre, that vntill hee grew aged, it seemed
no trouble vnto him. Hee liued eight and fiftie yeares sixe moneths and sixe and
twentie daies, his funerals were celebrated with great pompe throughout all the cities
of his realme, yea, throughout Christendome, euerie one seeming both in publike
in and in priuate, to be partakers of this generall losse.
In December after, king Philip his Sonne caused his funerall to bee made at
Brussells with great state and pompe, where all his most glorious enterprises
were represented. Spaine this yeare besides the losse of two such great Princes, was
not a little annoyed by the Turkes army, which going from Prouence, landed some
men in the Island of Minorca, beyond the port of Maone, and there, after some difficultie
and losse,Armie of Turks in Minorca. they tooke Cittadella, where there were not aboue fiue hundred
men to defend it, of whome there were aboue foure hundred slaine, the Turkes
disdaining that they were forced to batter it, and to giue some assaults before they
could take it. And so valour which is wont to bee admired and respected of the enemie,
did now cause a contrarie effect in the hearts of these barbarous and cruell
men, and hauing spoyled the towne and the whole island, they returned with many
prisoners into Prouence.
22 A little before the emperours death,Death of D. Iohn the third king of Portugal. D. Iohn the third of that name king of
Portugall, died at Lisbone, to the great griefe of his subiects, by reason of the infancie
wherein hee left D. Sebastian, the heire of the Crowne. Hee was stately and
beautifull Prince, and of hautie enterprise, hee continued the Nauigation of the Indes,
with great happinesse and reputation, and made the name of Christ to bee
knowne to many barbarous nations. Hee made many leagues with the Potentates of
the East and South to abate the Turkes power, yea with Tamas king of Persia, to
whome hee gaue succours of men, artillerie, and all other munition for warre, teaching
him and his people to warre after the discipline vsed in Europe, that they might
annoy the Turks: yet he was blamed, that to spare money, he had caused many forts in
Afrike to be rased which the kings his predecessors had won with great charge and losse
of men. Notwithstanding, he left manie monuments and marks of his pietie, according to
those times: for in fauor of him, the Pope made Miranda Portalegra and Leira, bishopricks,
and the citie of Ebora, an archbishprick; he reformed many Abbaies, taking away the superfluous
reuenues of the rich, and giuing them to the poore: Hee made an vniuersity
at Coimbra, increased the citie of Lisbone much, the which is the greatest and best
peopled of all Spaine, and by the perfuasion of the Clergie receiued the Inquisition into
Portugal, being vntill that time reiected by his Predecessors, by reason of the abuse:
Hee was a verie great fauourer of the Iesuites: and dyed in Iune, in the Palace of
Riuiere, in the fiue and fiftieth yeare of his age: hee was interred at Belem.
King Philip being at Gand,1559 hee sent William of Nassau Prince of Orange, and
D. Fernando Aluares of Toledo,Castille. duke of Alba (who had left Italie and his charge
to the duke of Sesse being sent in his place) into Fraunce, to sweare and confirme
the articles of the peace in his name: and the duke of Alba had an especiall commission,
to make the matrimoniall promise of the king of Spaine to Elizabeth of
Fraunce, according to the accord, and to solemnize this act, as it is vsuall for
great Princes that are absent.Marriage of king Philip with Elizabeth of France. This was celebrated at Paris in Iulie one thousand fiue
hundred fiftie and nine, but the feasts and ioy of this marriage prooued mornefull
for that k. Henry was hurt with the splinter of a lance, and died, as you may read at large in
the Historie of France. Before his death he wold haue the mariage of his Sister Marguerit
with the duke of Sauoy consummated, which was a great content to that poore prince
dispossest of his state, who feared much that the kings death which was vndoubtfull,

would be a great crosse vnto him. King Philip (after the consummation of his mariage,
by the duke of Alba) sent Ruy Gomez de Sylua vnto his queene, with a rich diamond,
valued by some at eightie thousand crownes, by others, at an hundred and fiftie thousand,
with order, that she should prepare her selfe to goe into Spaine the next yeare.
And hee finding himselfe freed from troubles, and hauing disposed of the affaires of
the Netherlands, appointed gouernours for euerie prouince, and ouer them Marguerite
of Austri^,King Philip returns into Spain his sister, duchesse of Parma, he tooke shipping at Flessingue, in September,
and arriued at Laredo in Biscaie, verie happily: for he was no sooner landed, but
there did rise so violent a storme, and such contrarie winds to that nauigation, as, had hee
beene at sea, he had beene in verie great danger, or, had he beene in Flanders, he could
not haue parted in six monethes. They persuaded him, that his presence in Spaine was
verie necessarie, for that by their acquaintance with the English and Germans, many of
the Court, and other Spaniards which had followed the warres, seasoned with Luthers
opinions, had spred them there: to root out the which the Iudges of the Inquisition
sayd, that they were too weake, the king being absent.
23 Being arriued,Persecutions in Spaine for rel^gion. it was his chiefe care to haue a strict search made for them that
had any ill conceit of the Romish religion, and to haue them rigorously punished: so
as that yeare there were two hideous spectacles presented, one at Vailledolit, and another
at Seuile, of people of diuers conditions, sexes, and ages, condemned to bee
burnt aliue; among which there were some of noble families. Some sayed, it was a
secret plot betwixt the two kings of France and Spaine, at the conclusion of the peace;
for hee of France had begun the like persecutions within his owne realme, and with his
owne officers first. The Archbishop of Toledo, the chiefe Prelate in Spaine, was much
suspected to decline from the Romish Church, wherefore he was put in prison, and his
rents sequestred.
This yeare the Roman Sea was voyd,Death of Pope Paul the fourth by the death of Pope Paul the fourth, being
fourescore and three yeares old; before his death being duely informed of the villanies
of cardinall Caraffa and his brethren, being his nephewes, hee banished them out of
Rome, and depriued them of all their dignities and offices. The cardinall lost his place
of Legat at Bolonia, the duke of Paliano the commaund of the armes and of the gallies
of the Church, and the marquesse of Montabello, the gard which hee had of the
Popes person, and of the palace. This Pope was succeeded by Iohn Ange de Medici, a
Milanois, and was called Pius the fourth: at his first comming to the Sea he caused cardinall
Caraffa to be put in prison, and strangled there, and the duke of Paliano, the earle of
Alife, and other of his predecessors kinsmen, to be beheaded, being conuicted of many
crimes. He did intimate the Councell of Trent, which had beene left off since the yeare
1552, but it began not vntill the yeare 1562.
During the warres of Europe, Asia and Africke had not beene at peace; for that famous
pyrat Dragut hauing gotten the island of Gerbe from Solyman that was lord thereof,
whom he caused to be hanged at Tripoli, giuing the place to another lord, for a tribute
of six thousand crownes, and yet soone after he depriued him: but those people,
not able to endure his tyrannie, tooke armes against him, and sought to make a new lord.
Tripoli had also beene taken eight yeares before by Dragut, from the knights of Saint
Iohn, who to reuenge that disgrace, sought to recouer it this yeare. The people of
Spaine desired nothing more, than to keepe vnder the Moores and pyrats of Africke,
who being neere vnto them, may easily trouble their nauigation, and annoy the Southerne
coasts: Wherefore it was not difficult for Iohn Valette, a French man, great Master
of Malta, to persuade the Catholike king, and the Councell of Spaine, to send an armie
to the conquest of Tripoli, from whence Dragut and other pyrats did dayly annoy the
Spaniards. Dragut was much hated, not onely of the Christians, but also of the Moores,
ouer whom hee vsed most cruell tyrannie, seeking by treacherie, or by open force, to
kill the chiefe Commaunders, and to make himselfe lord of their States: Among
which the king of Caruano was the chiefe, from whom hee had taken a great part
of his estate: and for that he was of great force, hee was reuerenced among his people,

almost like a Pope among the Christians; wherefore it seemed hee might helpe
much in this enterprise, against this famous pyrat, if (as hee had made offer) he would
shew himselfe fauourable. Valette being incouraged by his offers, hee began to treat
with the duke of Medina Celi, then Viceroy of Sicile, and afterwards in the Court of
Spaine,Tripoli besieged by the Christians. by the Commaunder Guimarano, his embassadour. At the first there was some
difficultie, the king being in warre against France, but a peace concluded, hee resolued
to attempt the enterprise of Tripoli, sending Guimarano with his resolution, and letters
of Commission to them that should haue the execution thereof. Hee carried letters
to prince Doria, That hee should with all speed make readie the armie, being now
mid Iune; who being verie old, and vnable to beare armes, gaue the charge thereof to
Iohn Andrew Doria, being his lieutenant, writing vnto him into Sicile. The duke of
Sessa had commission in the State of Milan, to make readie two thousand Spaniards
for that seruice: and Aluaro de Sandy to go thither in person with the footmen that were
vnder his charge within the realme, and with the two thousand Spaniards. The Viceroy
of Naples had order to send two thousand Spaniards of the regiments of that
realme; and the Viceroy of Sicile had the title of Generall in this action.
Guimarano hauing performed all these Commissions, in the end hee came to Messina,
the seuenteenth day of Iulie. Euerie man was carefull to execute his Commission,
and the great Master, to whom the king had giuen the chiefe care to manage this enterprise
with discretion, and to assist it both with his counsell and force, laboured by
all meanes to get the armie forth, that they might performe some worthie action
before Autumne: But they had so many crosses, as the nauie could not possibly
get out of the port of Sarragosse in Sicile, before the first day of December. There
were leuied for this enterprise by Sandy in the State of Milan, besides those men aboue
mentioned, two thousand fiue hundred Italians, all old souldiers, and three
Companies of Germans, which had remained there since the last warre, commaunded
by Stephen Leoparti: and so all these souldiers were sent to Genoua to imbarke,
where they had many difficulties, and the Spaniards mutined, so as Sandy and Lorenzo
Figueroa had some difficultie to pacifie them with foure payes: then putting them
into certaine ships, the fift of October they went to Messina.
Of the two thousand Spaniards out of the realme of Naples, the Viceroy would
giue but fiue hundred, hee fearing to leaue that coast without a good gard, for that
the Turkes armie, being fourescore sayles, was then at Velona, breeding a doubt in
the Christians, where this tempest would fall: But in effect it was by Solyman to keepe
our men from the enterprise of Barbarie; for that the great Master hauing some monethes
before sent two foists into Africke, to discouer, one of them was taken by
Dragut, whereby he vnderstood the Catholike kings preparations, and his designes:
so as hauing but fiue hundred men in Tripoli, hee suddenly hyred to the number of
two thousand Turkes and Moores; writing thereof to Constantinople, whereupon
hee resolued to send forth this fleet. Moreouer, there were leuied within the realme
twelue Companies of Italians. In Sicile also there were twelue Companies, among
the which, as in those of Naples, there were many banished men, who were fierce
and warlike, but verie mutinous.
All these men, being aboue thirteene thousand, were commaunded by valiant captaines:Number of Christian Armie going to Tripoli.
Iohn Andrew Gonzago, sonne to Fernanda, was Colonell of the Italian foot
leuied in the State of Milan, and Marshall of the campe to all the Italians that went in
that action: Luigi Osorio was master of the campe to the Spaniards of Sicile: Bernard
Aldana was master of the ordnance, whereof they carried great store, both for
field and batterie: Peter Velasques was Commissarie generall of the armie, and the
Commaunder Charles Iesiers, was Colonell of fiue hundred harquebusiers, sent by the
great Master, beside foure hundred valiant knights in the gallies, of that Order. There
were in Sicile of gallies, three from the Church, whereof the charge was giuen
by the Colledge of cardinals (the Sea being voyd) vnto Flaminio of Anguillara, thirteene
of Iohn Andrew Dorias, payed by the king, seuen of the realme of Naples, gouerned

by Sancio Lieua, tenne of Sicile, commaunded by Berlinghery Reques^ns, foure from
the duke of Florence, vnder Nicholus Gentile, fiue of the Order of Malta, and one galliot,
fiue of Anthonie Dorias, commaunded by his sonne Scipione, two of Bandinell^
Saule. To these were added two galliots of the duke of Medina Celi, the Generall,
one of Lewis Osorioes, and one of Frederic Staues: so as they were in all foure and fiftie,
besides eight and twentie great ships, of the which Iohn Andrew Gonzaga was Generall;
two galleons, one of Malta, the other of Cicala, with fiue and thirtie brigantines and
fregates: so as they reckoned in all an hundred and nineteene vessels. They carried
great store of munition for the warre, and victuals to feed 30000 men foure monethes.
There was some difficultie to imbarke the Spaniards of Sicile, mutined, for that there
were many monethes pay due vnto them; but Fernando de Sylua, marquesse of Fauara,
being left lieutenant by the duke, satisfied them with two monethes pay. Going from
Messina to Sarragosse, in October, they stayed there many daies, by reason of the contrarie
winds. Their long stay there did much prejudice them, for it not onely bred a sickenesse
among them, whereof there died aboue two thousand, but also many fled away, especially
of the Sicilians. The first of December the gallies parted from Sarragosse, with
great hope of a prosperous voyage, the ships sayling towards Cap passe ro, being towards
night, with an intent to goe to Secci di Palo; who hauing left the ships behind,
and a contrarie wind blowing in the morning, they were forced to returne againe into
Sarragosse. The gallies fearing if the contrarie windes should grow great, it would
breed them great danger in this long voyage, being much before the ships, they resolued
to get to Malta. Here the gallies, with the Generall in them, and other men of account,
were honourably entertained by the great Master, for some dayes, the winds being still
contrarie to their intended voyage. It was then resolued, that two and twentie gallies
should returne into Sicile, to bring the ships to Malta; most of which arriued after some
difficultie: Fiue of them stayed vntill the fift of Ianuarie, and three vnto the twelfth, among
which was the galleon of Cicala, which running to Cap passero, was there spoyled
by the Sicilian souldiers that were in her, who killing their commaunders, fled away.
The like happened vnto a ship which carried Sicilians also, of the which Vincentio Castagnuola
was captaine, who was not slaine by them, but verie cruelly intreated. Some dayes
before there arriued seuen Companies of Spaniards, sent in three ships by the Viceroy
of Naples, to fill vp his number of two thousand, according to the kings commaundement.
There came in like manner a galleon with many refreshings from Sicile, and
great store of munition.
They were haunted still with that infectious sicknesse in Malta,1560 whereof many dyed,
giuing in the beginning apparent signes of the vnfortunate successe of this armie.Queene of Spaine conducted into Spaine Thus
the secret judgements of God doe often make mens counsels and resolutions vaine, the
which in regard of the cause are held good, but are not approued by his diuiue prouidence,
it may be to confound the wisedome of men, but without doubt for our offences.
In the yere 1560 Isabella, or Elizabeth queene of Spaine, was conducted into Spaine, to
the king D. Philip her husband, being accompanied by Anthonie of Bourbon, king of Nauarre,
with other lords and ladies: she was receiued at Ronceuaux by the cardinal D. Francis
of Mendosa, bishop of Burgos, D. Inigo Lopez of Mendosa, duke of the Infantazgo, and
many others, who conducted her to Guadalajara, where the mariage was celebrated. At
that time D. Gabriel de la Cueua was Viceroy of Nauarre, in the place of D. Bertrand his father,
deceased, who gaue the new queene a stately reception passing by Pampelone. The
same yere the prince D. Charles, sonne to king Philip, was sworne, and acknowledged to be
true successor in the realmes of Castille, Nauarre, Arragon, etc. after the accustomed maner
of Spaine.
But to the returne to the warre of Barbarie. The Catholike kings nauie stayed many
dayes at Malta, by reason of the contrarie windes; so as in the beginning of the
yeare the Generall (although he were persuaded by the great Master to stay vntill the
weather were better setled) commaunded the armie to imbarke, and about the middest
of Februarie he came to the island of Gerbe; where hauing discouered two ships of

Alexandria, laden with marchandise, lying within the chanell, they tooke and spoyled
them: but they vsed no diligence to take two vessels that went with oares, which lay
more within, the which afterwards were no small hurt vnto them. Dragut was there
with seuen hundred Turkes and Moores, on horsebacke, and three thousand foot, being
then in quarell with the Xec, or lord of the island, who also had good numbers of
Arabians and Moores, and expecting aid from the Christians, was continually in armes
against his enemies.
Dr^gut held that part of the island which was towards the chanell, hauing kept those
two vessels readie to send vnto Constantinople,Christianr army at Gerbe. or to flie away, if necessitie forced him,
hauing no hope to escape on the other side, whereas the Xec lay with his forces, especially
if all the Christians armie were landed, whereof a part went to land, to fetch fresh
water, being led by Aluaro de Sandy; where skirmishing nine houres together, during
their watering, they receiued no great losse, and slue many enemies: In the retreat Aluaro
was shot in the flanke, yet could they not possibly take any one prisoner, to be informed
of the state of things: which was afterwards thought to haue stayed the victorie, and
to haue ruined their enterprise, when as, by the taking of the two galliots, Dragut could
not possibly haue escaped, after which the taking of Tripoli had beene easie, neither
should hee haue had meanes to send to Constantinople, to aduertise them of the state
of things in Barbarie, and to procure an armie. It was knowne afterwards, that there
was great store of money and jewels,Occasion of a victorie lost by the Christians. which Dragut sent by Vluccialy the pyrat, vnto the
Bassa of the port, to procure succours from the great Turke: so as if they had taken and
burnt them, they had obtained a happie victorie; the which was not done, partly
through the negligence of them that commaunded, and partly by the great diligence
of the enemie, who would not haue the Christians know what past in the island, for
that there was not any creature liuing found in the two ships, all being fled to land. In
the morning before day the Christians parted with their armie, neither could they
put any to land in a fregate, to discouer the state of the island, the Moores were so carefull
to defend the shore.
Two dayes after there came eight gallies to Gerbe, the which had stayed at Malta
for some prouision, where landing vnaduisedly to water, they were charged by the
Turkes,Christians slain by the Turkes in watering. who slue an hundred and fiftie good souldiers, and tooke some prisoners, among
which was captaine Pedro Vermudez: and of the chiefe of them that were slaine, were
foure Spaniards, Adrian Garzia, Alphonso de Guzman, Pedro Vianega del Rio, and Francisco
Mercato: which disorder did much trouble the Generall, being now at Secco di
Palo with the whole armie; and they were all much discontented, to heare afterwards,
that a fregate of the knights of Malta, passing neere vnto Gerbe, had beene told by two
Renegadoes, that Dragut was there, and that Vluccialy was gone with two galliots to
Constantinople: And, which was worse, the armie was forced to stay some dayes at Secco
di Palo, by reason of contrarie windes, being an hundred and fiftie miles from Tripoli,
where drinking fresh water digged in those sands, but of a pestiferous qualitie, it
brought a pestilent infirmitie into the armie, whereof many dyed. In the end a Southeast
wind arising, it did hinder their course to Tripoli, and staying there infinit numbers
dyed, through the corruption of the ayre and water, this pestilent disease increasing daily,
hauing wasted a great part of their munition, and broken the Admirals ship by the
mariners negligence, hauing also lost two smaller ships laden with victuals, at Chercheny,
they had not many men in the armie for this enterprise, expecting footmen from
Naples and Sicile, and the Galeon of Cicala, two galliots, and some ships, which
had beene kept backe by contrarie windes. Wherefore they resolued to returne, and
to land at Gerbe, where they arriued the two and twentieth day of March, and on the seuen
and twentieth Aluaro de Sandy, Marshall generall of the campe, landed with their
men,Christians army land at Gerbe. and some field peeces, to lodge in good order, neere vnto certaine wells of fresh water,
two miles from the castle, towards the West. At their landing Aluaros nephew died
of a pestilent feuer, carrying his name; a young man of great hope: he was much lamented
by him, and the whole armie.

Hauing at night made three squadrons of all his men they lodged neere. Sandy not
thinking it fit to goe vnto the wells, for that hee found by many coniectures that the
Moores had receiued them as enemies, wherefore it would bee dangerous, if lodging late,
they should bee charged by the enemy. At night the Xec sent two men with a fayned
Embassage, intreating the Generall to goe to Tripoli, for that hee had beene receiued
quietly by his subiects, who would take it ill if the Christians should remaine in that
Island* but in effect they came to discouer the campe. They were entertained vntill
the morning, and then an answere was giuen them, that they had landed at Gerbe finding
the winds contrary to goe to Tripoly, but yet they had done it willingly to put the
Xec in possession of the Island, before they went to Tripoly, which they intended afterwards.
They therefore desired to see him well setled, to buy refreshings with their money,
take water, and as soone as the windes were faire, goe for Tripoly. In the morning
hauing put all their men in battaile, they marched towards the wells, beeing sixe
miles off, the souldiers hauing indured much that night for want of water, hauing not
brought any out of the gallies, so as they marched with great thirst, Sandy beeing carefull
least at their arriuall, disordering themselues hauing a great desire to drinke they
should bee charged by the Moores, and receiue some great losse. They marched in
three squadrons; in the foreward went the great Commander, with the knights and
souldiers of Malta, and with the Germanes and French, which were not in all aboue two
thousand.
Andrew Gonzaga commanded the battaile,Order of the Christians army at Gerbe. consisting of three thousand Italians, and
in the rere-ward were three thousand and fiue hundred Spaniards: And of either side
they were couered with a wing of three hundred shot, leauing in the midest a conuenient
space for the baggage. But if they came to a battaile, one of these wings was to ioyne
with the foreward, and the other with the battaile; hauing marched a while, they were
staied at a certaine bogge, by a field peece: Sandy with the shot which were towards the
shore, aduanced to recouer the wells, which hee found had beene spoiled by the Moores,
and filled with stones and sand, so as hee was forced to send for Pioners with tooles to
clense them: neither did the Moores yet shew themselues, beeing an apparent signe
that they had an intent to charge them in their lodging, so as they marched in good
order, forbidding any man to disband vpon paine of death. Then they met with foure
Moores of Authority sent from the Xec, with a designe to view the army, but with
an excuse of a friuolous Embassage, where they were entertained with good words,
whilest that the army aduanced toward the wells, and then were dismist with a generous
answere from the Generall: That seeing the Xec could not come vnto him, beeing staied
by his people, that hee should rest satisfied, and that hee would soone bee with him in
his castle, reiecting their proposition, that the Duke should aduance with foure horses
onely, as the Xec had done, that they might parle together. Yet for all this the Moores,
who lay two miles off, couered with a little hill, did not mooue, seeing the order of the
Christians army to bee verie firme, wherefore they did forbeare vntill they lodged, imagining
that hauing endured much thirst that day and the night before, they would
in their lodging fall into a confusion with a desire of drinke. Which did not follow
by Aluaro de Sandys great care who caused them still to keepe their rankes: Notwithstanding
that Colonel Spinola hauing too eagrely aduanced to entertaine a great skirmish,
was in great daunger with some Harguebuziers that were with him. But the Marshall
foreseeing this danger, had sent captaine George Ruis with two hundred Harguebuziers
of Sicile behind certaine walles to fauour their retreat. The Moores attempted
also to breake the rankes of the Christians in other places, with great courage and readinesse,
but with little losse that day, onely captaine Ruis being hurt in the shoulder with a
launce, died within few daies after.
The skirmish ended two houres before night, and the Christians lodged, hauing caused
the wells to be clensed during the skirmish.
The day following they fortified their lodging against the enemie, and the gallies were
sent for to furnish themselues with water; but three daies after they went forth in battaile,
to goe and fight with the enemie, which did not succeed, for the Moores with their

Xec, did often intreat the Generall to receiue them for vanquished, offering to bee subiects
to the King of Spaine. Hauing first taken hostages, Michel of Baraona a Colonel
was sent with two companies of Spaniards to take possession of the castle, and the next
day the Generall entred, with the chiefe of the army, the Moores shewing themselues very
obsequious, bringing aboundance of victuals vnto the campe. The Arabians Mahamidi
were also paied with their Xec, who had faithfully kept the passage of the bridge, as
they had beene appointed at Secco di Palo. They afterwards held a Councell, how they
might keepe that Island at the kings deuotion, the which they held to bee verie necessarie,
for by that meanes they should take a retreat from the Turkes and Moores which did
robbe vpon those seas, and withall they should secure Sicile, Sardinia, Malta and other
places, and to that end they should build a fort, making vse of the castle to keepe their victualls
and munition, and for some wells: besides hauing their materialls neere, with other
commodities for the speedy doing it.
On the seuenteenth of March the army began to lodge about the castle,Fort built in the Island of Gerbe. where they had
appointed to build a fort, Antonio Conte being Ingener, assisted by Bernardo Aldano and Sanchio
de Lieua, within two daies after the worke beganne, it being diuided amongst the Nations
after this manner. Being to make foure Bulwarkes, the charge of one was giuen to
Andrew Gonzaga, and to the Italians, an other to the great Commander, and to them of
that order, the third to Andrew Doria, and them of the gallies, the Generall reseruing the
fourth for himselfe, so as within few daies it was put in defence. But neither the ayre
nor the water were healthfull for them that were not accustomed vnto it, so as many died
daily, and more fell sicke, which was a lamentable spectacle. There was an hospitall prouided,
and the bishop of Majorca who was also gouernour, did what hee could to preserue
the souldiers. They had newes that they prepared an army at Constantinople; and
the great Master of Malta doubting some danger called home the great Commander
with his Gallies and men, the which patted from Gerbe the eight of Aprill, leauing the
charge of fynishing that Bulwarke to Pedro Vrrea, for that they made great hast to leaue it
defensible, the Duke resoluing to imbarke, being verie carefull to furnish it, although that
all things did not succeed according to his desire. The king of Caruano came to visit
him, and there past great kindnesse betwixt them, but the Xec would by no meanes
meet him, yet hee came once halfe a mile out of the castle to treat with him, beeing accompanied
with a great number of Moores. The Generall was earnest to haue store
of victualls brought from the ships vnto the campe, but they that were interessed seemed
to haue small care of the publike good. There were two thousand foot Italians, Spaniards
and Dutch appointed for the gard of this fort, with fifty horse vnder the Colonel
Michel of Baraona. There was order giuen to haue the Xec take the oth, who should
aduance the armes of Spaine. And then hee resolued to part with the army in the beginning
of May, but hee was staied vpon some controuersie growne betwixt the Christians
and the Moores, vpon a light occasion; but it was wisely pacified, and some that had
most offended punished.
The fame of the army increasing, and the solemnitie performed the fifth of May, a
mile from the campe, in the presence of Monreal the Generals Secretary, and some of
his gentlemen,Xec swears ^bedience and tribute to the King of Spaine. the Xec did sweare vpon the Alcaron to bee faithfull to the king of Spaine,
to pay euery yeere sixe thousand crownes, foure Estriges, foure Lancrets, foure Falcons,
and one Camell, and in like manner the Moores, that were with him did sweare vassalage
and fealtie vnto him. Then order was giuen to imbarke the army, wherein they were
verie slacke and negligent, vntill that there came a message from the Great Master to the
Generall, assuring him that the Turkes gallies being foure score and fiue had parted from
Gozo on the eight day of that month at night, with an intent as hee did coniecture to releeue
Tripoly, and then to seeke out the Christians army, hearing that it was vnfurnished
of souldiars, and out of order. Then euery man desired to bee at sea, so as the confusion was
great, and their opinion diuers, but most concurred to go presently to sea.
The Generall went to Iohn Andrew Doria being not well recouered of a great Infirmitie,
to resolue of all things, leauing a charge with Alnaro to haue his men readie, so as
returning at night he might not stay; Doria being resolued to put to sea, and hauing giuen

order to the ships to follow him, he left a gallie called the Contesse, for the duke to imbarke
in, being light, and well furnished with slaues, that all things being ordered, hee
might goe and joyne with the armie. The Generall would not omit any duetie that night,
being before the twelfth day, but hauing giuen good instructions to the gouernour of the
fort, he spake with great efficacie to the souldiers which remained, assuring them, That
the armie at sea being in that accident in greater daunger than the fort, it was fit he should
be where the perill was most apparent, entertaining them after this manner vntill the
day began to breake, when as he with Sandy came vnto the fregate which should carrie
them to the gallie that was gouerned by the Commaunder Guimarano. But hee made
a signe vnto him with his hand, that hee should retire to land, for that the Turkes armie
began to appeare, with an intent to charge the Christians. After Dorias resolutions
to get out of those shelues, there arose a contrarie wind, which did hinder him: so as
the Turkes Generall hauing cast anker but sixteene miles from Gerbe, the night before,
hauing sent Cara Mustafa gouernour of Mitelen and Vluccialy to discouer, he vnderstood
in what confusion the Christians were, being readie to depart, hee then resolued to
set vpon them at the breake of day: with which resolution hee came on with a prosperous
wind, when as Scipion going forth with a squadron of gallies for the gard, hee
was so suddenly surprised by the Turkes, as hee had no time to aduertise the armie:
so as euerie man being amazed by this sudden accident, they had no other care
but how to flie, but it was done with that confusion which a sudden feare of an ineuitable
daunger doth vsually bring. Iohn Andrew Doria distrusting his Admirall gallie,
for that it was old and heauie, hee resolued to draw neere to land, being forced to 
recouer the fort in a barke,Armie of Christians miserably lost at Gerbe. being a mile off: the gallie was presently abandoned, and
left in the slaues hands, who being at libertie, carried it to the enemie. It was a miserable
spectacle to see that mightie armie scattered in an instant, some one way some
another. There were seuen gallies which sought to saue themselues in the chanell
of Gerbe, where most of the men leaping into the water, although they were farre
from land, sought to saue their liues by swimming, so as all the shore was full of
men.
The Marshall Sandy ranne thither with a great troupe of shot and pikes, to defend
them that came to land, for that the Moores, being treacherous and inconstant, had presently
changed their minds, and slue and spoyled as many as came vnto their hands. The
Generall to auoyd this other mischiefe, sent word vnto the Xec, by the king of Caruano,
and the Infant of Tunis, That hee should forbid his Moores to annoy the Christians,
putting him in mind of his faith formerly giuen. But they prepared to flie also,
fearing the Turkes, pretending, that they went to gather together some Arabians
Mahamidy, with the which they would returne, and fauour the Christians; wishing
them not to trust the Moores of the island, who were not well affected to them. That
morning there were nineteene gallies fell into the enemies hands, with the Admirall,
the rest saued themselues in diuers places, by flight, the which was attributed to
the courage and good counsell of the Commaunder Anthonie Maldonato. The great
Master had called home his gallies to Malta, as hath beene sayed, to prouide for the
daungers of that island; but afterwards hee sent backe three, vnder the commaund of
Maldonato, who in this confusion going to sea, was followed by many gallies, relying
vpon the skill of this knight, the which succeeded happily. The duke and Sandy stayed
vpon the shore, to defend those poore wretches which came from the gallies, from the
Moores, giuing them clothes and armes, which were prepared for them that should
defend the fort.
The same day they held a Councell vnder a tent, where were the Generals Iohn Andrew
Doria, D. Aluaro de Sandy, and the Commaunder Guimerano. Doria said, That it was
necessarie for them to depart speedily, whilest that the enemie was busie in giuing chase
to the gallies, which he meant to doe in a fregate, carrying them to Malta, or into Sicile,
to gather together the dispersed gallies, and to arme others, to make head against the
Turkes armie, if hee should seeke to annoy any place of the kings. Sandy did counsell

the duke to goe to attend his chiefe charge of Sicile, the which was now in great daunger,
and if he did it not he should faile much of his duetie: but for his part, he would
remaine in Gerbe, being thereunto bound both by the duetie of his charge, and the seruice
he ought vnto his king, seeing there remained aboue three thousand, besides the appointed
garrison, some of which escaped from the gallies, and some were neuer imbarked,
being sicke, and not fit for the warre, and yet they were to be respected as Christians;
besides, there being many which had followed him in the action, it was not fit hee
should seeke his owne safetie, and abandon them.
These with other his reasons were allowed of, and it was resolued, they should depart
that euening about Sunne set, in nine fregates, some other knights and officers following
them: but a contrarie wind stayed them that night. But the next day there, happened
another disgrace: for the Generall meaning to keepe the Turkes from the shore,
whilest they pursued the gallies that retired into the chanell, hee caused the artillerie of
the fort to bee mounted, among which was a Culuerin, which being ouercharged,
brake, and slue some that were neere vnto the Generall. The losse was exceeding
great in those gallies that were taken, not onely of the vessels, and of many souldiers
that were in them, but also for that there were many men of account slaine, or taken
prisoners: among which were Flaninio of Anguillara, Generall of the Popes gallies,
Sancio de Leua, Generall of them of Naples, Berlingheri of Requesens, of those of Sicile,
the bishop of Majorca, Gaston de la Cerde, the Generals sonne, with others. But at
the Turkes returne from the chase of the gallies, they prepared to fight with the
ships which were full of souldiers, being fiue and twentie, all which they tooke without
any difficultie. Some write, there were aboue 3000 men taken in the ships and gallies,
and drowned, seeking to flie to land. The Viceroy of Sicile, and Iohn Andrew Doria, escaped,
and came to Malta, and from thence to Sicile, hauing first giuen order, that a fregate
of aduice should bee sent to them that were in the fort at Gerbe, of their safetie,
and that the Commaunder Guimerano was sent into Spaine, to informe the king of this
accident, and to intreat him to send D. Bernardin de Mendosa, Generall of the gallies of
Spaine in Sicile, to joyne with such as were escaped, and to make the bodie of an armie,
whereby they might succour the besieged at Gerbe. They of the fort were verie joyfull
of these newes; and Sandy, who was made Generall by the duke, confirmed them
with many good reasons, that they should vndoubtedly expect it, omitting no paines
to fortifie the place.
Pialy Bassa, who was Generall of the armie, resoluing to take the fort, did write to Dragut
(who, a little before the Christians had come the second time to Gerbe, was gone with
all his horsemen to Tripoli, to defend it) That he should send, or come with all the forces
he had, to besiege Gerbe, sending him also prouision of victuals, and munition for that
enterprise.Turkes campe about the fort at Gerbe. The Bassa landed his souldiers, and began to fortifie his lodging neere vnto
the wells where the Christians had camped. Sandy did not thinke it conuenient to make
often sallies, hauing no great store of good men, and too many that were vnprofitable,
which was his greatest trouble, hauing neither victuals nor water sufficient for a long
siege. But he resolued to draw it in length, for many respects, hoping that they should be
releeued, it importing his Maiestie much, not onely for the losse of the fort, but also of so
many good souldiers, and captaines of qualitie, which were there exposed to apparent
danger. The Bassa hauing all the garrison souldiers of Barbarie, with other necessaries,
made his approaches neere vnto the fort, where they were daily in skirmish, about certaine
wells,Wells lo^^ by the Christians at Gerbe. where the Christians kept a gard without the fort, but in the end they tooke
them from the besieged. The Turkes prest them with their trenches, and prepared a great
batterie against the fort; but their greatest miserie was, that by the losse of their wells, and
the great heat in those Southern cou^tries, many bega^ to die of thirst, hauing but littlewater
which they had reserued in vessels; for the water which they drew out of the wels was
so salt, as it did cause thirst, and not quench it. Sandy seeing how much it did import to
be thus kept within the fort, and to be depriued of water, he resolued to make a great sallie,
and to chase the enemie from their trenches; the which had beene succesfull, if the

souldiers had kept the order prescribed them. There went forth fiue hundred Italians,
and as many Spaniards, all harquebusiers, with an hundred Germans, pikes, who sallying
forth by two ports, should come and ioyne together, cloy the ordnance, and kill all that
should resist, expresly forbidding them to fall to the spoyle. There were others also
stood readie to succour where (...) should require. At the breake of day they went
forth, killing many of the enemies* in which charge Dragut himselfe was hurt: they
cloyed three peeces of ordnance, tooke some Ensignes, and were masters of the trenches:
but forgetting the order was giuen them, some being too bold, aduanced so farre,
as they could not be releeued by their companions, and some too greedie, fell to spoyle;
whereby they were in such disorder, as the Turkes imbracing the occasion, turned head,
and charged them, striking such a terrour into them, as they basely fled. There were many
men of worth died fighting valiantly, among the which were the earle Galu^^ Anguisola,
captaine Carlo d' Aro, and some others. The Turkes pursued them that fled euen vnto
the fort, where the artillerie from the bulwarkes made a great slaughter of them. But
the want of water, through the losse of their wells, was of such importance for the besieged,
as without doubt it was the cause of all their miseries, and in the end of the losse
of the fort. They were forced to make their bread with salt water, their victuals were verie
salt, being prouision taken out of the ships, the season of the yeare in that climat was
exceeding hot, their toyle great, and continuall, so as their thirst increased as their water
decreased. Those poore wretches, to flie the occasions of great thirst, eat little, so as
they grew so weake,Thirst vnheard of in the sort of Gerbe. as they could not endure the insupportable toyle of warre, but died
without remedie. Many seeing that they must die of thirst, fled to the enemie,
and although they knew well, that they went to a perpetuall slauerie, yet they ranne
when they had any opportunitie, to giue themselues vnto the enemie for drinke, and to
no other end.
They had not much water remaining in their cesternes, and that which they digged
within the fort was salt, like vnto the sea water: whereupon a Sicilian, called Sebastian du
Pollere, offered to draw a good quantitie daily by Alambick, and to make it fresh: Sandy
promised him a great recompence for this inuention,Salt water made fresh by Alambicke. and caused the Germanes to make
eighteene Alambickes, hauing no more matter to worke with; but they could not draw
aboue fiue and thirtie barrels a day out of their wells, which was a small prouision for so
many thousands of thirtie persons. The salt water being distilled, was so sweet, as
tempering it with the well water, it made a pleasant mixture: so mingling the water
of the wells, the distilled water, and that of the cesternes, together, the Generall diuided
it among the souldiers, giuing a double portion to them that carried armes.
The diuision of this drinke was verie strange, whereof the gouernour of the fort had
the chiefe care, being a matter of great importance, and therefore it was distributed
in a place where there was a good gard, whereas the souldiers past in order, hauing a
spunge hanging at a line, the which being put into a tub of water, he tooke it and suckt
as much as was allowed him.
The Turkes continued their workes, and had aduanced their trenches euen vnto the
sort, and the souldiers ran daily vnto them, yea they who had the charge not to suffer others
to run away, were the first that went themselues; and some were so villanous, as they
had plotted to set fire on the powder, and to blow vp all. Some affirme that there were fifteene
hundred which had fled to the enemie, wherof there were many souldiers of known
valour, and some nobly borne, but not nobly minded, felling bodie and soule to flie the
want of drinke. The Turkes sought to win the fort by mines, batterie, and assaults, and
the besieged repulst them valiantly. In the end of Iune D. Aluaro de Sandy hauing viewed
the prouisions carefully, and finding that they had not wood for six dayes, which was
most necessarie to distill their water, and that they had not sufficient of cesterne water
left, to serue the souldiers three dayes, they being aboue a thousand, seeing matters reduced
to that extremitie, he called the captaines and chiefe officers to councell, hauing first
appointed that the souldiers should haue double allowance both of meat and fresh water
alone, with some little wine which had beene reserued for them that were wounded.

He spake vnto them at night, letting them see to what estate they were brought, and
repeating in what manner they had defended themselues with judgement and valour, against
the violence of their enemies; and that seeing themselues now vanquished rather
by hunger and thirst than by armes, he knew not a more honourable resolution, than
to put that generous course in practise,Resolution of Aluaro de Sandy for their last refuge. which in most desperate cases hath giuen a glorious
victorie to braue and resolute souldiers. They therefore concluded that night to
make a gallant sallie, and to charge the enemie, who least dreamt of it. In the morning,
two houres before day, there went forth at the port towards the sea, six captaines with
three hundred men, being chosen out of all the nations, and hee himselfe followed with
the chiefe of all his men, leauing some behind to gard the fort: of those that he led hee
commaunded some to remaine in the rereward, with certaine captaines, and to kill all
them that should disband. He commaunded the foreward to goe directly to the Bassa
and Draguts ^ents, he himselfe chusing to assaile the great tent, where there was a great
corps de gard. With this order they ^allied forth with great resolution, some marching
towards the Generals tent, and some towards the other: They past three trenches valiantly,
to come vnto the tents, and Sandy defeated the corps de gard, where making a
great slaughter, he put all into confusion: but hee found himselfe suddenly abandoned
by his men, meaning to aduance, not any one remaining with him but Marotto, the
Sergeant Major, and captaine Peruccio of Nizza, of the which Marotto was soone after
wounded and taken prisoner, and yet he fighting still with the enemies, being followed
by Peruccio, who had offered to conduct him to the gallies, in the end hee freed himselfe,
and recouered a gallie, whereas hee neither found victuals nor clothes, being all wet:
wherefore he sent a messenger vnto the fort, to will Iohn d' Alarcone, the Treasurer, to send
him clothes, and some prouision for the souldiers of the gallies, with some oares, to
the end they might conduct him, by the chanell, into the fort, exhorting all them that
were yet remaining to defend it safely.
The newes of their Generals life was some comfort to the captaines and souldiers,
but they began presently to despaire of all helpe, but by some accord with the enemie,
hauing water but for two dayes drinke. There were many Christians dyed in this
sallie, but most men of commaund, the rest being either fled vnto the enemie, or gotten
vnto the fort. The Treasurer Alarcone went vnto Sandy with prouision, and yet they
could not part that day, the gallies being battered continually by the Turkes artillerie.
They within the fort were so full of confusion, as they knew not what to resolue, and
although there were some captaines which did incourage them to attend the Generalls
returne, yet the feare of the greater part was such, as they forced the rest to yeeld, to another
resolution; and they had alreadie set vp a flag on Spinolas bulwarke, in token of
a parley: whereunto the Turkes made aunswer with the like signe. Whereupon three
captaines with an Ensigne went vnto the campe: but the Turks seeing no flag of truce
set vp in the gallies, as well as in the fort, Pialy commaunded that they should assaile them
both by land and sea. Sandy being surprised with this vnexpected furie, he with captaine
Cl^ment disposed the souldiers as well as they could for their defence, finding in them a
great willingnesse and resolution: but seeing afterwards that they made no shew of hostilitie
in the fort, and that the Moores, Turkes, and Christians seemed to bee vnited,
they also sought to escape, so many flying away, as Sandy had not aboue thirtie men remaining
with him; at which time Dromux Arez, a renegado of Genoua, captaine of
the Bassaes Admirall, came vnto the gallies prow, who spake vnto Aluaro in Italian:
My lord,D. Aluaro de Sandy taken prisoner by the Turkes. you can no longer defend your selfe, fall not therefore into the hands of these
base people, but yeeld your selfe, and chuse a better partie: I will not yeeld my selfe to
thee nor to any other, aunswered Sandy, but I will goe with thee, if thou wilt promise
to bring me vnto the Bassa: The renegado promised him, and receiuing him into
a little boat, being ouer laden, it sunke, and they were wet. Being then conducted to
the Bassaes tent, hee receiued him with honour, and discoursed much with him touching
his defence: but he refusing to accept of any offer vnworthie the name of a Christian
knight, was conducted to Constantinople, and presented to the great Turke.

Sandy seeing the captaines which went forth to capitulate, he blamed them, foretelling
them, that they should not haue any thing obserued, as it fell out: for hauing agreed,
That all the officers should come forth freely, with fiue and twentie souldiers in a companie,
they were most of them put to the sword, and the rest taken prisoners, onely they
had libertie which went forth to capitulate.Fort at Gerbe taken by the Turkes. The fort was spoyled, but the gaine was
small. The Generall Pialy hauing stayed there eight dayes with his fleet, he went and
made a stately entrie at Tripoli; then returning home, he was forced by contrarie winds
to stay in a port of Sicile neere to Sarragosse: where some Turkes, going to water, they
receiued much losse by the horsemen which garded the coast.
The next day Lewis Saha^edra went vnto the Bassa with a safeconduct, touching
the ransome of prisoners, lamenting much the miserie of those noblemen he found there,
and wondering at the smiling countenance wherewith Sandy entertained him, who shewed
himselfe like one that was neuer altered by the crosses or smiles of fortune. The Bassa
gaue him good hope of ransome; but the wind growing faire in the morning, he weighed
anker,Pialy Bassa ^^ters Constantinople in triumph. and went on his voyage. Comming to Constantinople, he entred in great triumph,
causing the prisoners to be carried to his house: In which Aluaro de Sandy shewed
againe his generous mind; for some shewing him a bathing house, a place appointed for
many slaues, he refused to enter into it, letting the Bassa vnderstand, That it was no fit
lodging for him: and the Turke (not without wonder at the greatnesse of his mind) commaunded,
that he should haue chambers appointed for him. They were all presented
with great solemnitie before the great Turke, who stood behind a window to see them,
they all refusing to accept any vnfitting conditions, that were offered them by the great
men of the port. Sundy was carried to the tower of Marnero, whereas those prisoners
which once enter, doe neuer, or seldome, come forth. Sancho de Lieua Berlingheri, and others,
were sent to the tower of Pera.
After this great losse,1561 new miseries pursued some of them that escaped: for D. Lewis
Osorio, and the vicont of Cigale, being come into Sicile, hauing bought a Turkish gallie
which had beene taken from Vluccialy the pyrat, a renegado of Calabria, it was taken
from them by the Viceroy, in the port of Messina: Whereat these two captaines being
much moued, they meant to passe into Spaine, to complaine vnto the king, going in two
of their vessels; but they were set vpon by a gallie and two Turkish foists, and taken almost
without any resistance. Cigale was led to Constantinople, with Scipio his sonne: the
father dyed there, and the sonne denied Iesus Christ, from whom came that famous Cigale,
who was a Bassa in our time. The Commaunder Guimerano hauing the reputation
of a great mariner, was made Generall of the gallies of Sicile; but at his first going forth
with seuen gallies, hee was incountred by Dragut, neere vnto the island of Lipari,
hauing eleuen gallies well armed, who tooke him with his seuen gallies, and led
him away. Among the prisoners was the bishop of Cattanea, of the house of Caraccioli.
In the king of Spaines countries of the Netherlands, they of the reformed religion increasing
mightily, notwithstanding the rigorous Edicts which had beene made by the
Emperour, the Councell of Spaine thought it fit to bring in the Inquisition to suppress^
them, appointing certaine Inquisitors of the Faith, who should haue a care that no forbidden
bookes should bee read, nor kept in their houses, and that no man should dispute
against the Romish religion. But the king hauing promised, That hee would not
charge his subiects with such an intollerable yoke as the Inquisition was, and the Inquisitors
finding that they could not by any meanes put it in practise, they sought to bring it in
by a couert meanes,Now bishops in the Netherlands vnder colour of making new bishops in the countrey; to effect the
which cardinall Granuelle sent doctor Sonnius to Rome, as you may read more at large in
the Historie of the Netherlands.
This yeare 1561 the king of Spaine made great instance at Rome,King of Spaine seekes to prepare a great fleet with the reuenues of the Clergie. to haue libertie from
the Pope, to dispose of some of the tenthes of the Clergie of Spaine, which amounting to
a great summe yearely, he meant to applie to the good of Christendome, and especially
of his realmes of Spaine, arming a great number of gallies more than had bin accustomed
to defend those coasts, being continually annoyed with multitudes of pirats, who had

their retreats in the ports of Barbarie: And as many of the noblemen of Spaine shewed
themselues readie to contribute out of their owne reuenues, to so good and necessarie a
worke, so the Pope did not refuse to gratifie the king, but stayed his resolution, for that
he would not displease the Prelates of Spaine, who did not seeme verie willing to beare
this burthen; and the Pope desired more at that time than any other (when as they
sought to draw the Councell againe together) not to giue them any great distast.
The warre beginning to grow hot in France,1562 for matters of religion, the Protestants
being in armes, after the massacre of Vassy, the French king craued aid from the Pope
and king of Spaine, who were verie willing to giue him the best succours they could. The
Pope, on the sudden, could not send him aboue two thousand foot, and two hundred
harquebusiers on horsebacke, vnder Fabritio Serbelloni, his nephew, Generall of his forces
at Auignon: who finding himselfe too weake for them of the Religion that were
in that countrey, demaunded new succours, and had two companies of lances sent him:
but the Catholike king offered to sed tenne thousand foot,King of Spaine sends succours into France. and 3000 horse, of the which
the French accepted 3000 Spaniards, and 3000 Italians; but they came late, after the battell
of Dreux.
The prince D. Carlo,D. Carlo prince of Spaine grieuously sicke. sonne to the king of Spaine, appointed the sole heire of so many
realmes, playing at Alcala de Henares with some young youthes, his play-fellowes,
hee fell vnfortunatly downe the stayres in the palace, where they stood playing: in
which fall hee was so hurt in the head, as the Physi^ians dispaired of his life. In this
mournefull accident the king referred his fatherly affection to the will of God, writing
into all his realmes, That they should with their deuout prayers procure the princes
long life, if it were for the glorie of his diuine Maiestie, and the good of his subiects.
Some write, that hee was strangely cured by the bodie of Saint Diego, who dyed some
hundred yeares before, a religious man of the Order of Saint Francis* the which the king
caused to bee brought into the princes presence. This bodie was kept in a shrine
of yron, which Henrie the fourth of that name, king of Castille, had caused to bee
made, and layed in a chappell built in honour of him. This shrine being brought and
opened in the kings presence, they found, with great admiration, that the bodie was nothing
corrupted, nor a haire diminished, but breathing forth a sweet sauour; where causing
the princes bodie, halfe dead, to be layed vpon it, he began presently to amend, and
within few dayes after recouered his perfect health. But euerie man hath free libertie to
beleeue it, if he please.
This yeare, besides the kings priuat sorrow for the daungerous sicknesse of his sonne,
hee had a publicke discontent for the losse of some gallies, neere vnto the port of
Herradura. D. Bernardin of Mendosa, some call him Iohn, was Admirall of the fleet
of Spaine, who was readie with two and thirtie gallies, well furnished, to make an attempt
against the Moores;Bernardin, or Iohn de Mendosa drowned with some gallies. but they were surprised with a cruell storme, and in the
end three were swallowed vp in the sea, of the which the Admirall was one, where Mendosa
was, and the rest were driuen into the neere harbours verie much shaken: of the
three there was not any liuing creature saued, and of the rest there dyed verie many:
so as some write, they lost two thousand persons, others fiue thousand. The which, with
their former losse at Gerbe, was verie grieuous to the house of Mendosa: for the same
yeare Indico, brother to this Mendosa the Admirall, sailing from Genoua towards Spaine
in a gallie, it was so tost with contrarie winds, as the mariners not able to help themselues,
they were swallowed vp; so as Mendos^es bodie could neuer be found, yet the bodie of the
gallie, and of the rest that were dead, were recouered.
25 The Prelats being assembled againe together this yeare 1563,1563 they began to prosecute
their sessions,Councell of Trent. and it ended in December, hauing continued almost eighteene yeres,
but with many interruptions, not without the protestations of many princes and Christian
States, of some pretended nullities, as well in the manner of their proceeding, as in
the substance of their decrees. But among all the questions, that of Precedence betwixt
the kings of France and Spaine, was vrged by their embassadours with great vehemencie,
and in the end it was sent by the Fathers to Rome, to be decided by the Pope,
and the Consistorie.

These two great Princes hauing both at the Councell and in Rome, where they attended
a definitiue sentence, their partisans that were affected, and others which discoursed
without passion, many pertinent reasons were produced on both sides, both by word of
mouth, and by writing: whereof for that it concernes this subiect, I will make a briefe repetition.
The Spaniards said, that take it how they would,Controuersie betwixt the French and Spanish for precedencie. were it for temporall or spiritual matters,
Spaine was of greater dignitie than Fraunce, and that it was in a maner iudged by
law, custome, and the opinions and authoritie of the most learned, that the kings of
Spaine should haue the prerogatiue for their excellencie and nobilitie, and for their merits
to mankinde, and especially to the Church of Rome. Antiquitie (said they) in these
matters imports much, whereof Spaine retaines the vndoubted markes:Markes of the antiquitie of Spaine. for since the first
peopling of the earth, the name of Spaine hath beene famous to the world, and preserued
in that nation since the time of great Hercules Oron, or his nerest descendants which haue
raigned there, and hath neuer beene extinguished, whereas the name of the French is
new.
The Spaniards by the consent of all men, are descended from Tubal one of Iaphets
children,Tubal father to the Spaniards. which his posteritie hath called Iuball, of whome the mountaine Iubalda, called
by Geographers Idubeda, retaines the name: But the Celtes and Gaules to whome the
French haue succeeded, or (to doe them more honour) with whom they are in a maner incorporated,
haue their beginning from one Samoteus, who according to Berosus was the
younger Sonne of Tubal.Situation of Spaine. The situation of Spaine ads to her dignity, it holding the first
place in the Geographicall maps: but if the greatnesse of the countrie giues power to
kings, and that they are valued thereby, who knowes not but that Spaine is much greater
than France, wherof the kings of Spaine doe yet hold a good part in Soueraigntie? It is,
vnquestionable,Greatnesse of the king of Spaines dominions. that euer since there were kings of Spaine, their dominions haue beene
larger then those of France: it is apparent in the raigne of the Spanish Gothes, who did
not onely hold at one time Spaine bounded by the Spanish seas, and the Pyrenee mountains,
but also the country of Languedoc, vnto the riuer of Rhosne, and that which is now
of the realme of France beyond Garonne, and moreouer in Afrik a great part of the countrie:
The greatnesse of the empire of the king of Spaine at this day is different, who holding
the best part of Europe, with many places in Afrik vpon the Mediterranean sea haue
discouered a fourth part of the world, vnknowne to the ancients, and therby inriched the
rest with temporall commodities, as it hath done that new world with spiritual blessings,
causing those barbarous nations to bee instructed in the knowledge of God. To which
new regions the monarchies of the auncients cannot bee compared in greatnesse, much
lesse the empire of Fraunce at any season.Right of the kings of Spaine. And to increase their greatnesse, wee may adde
vnto these reuenues the rights which they haue gotten to the empire of Constantinople,
not only as successors to the earls of Flanders, but by co^tracts made with the Paleologues,
expelled by the Turks, and in like maner to Ierusale^, which euery one holds to be the chiefe
in dignitie among al the Christian realms.Felicitie of the land of Spaine. The gifts of nature are also verie considerable,
where there is any question of the preheminence of realms and countries; wherein Spain
excels France without contradiction: for there is no Region in the world more temperate
than Spaine, nor better indowed by nature, be it in fertillitie of the land, in bountie of
the fruits, or in any commoditie it doth produce, and as for the men, they are actiue both
of body and mind, industrious, warlike, and fit to commaund, as the world hath found by
experience. Spaine hath beene alwaies knowne to be a nurserie of good souldiers, and the
mother of great Captaines, and wee need not doubt, but that Hanniball (who made the
Romans to sweat and tremble) if hee had any magnanimitie and courage, hee retained it
from the instruction and breeding he had in Spaine in his youth. Spaine hath in former
times giuen vnto Rome a Traian,Emperors and Popes, Spaniards. an Adrian, two Theodosius, all emperours, valiant and
tryumphant, with many holy and learned Popes, guiders of the church, among the which
Damasus was great and admirable. As for the Nobilitie of the kings of Spaine which
raigne at this day, it is incomparable, for they be successours to the kings of the Gothes,
and allyed to them in bloud,Nobilitie of the kings of Spaine. and are as it were graft i^to the stockes of the famous families
of the Baltes and Hamales. But to draw their Genealogie neerer and more personally;

Authours agree that they descend from the Merouingiens and Carlouingiens, the founders
of the estate of the French, whereby it followes that they haue right vnto the
realme of France, so as they cannot be taxed of fraud when as they shall seeke to
settle themselues there to aduance their monarchie. If you consider their prowesse
and victories, wee haue no need to go beyond our owne age: for the emperor Charles
the fift, king of Spaine, hath alone wonne more famous victories, than all the other princes
of Europe. The French are witnesses to their costs, and that mightie and fearefull
Germane Nation, which hee subdued in lesse than tenne moneths, and brought all the
Princes, Towns and states of the Germane empire vnder his obedience: he repulsed the
Ottomans forces both by Sea and land, and conquered the realme of Tunes in Afrik. But
it is verie remarkable, that notwithstanding any warre which Spaine hath endured since
it was freed from the Romane yoake, being inuaded by the Gothes, Moores, Arabians,
and other nations, yet the Spaniards haue alwaies preserued their libertie, and retained
their manners, their language, and their religion, and haue drawne others vnto it, with
whome humane changes haue made them to liue and conuerse. Seeing then by antiquitie,
nobilitie, largenesse of dominions, power, victories, generous actions, and finally
by all that may purchase greatnesse and temporall dignitie to nations and their kings,
Spaine is to bee preferred before all; it followes, that the first place is due to the kings
of Spaine before all other Christian kings, and by consequence before him of France.
But for that the question of this precedence hath beene mooued in a generall Councell
and disputed before the Pope and the sacred Senate, it is no lesse requisit to set down
the testimonies which Spaine and her kings haue of the spirituall fauour of God in
his Chatholike Church, wherein they shall bee found to exceed in graces, and spirituall
gifts, the kings of France, and all other kings, and their realmes, as also in deuotion
and merits to the Popes, and to the Sea of Rome, the onely iudge of this controuersie.Sp^^^e first instructed in the Gospell.
It is certaine that Iesus Christ hauing finished the worke of mans redemption, and
ascended into heauen, Spaine among all other Pagan nations was first aduertised of this
great benefit; as also by signes and wonderfull prodigies, shee had the first feeling of his
comming and birth: for the Spaniards had first of all this credit to see the Apostles personally
among them, and to heare the Gospell preached by them, and to beleeue, the
which is confirmed by many graue and faithfull authours, and by the ancient and vndoubted
traditions of the churches of Spain, saying that S. Iames had been sent by the Apostles
to the Spaniards, had preached among them, and made many disciples, who returning
to Ierusalem, had led some with them, who assisted at the third General Councell,
(whereof mention is made in the fifteenth of the Acts of the Apostles) and had their
voices there, this holy Apostle being president: who hauing beene put to death by Herod
Agrippa, and his bodie cast vnto the dogs, it was gathered vp by the said disciples, and
transported miraculously into Spaine: and by their peaching infinit families had beene
conuerted, where afterwards many receiued the Crowne of martyrdom, whose memorie
is famous in the church: the authoritie whereof commaunds euerie man to beleeue
that the virgin Mary being liuing,Virgin Mary seene in Spaine. appeared to Saint Iames in the Citie of Saragosse
before hee parted from Spaine, exhorting him to cause that church to be built, which is
there dedicated to her, which is the most ancient of the Countrie, and it was not long
before the Princes of the Apostles, S. Peter and S. Paul came into Spaine, where with an incredible
zeale in maner al the people were conuerted, vnto the Asturies; whereof Torquatus
the Asturian, was one of the first to giue testimony of their constancie in the faith, for
the which he was executed at Rome. The Prelates of Spain, were at the first cou^cels, especially
at the first at Nice, wheras Ozius that famous bishop of Cordoua signed the decrees
thereof, before Nicasius bishop of Gaule: The church of Rome is beholding to this Ozius
a Spaniard, for the donation made vnto it by the emperor Constantin, who had beene instructed
by him in the catholike faith. After this sacred general councell, there were many
others held in Spain,Councels in Spaine. of the which that of Illiberi in Granado is famous, wheras Helene the
emperors mother was with her grand child Constantin. But since there haue bin frequent
Councels in that nation, namely in Toledo, during the Goths raigne, where the kings did
assist, and shewed themselues ready to execute their decrees. There is no contradiction, but

but the kings of Spaine were made Christians before them of France: the memorie of
king Rio^edo is and shall for euer be honourable, who chased Arrianisme out of Spain, and
did persecute here^^^^,Richaredo a Catholike king of which Catholike Prince the kings of Spaine which raigne at
this day are true successors, for that they suffer not any one within their dominions to
speake against the holie Catholike Apostolik and Romish church. To maintein the which
without blemish vpon earth, there is nothing like in all the Christian gouernment to the
inquisition of Spain,Inquisition of Spaine. exceeding in holie seueritie and profitable rigour all the inquisitions
of other kingdomes and estates. There the lawes and constitutions of Popes are receiued,
reuerenced and practised, the which are not in France, whereas the Canon law is abrogated,
and whereas they haue often resisted Popes and Councels, censuring their decrees,
which are irreprehe^sible, vnder color of certain pretended liberties of the French church
wherof their kings make themselues protectors to the preiudice of the sea of Rome. The
first princes which opposed themselues against the spoiles of the Moores inuading Spain,
abandoned by the defeat and death of king Roderike the last of the Gothes,Kings of Spaine Saints. haue been holy
and wel beloued of God, wherof there are most a^tentik signs in many places. To D. Garcia
Ximenes first king of Sobrarbre, the deliuerer of Spain,Armes from heauen. was giuen fro^ heauen for his arms
a red crosse vpo^ a green tree in a field arge^t. D. Inigo Arista one of his successors, by the like
fauor receiued a crosse arge^t in a field Azure. Many miracles are reported to haue hapned
at the Christenings of kings of Spain. Some of the^ haue cured the kings euil, and many haue
expelled diuels. In the citie of Leon, is kept a holy standard brought from heauen by S. Isidorus,
one of the Patrons and protectors of Spain; in the which there is painted a bishop on
horseback, holding in one hand a crosse, and in the other a sword, vnder which the kings and
catholike princes of Spain fighting against the Moores, haue obtained many victories. By
the constancy of the kings of Spaine, especially of them of Castille, who haue neuer varied
in religion, since king Ricaredo aboue mentioned, they haue had the honor to root the
Moores out of Spaine, and to clense the countrie of those blaspheming Iewes. In acknowledgement
of which graces, they haue alwaies freely giuen the first fruits of the conquests
and glorious victories which they haue obtained against Infidels to Popes and churches,
building more goodly abbies, Cathedrall churches, Monasteries and Colledges, than any
countrie in the world, and giuing them large indowments; wherof that of Toledo is a
strange pr^sident,Church of Toledo rich. for the archbishop hath aboue 300000 ducats of yearely rent, besides
that which concerns the church and chapter, and the rich dignities and Prebends, the reuenues
of which archbishoprick exceed the ordinarie of many kings. In Spain, the Ieronimitans
haue had their beginning, with the order de la merced, of the redemption of captiues, and
many other orders of holy knights, which haue been a terror to the Moores and Infidels.
But aboue al,Iesuits first bred in Spain^ the Iesuits are a worthie brood of Spaine, couragious defenders, and adua^cers
of the Catholik Apostolike and Romish religion cherished by the kings of Spaine, in fauor
of the holy Sea, and continually entertained by them, and sent into all the parts of the
world, to make war with their spiritual armes, whilest that they did valiantly, with their
materiall a^mes fight against infidels,Name of Catholike. and root out heretiks: for which good offices, they do
rightly carry the name of Catholike, the which is much more excellent than that of most
Christia^ which the French kings vse, for sectaries, and they that are straied from the church
dare boldly cal themselues Christians, but not Catholiks; the which were absurd for that
this appellation is not proper but to those that are of the true familie of Iesus Christ, euer
distinguished by this name of Catholik, receiuing no other superlatiue note, and therfore
of greater dignity, the which hath been confirmed in the house of Castille and Leon, since
the king D. Alfonso the first, who raigned in the yere of our Lord 737 for a marke of their
piety and merits. By the which they are both by law and priuiledge from the Pope worthily
aduanced to the first seats among Christian kings, and therefore to be preferred before
them of France, in all assemblies, both spirituall and temporall.
Against these reasons the French and their partisans mainteined, that the French king
shold haue the precedency, not only for that they had been long in possession, but also by
right, hauing wel deserued it, and for many reasons answering those which the Spaniards
had obiected.Preiu^^ice done to the kings of France by the Councell. The embassadors of Fra^ce complained much that the fathers of the Councel
had done wro^g vnto their king, in admitting of this action, althogh they had surceased,

and would noe decide it, the which they should haue reiected, hauing also allowed them
of Spaine to sit alone our of ranke, by way of prouision, vntill that the Pope and the Consistorie
of Rome had determined, calling thereby in question the precedence of the kings
of France, ouer all other Christian kings the which had beene so many yeares practised, and
confirmed by the Iudgement of Popes, and the testimony of the most famous Lawyers,
and ancient writers. For Saint Gregory the Pope saith, that the king of France doth as
much exceed al other kings as a Royaltie doth a priuat man. Pope Stephen the third saith,
that the French nation shines aboue all others.Testimonies of the preheminences of the kings of France Bald^s doth mainteine that the kings of
France carrie the crown of liberty and glory aboue all other kings; That they are as the day
star in the middest of a cloud co^ming from the South, which cannot be darkned. That the
banners of France march first, ouer the which no other king can pretend any adua^tage of
honor. Boniface of Vitalianis an Italian, Auditor de Rota, Suidas a Greek author, and many others
haue left in writing that whe^ they named a king simply, it was ment by him of fra^ce.
Besides, the ranks of Christian kings is seen in the Registers of the court of Rome; and in
those which they cal prouincials in all the Cathedral churches, in which the king of Fra^ce
precedes, and they of England and Spain are set after. That it was vnworthy after these holie
and learned iudgements, to bring it again in questio^: and they held it for an insupportable iniurie
to the kings of France, who in effect are not subiect to the Popes iudgement, nor to
any other iurisdiction in this matter, not, in any thing that co^cerns the rights, preheminences
and prerogatiues of their crown, which they were to maintain by the means which God
had giuen them: whereupon they made a sharpe inuectiue in open Councel against the
Pope, by reason of some former opinions he had declared at Rome: yea they did taxe him
bitterly, for that he did chalenge vnto himself all power aboue the Councel, suffering nothing
to be determined but what had bin allowed by him at Rome: That he shewed himselfe
too vnthankful and vniust to France and to her kings, who had alwaies bin benefactors
to the holy Sea, seeking to put them from their lawful rank; and cruel to all Christian people,
in that he reiected the iust demands of all Catholike princes which was, a necessarie
reformation of the maners of the Clergie, and of that which was corrupted in the discipline
of the Church, and especially of the abuses of the court of Rome, That instead of bread of
health, he gaue Scorpions, sowing discord betwixt the kings of France and Spaine, vnder
colour of these importune precedencies, tending to cause a pernitious warre in Christendome:
wherefore they said, that reseruing the reuerence that was due to the holy Sea of
Rome, wherein France and her king meant to continue, they could not acknowledge Pius
4 for a common Father, nor true Pope, but for an vnlawfull vsurper of that dignitie; they
protested nullity of the acts and decrees of the Councell, which were but repetitions of
that which Pius had set down; declaring that they had co^mandement from the king their
master to retire, with all the Prelates of France, least by their presence they should seeme
to allow of his attempts against the dignities of the kings of France, the priuiledges of
their crowne, and the liberties of the French Church.
The Partisans of the French nation both at Rome and at Trent discoursed at large both
by word and writing:People an incorruptible Iudge. seeking to satisfie the curious multitud (which it may be is the most incorrupted
iudge in such co^trouersies.) And for that the Spaniards wold bring their nation
from Tubal, one of the neere descendents of Noah, they to pay them with the like money,
laied for a foundation of the antiquitie of the French Nation, that the Gaules and the
French were one nation, and one people, issued from Gomer, grand-child to Noah, and that
this nation of the Gaules did extend from the riuer Tanais, vnto the Western and Atlantik
Ocean, in which circuit at this day is contained Spain, France, Germany, Polonia, Russia,
with the Gottike and British Ilands; and these people were generally called Gommerians
and Gaules, a name taken from their progenitor, Gomer, who was also surnamed Gal, which
signifies escaped from the waters, that is to say, the Deluge. But since to distinguish their
troups and me^bers, as they dispersed the^selues, they took other names, as of Galates, Albins
Theuto^s,People comprehended vnder the Gaules. Germa^s, Cimmeria^s, Cimbres, Cica^btians french etc. drawn fro^ their adue^tures
or the situatio^ of the regions where they lodged, or fro^ the princes and captaines which did
lead the^: yet the name of Gaules hath bin alwaies retained by them which haue held the
country on this side, or on the west part of the riuer of Rhin, for a perpetual marke of their

antiquitie, taken as is said, from the deluge, that all the foresaid people were in old time
of the same maners, that is to say, free, open, warlike and conquerous, courteous
to their friends, fierce to their enemies, vsing for a long time one language, taken
at the diuision of Babell, which was the Teutonicke, more pure at that time than
it hath beene since, by reason of the mixture of nations: And thereupon the Gaules
which dwelt on this side, and the Germanes or Teutons, which remained on that
side the Rhin called Brethren. That the inhabitants of Spaine at this day could not
attaine to this antiquitie, although they say they are descended from Tuball the brother
of Gomer, for Gomer Gal was the eldest of Iaphets children, as they are set downe
in the holy Scripture, and Tubal was the fift, who made another branch; the which
came but late into Spaine, hauing taken another way. That one Iberius issuing from
him, had giuen the name to Iberia Asiatica, which at this day is the Countrie of the
Georgians, from whence out of doubt the Iberians Spaniards are come, but long after
the Deluge:Iberians Spaniards. And that on the other side some wandring troopes came into Spaine
vnder the conduct of one Sepherad, whose descent the Rabins bring also from Gomer,
of whom there is no other record, but that hauing crost Afrike, which was held by the
posteritie of Cain, hee had entred by the strait into Spaine, and that hee had called
that continent by his name Sepheride, turned since into Speride, and in the end into
Hesperide.
Moreouer (said they) that the names of these two stemmes or fathers of nations are
verie considerable in this question of antiquirie and nobilitie, being most certaine, that
in all the names of these first men, there was something mysteriall and propheticall,
which gaue a note vnto posteritie. But the word Gomer signifies a man perfect and
finished, and Tubal signifies seed, which begins to spring. There is an honourable mention
made of Gomer, and his descendents in all authors, as giuen to religion and sciences:
And if wee shall beleeue Berosus, as wee haue him at this day, and drawe the
Gaules from one Samotheus brother to Gomer, hee commends him to haue beene the wisestman
of his time: whereas there is no worthy mention of Tubal, to ground nobilitie
on. When as the Scipture speakes of the children of Tubal, it puts them in the rankes of
mercers,Ezechiel 27. pedlers, and horse coursers, frequenting the Tyrians faires and markets. The Spaniards
themselues say that Tubal and his people were first seated in Iberia Asiatica, from
whence they without doubt came, which haue peopled the greatest part of Spaine, who
were therefore called by the Greekes and Latins Iberians, which is the true and most ancient
name which we find of that region of Europe,Name of Spaine come out of Asia which wee call Spaine, which name
was brought from Asia. Before this transmigration of the Spaniards or Iberians out of Asia
into Europe, the Gaules, who were also called Celtes, had run beyond the Pyrenees,
and being as it were in possession of Spaine, did this honour to the Iberians that were
new come, to giue them passage through Gaule, and a dwelling beyond the mountains:
and although that afterwards growing insolent against their benefactors, there grew contention
and warre betwixt them, yet they were reconciled, and thence comes the name of
Celtiberians, a people famous in the war, with whom the Romanes had to do in Spaine;
the which were long subiect to Princes and Captaines, Gaules and Celtes, whereof
the name of Brigus one of their ancient kings (which word is of the ancient Gaule) makes
mention: and the names of Celtiques and Callaiques or Galliques haue beene for many
ages preserued among the people of Spain, whereas now the Countries of Portugal, and
Gallicia are, for assured testimonies that the Celtes and Gaules had been seated in Spain
before that euer the Iberians Asiatikes had set footing there.Name of Fra^ce or French. As for the name of Franc
or French, which their nation carries now, they were agreed that it was new, but with all
they mainteined that it was most honourable, for ^ranc signifies fierce and valiant, free
from all seruitude, actiue, noble, and an honest man; and for that they had giuen it to the
nation of the Gaules, not conquered by them, but rather freed from the tyrannie of the
Romanes, and of the barbarous nations which did spoile it, it did nothing derogate from
the antiquitie and nobilitie thereof, nor to the fraternitie which they haue alwaies had
with the Gaules, seeing that both these names are still in vse, and common to the Nation,
that of Gaule and Gaulois being much vsed in solemne acts both spirituall and ciuill.

It is certaine that Gaules is as it were the generall name, and French a particular,
so as the Spaniards in the search of Antiquities cannot find any other, but that the
French being somewhat dispersed from the bodie of the Gaules, by the violence of the
Romanes, who prest them, and to whome they would not yeeld but by extremitie,
were in the end vnited: againe vnder one Crowne, whereas by their vertue they
erected a realme i^ Gaule, of the French familie of the Merouing^ens: And they may
read in Histories that the Romanes possessing Gaule, found alwaies them of that nation,
dwelling vpon the bankes of Rhin and Meuse, whereas now bee the Prouinces
of Cleues, Iuliers, Gueldres, Holland, Zeland, Frizeland, and the neighbour
Countries, knowne to all Authors by the name of Sicambrians, who were hard to
manage,Sieambrians are French people of Gaule. alwaies contending for their libertie, vntill they had freed themselues from
the yoake and tyrannie of the Romanes, which Sicambrians of the Rhin did afterwards
take the name of Frances or French, and haue imparted it to others: So as wee
may be good proofes conclude, that when as in the time of the emperour Valentinian,
the Sicambrians French erected a realme in Gaule, that they were no new people,
but of the same nation, whereof a number became more eminent than the rest, not
for any desire to rule ouer them, but in hatred of the Romanes tyranny, and to repulse
the Bourgongnians, Gothes, and other barbarous Nations, which spoiled the
Countrie, and held their brethren in seruitude.
Hauing freed them, and ioyning all in one bodie, they erected this French monarchy,
which hath exceeded all others in dignitie and valour, adding to the name of Gaule
that of France, in honour and remembrance of their deliuerers, who held the Scepter
and Soueraigntie as due vnto them; but the Belges, Celtes, French, Acquitanes, and
finally all the Gaules made the bodie of the estate, vnder one common bond of ciuill libertie,
one honouring another by mutuall courtesies, for as the Gaules had reuer^nced
the French armes which had freed them from seruitude and oppression, so the French for
their part, had receiued with honour the ciuilitie, lawes, and religion of the Gaules, and
made an equalitie of free right betwixt them.
The Spaniards haue no memorie to brag on,Spaine a prey to the Barbarians. for as Pharamond made warre in the lower
part of Gaule Belgike, Spaine was then a prey, and torne in peeces by diuers cruell and
barbarous nations, hauing neither feare nor courage to resist them. The Gothes beganne
to shew themselues on this side the Alpes, and to frame a royall estate in Gaule, making
their seat at Tolousa, but they held it not long, for the French sent them soone beyond
the Pyrenees, to contend with the Vandales, Alanes, and Sueues, who had already wholy
subdued Spaine, and hauing diuided it among them, fell to iarre about their portions,
at the comming of this Gotike nation, who had no co^formitie nor acquaintance with the
Spaniards, as the Sicambrians had with the Gaules, but was a meer stranger and an enemie,
seeking nothing but spoile. The Spaniards hauing beene conquered by the Gothes from
the Romanes, and the aboue named nations, they fell out of one seruitude into another,
which continued aboue one hundred and twentie yeares; and their condition was very
miserable from Wallia the Arrian king vnto Richareds the Christian: for all that time was
a meere conquest full of desolations and ruines, without any forme of good gouernment,
whilest that the raigne of the French Gaules was setled in pietie and justice, and did prosper
in armes, subduing the Burgongnians, forcing the remainder of the Gothes which
were on this side the Pyrenee mountains, to goe to their companions in Spaine, and rooting
out the rest of the Romanes in Gaule. Ricaredo and some other kings following him
held some better order in their gouernments, and made lawes grounded vpon naturall equitie
and justice, the which are at this day in price: There past some raigns in this natio^, in
the which the princes being made Christians, did willingly take counsell in Spirituall
things, of the Clergie in national councels which were often held, and namely at Toledo.
In like maner the Clergie did reuerence the royall authority, and did freely receiue fit
orders for their estate, in temporal things: and we must confesse that whilest this harmony
lasted,Abuse of Councels in Spaine. the Spaniards and their affairs did prosper: but when their Councels were conuerted
into assemblies of the states (where also the Clergie would euer haue most authoritie)
when as instead of treating of the doctrine of Iesus Christ, and the due dispensation

of his heauenly blessings among Christians, studying to refute errors with knowledge
and charitie, and to reclaime the manners and affections of men, to the rule of true Iustice.
By holie Constitutions they did handle with contention the preheminences of
Prelats in their diocesses and iurisdictions, disposed of the estate of Kings houses, of the
honours and offices thereof, and of the gard of their persons, reconciled quarrelles among
great men, and dealt in other such worldly affaires, all vnder the authoritie of
Councells, whereby all was corrupted, euery man for getting his ranke, in the end they
found proud and obstinate Kings in that State, who in disdaine of the impertinencie and
excesse of such pastors (and for their cause of religion it selfe) abandoned themselues to
all vice and impietie, so as God to punish them gaue way to the Moores and Arabians,
who entred into Spaine,Moores the scourge of Gods iustice. and made such a spoile, as both Clergie and Laie men, King
and Subiects, Noblemen and Clownes, finally all degrees smarted many yeeres. That
from these lamentable calamities the defenders of the Spaniards preheminence and of
their kings, seeke I know not by what Art to draw glorie, saying with ostentation, that
their nation hath always preserued (among the Gothes and Sarazins which haue ruled ouer
them) their Language, Religion, and Libertie: wherein they shew themselues verie
vaine;Vanities of the Spaniards. for as for their libertie, the Histories shew the contrarie, neither had they kept
their religion pure: And as for their language, they of the French partie said, that the
Spaniards had vrged it to no purpose, yea if they would consider it well, they should
find, that it gaue them no grace, but did rather blemish them. If they will say, that in
Spaine they neither speake the Gothike, Arabic, nor Africane tongues, they must also
adde that they speake not Spanish there. The French doe freely confesse that the true
Languages of the Gaules and French are not much vsed now in Fraunce. Doe wee not
know that either of them spake the Roman tongue in those daies? for hauing beene long
subiect to the Empire of Rome, they were forced to learne the tongue, and to vse it by
an expresse Lawe, as all other people did, which were subdued by this proud Nation.
This Roman tongue was retained both by the Spaniards and French to this day, yet
mingled and corrupted by other tongues: but there is one notable difference, which
giues the aduantages to the French, which is, that although they haue some words and
tearmes remaining of the Roman tongue, yet haue they very few that are meerly strange,
but are of the old Sicambrian, German and Teuton tongues, which is the common language
of the French, and of all the auncient Gaules, whereas that which the Spaniards
vse at this day, consists of the Roman, Gothike, Arabic, Moorish, and African tongues,
a perpetuall note (vnlesse they change it) that they haue serued the Gothes, Moores,
Arabians, and Africans; the which is yet fresh: And therfore it appeeres that the Gaules
being deliuered from the Roman yoake, by the French their Country men, hauing made
one body, and one people, haue since preserued their language better and more generously
than the Spaniards: and (which doth more import) increasing still in power, dignitie
and good gouernement, they haue alwayes maintained their estate and libertie, keeping
any other nations from supplanting them either in al or in part, were hee Christian or
Infidell, and therein they doe much exceed the Spaniards, who haue suffered themselues
to be controlled by the Infidell Moores aboue 800 yeeres.
And whereas they thinke to extoll Spaine by reason of her situation, aboue all the
regions of Europe,Argument taken from the sitation of Spain vaine. for that say they, it represents the head in the Geographicall Maps:
they answered, that it was a friuolous induction, grounded vpon the speculation of children
and idle persons. That in trueth Spaine makes a chiefe part of Europe, but that
proues not that it is the best part. If in the description of Authors it be set before France,
that giues it no preheminence: for by this reason Ireland should be preferred before Italie
and Spaine it selfe, for that Ptolomie and other Cosmographers after him set it first in
their geographicall descriptions.
And for that there was no contradiction but to the greatest Princes greatest honours
are due, they were agreed vpon this point: But the French saied, that the honourable
greatnesse which consists in dignitie must not be measured by the greatnesse of his dominions,
nor the multitude of his subiects, as the Spaniards would doe. That seeing they
did confesse that the Realme of Ierusalem, which did neuer equall the fourth part of

Spaine, should be preferred before all Christian realmes if it were standing, they shew
plainely that this greatnesse which giues preheminence, doth not consist in quantitie of
ground,Dignitie and greatnesse of st^^es wherein it consists. but by pietie and iustice, by the valor and vertue of kings, and of their subiects, and
by their bounty, they and their estates increase in reputation: In all which it is very apparent
that France hath the better. But discoursing of his greatnes which consists in quantitie,
they said that the number of realmes which they reckon within the contient of
Spaine, is a vanitie and euident signe of the weakenes of that nation and of their shame;
witnessing that Spaine hath beene dismembred into many parts, which hath not hapned
in France, since it was a realme, in the which they might haue made a dosen better realms
than those of Arragon, Granado, Gallicia, and the Castilles, being reduced to their auncient
limits,The Spaniards Empire is a ^^^rge to it self. the other foreine estates, where they commaund, are no profitable accessaries
to Spaine, as Sicilie, Naples, Sardynia, the Netherlands, no nor the Indies: These members
lie too farre off, and doe more trouble than aduaunce their kings affaires. Let the
Spaniards then heape together all the realmes, duchies and counties which are of the iurisdiction
of Spaine in Europe, and let them adde thereunto Peru, and new Spaine, and
for an increase let them bring their pretended rights to the Empire of Constantinople,
and to the realme of Ierusalem, France will alwayes ballance all this euen as a small bullet
of gold; and will equall in weight a greater masse of other mettall. This greatnesse,
said they, of that Spanish Empire, is too new to be esteemed, and too yong to presume to
goe before Fraunce, the which is venerable for his lustie age, and hath maintained her
Crowne aboue 1200 yeeres, with so great honor, as it were follie to repeat the attempts
of her feudataries and vassals, the which shee hath happily calmed and quenched. This
Spanish pride, glorious but of late, is too delicate to stand of it selfe, the which time will
discouer. This a^rogant presumption is like vnto the gourd, which being growne in few
nights, aduaunced it selfe before the Pine tree which had indured many a sharpe winter,
but it withered away with the first wind, the Pine standing firme and immoueable.
But as for the commodities which the Spaniards say that the greatnesse of their kings
Empire brings to the rest of Christendome,Spaine hurtfull to all Christendome. they answered, that it was quite contrarie, and
that there was no nation in Christendome but complained of the wrongs and iniuries they
receiued from Spaine, neither was there any one pleased with any good was brought fro^
thence, vpon which tearmes France stood. The commodities, said they, which people
receiue one from another, proceed either from meere liberalitie, or by way of commerce
and traffike, or else casually, and as it were by reflection of that which a nation doth for it
selfe, which notwithstanding redounds to the profit of their neighbors. They know not
in France, what the Spanish liberalitie is proceeding from charitie. The commerce and
and traffike which these two nations haue together, doe without doubt incommodate
France, and cause a dearth of victualls and other commodities, besides it doth daily withdraw
the labouring people and Artisans (which are said to be the riches of a country, being
inticed with the Indian gold) which hath course in Spaine. And it were difficult to find
a president of any deed or enterprise of the Spaniards, which hath turned to the profit or
ease of the French. But what benefits and good offices haue not the Spaniards receiued
of the French nation? since the time of the Gothes raigne in Spaine, these people being
alwayes in the pawes of some tyrant, the French were forced to goe and deliuer them.
Vpon this occasion King Dagobert passed the Pyrenees,French alwaies benefactor to the Spaniards. chased Suintilla, a disordered and
cruell man, from the royall throne, and setled Sizebut a good prince. Lewis 8, and his son
S. Lewis, to the end they might not diuert the weake kings of Spaine from their warres against
the Moores, they did charitably dissemble the wrongs, and the affront which (said
they) was done vnto them by D. Berenguela, wife to D. Alphonso 9 king of Leon, when as
she seazed vpon the realme of Castille, the inheritance of her eldest sister D. Blaunch mothkr
of S. Lewis, causing her son D. Ferdinand to be inuested, the French being busied in
greater affaires. They will say, they haue made warre against the Sarazins, the vsurpers
of Spaine, when they threatned to inuade Fraunce, and the other regions of Europe;
That they haue staied them with their owne forces, and in the end expelled them: It is
their custome to bragge, but they cannot giue the lie to so many worthie Authors of all
nations, and to their owne Annales which shew the contrarie. The French are not so malitious

to deny that the Spaniards haue not caried themselues valiantly in many incounters
against the Moores, holding their country and houses, but to say that they alone had
subdued them, that were not fit. Let them for euer thanke the French, who haue giuen
them the means: Let them acknowledge, that to attaine vnto their deliuerie, the French
made the way, and brought the ladder, mounting with them, yea before them: wherevnto
they had neuer attained without the French. Did not Charles Martel prince and gouernor
of the French defeat the barbarous Africans, whenas being masters of all Spaine,
they passed the Pyrenees, presuming to deuoure France? Euery man knowes that in two
memorable victories, which he obtained against them, the one in Touraine, the other in
Languedoc, he shew aboue 400000, by which routs they were so weakened, as the petie
Kings of Spaine, who had begunne to lay the weake foundations of the realmes of Ouiedo,
Leon, Arragon, and Nauarre, in the mountaines, had some leisure to fortifie themselues.
The same Martel, did not he keepe the country of Cattelogne with the forces of
France, whereof he made a bulwarke against the Sarazins of Saragosse, Valencia, and those
that were lodged in the neere countrie of Nauarre? They would gladly deface the memorie
of so many painfull voyages and worthy exploits done for them by the French during
the raignes of Charlemaine and his sonne Lewis, who did so long keep the Moores on
this side the riuer of Ebro, that the Asturians and Castillans might on their side aduance
against the Barbarians, for that it may be they would blush at the report of these things
whereof we cannot speake but to their great dishonour. They should remember, and can
not dissemble it, that D. Alphonso 2 of that name king of Leon and Ouiedo, surnamed the
Chast, for that (although he were married) he would not haue any children, seeming to
haue a desire to recompence Charles the great for so many good offices which hee had receiued,
inuited him to come into Spaine, vpon a voluntary promise, that he would cause
him to be acknowledged by his subiects, for the lawfull successor of his estates: then hauing
lightly changed his opinion by the persuasion of his courtiers, hee did forget both
Gods honor and his owne,Treachberie and ingratitude of the Spaniards to the French. making a league without any scruple with the Moores: whom
hee did arme against the French, beeing vpon the way, for that said the Spaniards they
would not subiect themselues to a stranger. This was the cause that the French armie receiued
a notable rout in their retreat. The French being incensed at this bad vsage, beganne
to neglect the affaires of Spaine for a time, which gaue meanes to the Moores to
increase their power, and to settle themselues for many yeeres, God letting them know
by this seuere and long punishment, how much he was displeased with their treacherie and
ingratitude, the which shewed a manifest contempt of religion: Notwithstanding the
French did not forbeare to succour the Spaniards many times at their great neede.Generositie of the French to the Spaniards. Read
the Annales of Spaine, you shal find, that King D. Alphonso the first of that name in Castille,
and the 6 of Leon (it is he which took ^oledo from the Moores, and vnited it to
Castille) was vertuously assisted by great troups of French, led by the Earles Raymond of
Burgundie, Henry of Bezanson, and Raymond of Tolousa, who purchased him the surname
of Braue, by reason of many goodlie victories, obtained against the Moores attributed to
this king, although that most were done by the French, and their commanders, to whom
he was not vnthankfull. For in requitall of their vertues, he married all three to his owne
daughters. Raymond of Bourgundie left vnto his sonne D. Alphonso Raymond the Royall
scepter of Castille, by the right of his wife D. Vrraca: and Henrie of Bezanson was the
stemme of the royall house of Portugall. The same Spanish Histories make mention, that
at the siege of Saragosse, in the yeere of our Lord 1118, being held by the Moores, D.
Alphonso the seuenth, who called himselfe Emperour of Spaine, for that he held all the
Christian Realmes in that country, had in his armie the earles William of Poitiers, Rotron
of Perche, with them of Cominges and Bigorre, the vicount of Lauedan, the bishop of
Lescar, with many other French noblemen and knights, by whose valour the citie was taken,
and made the chiefe of Arragon, and many routs giuen vnto the Infidelles. It was not
by the sole forces of the Spaniards, although they were all vnited, that the famous battel
of Muradal was won: it were too great ingratitude, or senslesse malice, not to acknowledge
it, the which their owne Writers doe witnesse, that in the army of king D. Alphonso
the fourth of that name in Castille, there were aboue 100000 stra^gers, and most French:

and in like maner at the battell of Salado, at the siege of Algezires, and such like actions,
it is most certaine that the Kings of Fraunce, and they of Nauarre, who then came from
the French, neither sparedmen, nor treasure, no not their persons, witnesse Philip of Eureux
king of Nauarre, who died at Seuile or Xeres. They did confesse that the Spaniards
predecessours had fought valiantly against the Moores, according to their meanes, but
it was for themselues, and their owne priuate commodities, and to return into their houses,
the which did not much concerne the profit of other christian people. Whereas the
French without any priuate designe, moued with the only zeale of religion at the simple
persuasion of Popes, and at such time as they did assist the Spaniards, haue enterprized
most holy and difficult warres, against all the forces of the East, drawing vpon them the
warrelike nations of the Turks,Enter prises of the French for the publike good of Christendome Arabians, Chaldeans, Egiptians, and others of Mahumets
sect, from whom they took the city of Ierusalem, all Pales^ina, and Syria towards the sea,
erecting a realme there, which they held and defended valiantly, to the good of all Christendome,
wherein the Spaniards cannot say that they gaue any aide; and yet they intitle
themselues Kings of Ierusalem, and aspire to the Empire of Constantinople, which estates
haue cost Fraunce so much bloud, so as they haue no reason to quit their rights, beeing
grounded vpon a donation and inuestiture of the Empire of Constantinople, made by
Pope Leo the tenth to King Francis the first, and to his successors, when these Potentates
had enteruiew at Bolonia.
Experience doth teach vs daily, to what vse the forces and treasure of the Kings of
Spaine are imployed, and of what import they be to the state of Christendome. The nauigation
of the west Indies, and the possession of those great and vast desarts seeme verie
honourable and fruitfull vnto them, and they make great oftentation of the gold, siluer,
and pearle that comes from thence. These things, which are not worthie to bee put in
the ranke of things to be wished for by vertuous men, seeme to giue content, and to bring
some ease to this common life, the which we passed more sincerely, and it may bee more
commodiously before the discoue^ie of these countries. In one respect they are verie auaileable
for the Spaniards and their kings; for they are as it were sinkes and common
sewers, to draine away and confine all their banished men, bad husbands, bankrupts, infamous
persons, and finally all men that are hurtfull to their other subiects, for with such
men the west Indies are for the most part peopled. Moreouer, it is certaine, and it doth
plainely appeere to those that consider things rightly,^iscomm ^ities by the discourse of the we^^ Indies. that all other regions and states of
Europe, yea and Spaine it selfe are hurt in many respects: for since the plentie of Indian
gold, al things are more deere and impaired. By this mettall which passeth currently with
the armes of Spaine, Inuention and Industrie are made dull and sleepie, and thereby
Trueth and Honestie are corrupted. By this Indian gold, the Kings of Spaine, who were
wont to entertaine friendship with other Potentates their neighbours, are now growne
full of contentions. They entertaine many souldiers, and make continuall leuies, beeing
neuer without quarrells, so as they and their subiects are in continuall troubles; as it happens
alwayes to those, who to afflict others, loose their owne quiet and rest. By this gold
the Kings of Spaine presumed to haue away made to a monarchie in Europe, and haue
ingaged themselues in vnnecessarie warres vpon diuers pretexts, which haue kept backe
the Christians forces, whilest that the Turke got Hungarie, and made other lamentable
breaches into Christendome; and by this holie or cursed gold, Charles the fift Emperour
or King of Spaine, made warre against the Germans, vnder colour of religion, though
the true cause was to force them to suffer the Empire to be hereditarie in his house. Hee
vanquished them, but not without the aide of other Germans, corrupted with his gold,
hee triumphed ouer all the princes, estates, and townes of the Empire, and thought hee
had attained to the height of happinesse; but behold Henrie the second the French king,
staies him sodainely, with the valour of his Armes, accompanied with Iustice, and maketh
him desist; hearing that the French army approached neere vnto the Rhine: the
Germans receiued this good turne at that time of the French their friends, neighbours,
and brethren,Germany freed fro^ seruitude by the French. to recouer their libertie and the dignitie of the Empire. A worthie and
fresh example, to shew that Fraunce precedes Spaine in qualities which giue splendor
and dignitie to Kings, that is, in valour accompanied with iustice, and in a charitable

protectio^ of the oppressed: and that true riches consist in sufficie^t, which is always found in
France. But who could forbeare to smile, to heare the scorching aire, and the drie and barren
ground of Spaine preferred before the milde and temperate climate of Fraunce, whereas
the Spaniards seek reliefe in all their necessities, as euerie man knowes: what good comparison
can be made of the men and fruits which Spain produceth with them of France?
whereas so many religious, actiue and ready wits are bred, such goodlie and nimble bodies,
so curteous and pleasing in behauior, of such inuincible courages in all great and difficult
enterprises? whereas so many great captaines were borne, who planted colonies
throughout all the world? a nation which hath made the Turke to tremble, hearing only
the name of Franc or French, which hath furnished so many Popes and soueraigne pastors
to the Church, and so perfect, as the Spaniards cannot compare with them, be it in regard
of their vertue or number: which hath produced so many great emperors, fathers of nations,
and amplifiers of the Christian religion, sons to so many noble kings, and of so great antiquitie,
as no others can attaine vnto it. Let the kings of Spaine glorie of the families of
the Balthes and Hamales raigning among the Gothes, fatall nations, which haue brought
nothing but miseries and ruines into Europe, where in the end they themselues haue bin
^uined and extinct, but that the Spaniards would now make them liue againe amongst
them: But that they are descended by issue male, fro^ the Merouingians or Carlouingians
as some of their feed chroniclers suggest, and they themselues vant, ther is not any but they
that speak it, and their profes are very obscure and vain, and subiect to many inuented fables.
The princes of the familie of Austria,Beginning of the Kings of Spaine issued from the house of Austria. from whence the kings of Spaine at this day are
descended, are issued (as the French said) from the earles of Habsbourg, the which Earledome
was a verie small thing in that part of Germany, which is now called Ergow, amo^g
the Suisses in the yeere 1272. This place of Habsbourg, wherof they intitled themselues
earles, is now a ruinous castle, and hath often changed master. As some report, it was one
Rapat or Rathoth which layd the first foundations, as also of the Abbey of Murre, where
they find some charters, from the which they haue drawne their genealogie since this Rapat
vnto Raoul or Rodulphus the fift of that name among those Earles, who was chosen emperour
of the Romans, at such time as there was a great schisme among the Germans; and
they found that this house had bin first brought into credit by a bishop of Strausbourgh,
brother or neere kinsman to the said Rapat. They also shewed by the testimony of some
writers, that this Rodolphus Earle of Habsbourg was so poore, as he was forced for a time
to serue as steward to Ottocaire the titularie king of Bohemia, and that afterwards ayming
at the commodities of the Church, he did insinuate himselfe into the fauor of an archbishop
of Mentz, whom he did accompany in a voyage which he made to Rome, and was
so gratious with him, as at their return, finding the princes of Germany strangely diuided
into factions, for the imperiall dignitie which had bin void aboue 25 yeeres, this archbishop
caused Rodulphus to be chosen K. of Romans, by his credit which was great, and by
means of the princes contentions, who would not yield one vnto another, and by the same
fauour he was easily confirmed by pope Gregory 10, who was then at Lion, at a generall
Councell. Rodulphus hauing attained to this dignitie, imployed himselfe happily to pacifie
the quarrels of Germany: and as he was politike, he neglected no occasion to aduance
his owne affaires, mannaging his good fortune in such sort, as he caused the duchies of
Austria, Sueuia, Stiria, and Carinthia to fall into his house, with the realme of Bohemia
for a season, and the Landgrauiat of Alsacia, with other lands and fees of the Empire, the
which fell void during the said troubles, most of the which haue remained to his posteritie.
So by these vnexpected euents, and contrary to all mens expectations this house of
Habsbourg grew famous, as God doth sometimes raise the poore, and make of a Sheepheard
a King, when he pleaseth. There was some light (saied they) vnto that time of the
house and familie of Austria, issued without contradiction from the estates of Habsbourg,
but whereas Writers seeke to draw their auncestors from the Princes of Austracia, of the
French race of Merous; It is a meer vanitie and rashnes for the^, to wander through the desarts
of these turbulent times, where there is no path, nor way to lead them to the knowledge
of such auntient beginnings. For the ground whereof, they suppose one Sigebert,
(who it may be neuer was) fro^ whom they would draw the families of the Erles of Habsbourg,

and others: and they say that he was sonne to Theodebert king of Austrasia, he that
was dispossest of his estate, and slaine at the instigation of Queene Brunhalt, by Theodoric
king of Burgondie, she being grandmother to these 2 princes. That Theodebert and all his
sonnes being slaine, except Sigebert, who hauing escaped the massacre, was sent into high
Burgondie, beyond Mount Iura, where he begat sonnes and daughters, and that his issue
was dispersed into diuers families of Germanie: but the French maintained that this pretended
Sigebert was fained and fabulous, as doth appeare by the best French writers, who
say that Brunhalt her selfe slue all the sonnes of Theodebert, casting her selfe a little one, being
in his swathing cloths, against the stone, whose name was M^rouee, Theodoric hi^ other
grandchild being also poisoned by her, and she punished by Clotaire king of France; hauing
also rooted out the vnlawfull race of Theodoric, he vnited the realmes of Austrasia and Burgondie
to his crowne: afterwards hee gaue Austrasia with the title of a realme to his son
Dagobert, who comming to that of France, inuested his sonne Sigebert, who dying king of
Austrasia, left one onely sonne called Dagobert in the garde of Grimoald Maior of his
palace, who sent his Pupil into Scotland, where hee caused him to bee made a monke,
and soone after died, and then hee caused his owne sonne Hildebert to be crowned king.
But the French to reuenge this disloyaltie, brought an armie against him, slew Hildebert,
and carried the father to Paris, where hee died in prison. Since which Austrasia and
Burgundy were gouerned by Maiors of the Palace or Viceroyes, vnto Pepin, who was
crowned King of Fraunce, by reason of the idlenesse of Childeric the last king of the
race of the Merouingians, not by fraud nor violent vsurpation, and much lesse through
the fauour, approbation, or counsell of any Pope, as some say, but by the election and consent
of the princes and estates of France, and therefore with a more iust title (if there be
any comparison) than that by the which the kings of Spaine doe now hold the realme of
Nauarre: for it is a fundamentall right which neuer dies among the French, to haue libertie
to choose their kings (prouided alwayes that they goe not out of the masculine
line of the blood royall) in case of some great incapacitie, or for some other important
accident, which concernes the publique good, and preseruation of that crowne and state:
which nation among other good humours cannot endure a strangers commaund, no not
of their owne princes, when they seeke hatefull alliances elsewhere, and that contemning
the honors and sweetnes of their owne country, they affect the manners and fashions of
strangers: whereof Charles of France duke of Lorraine made trial, after the decease of king
Lewis the 5 his nephew, before whom Hugh Capet was preferred, being also a prince of the
blood, but not so neere: whom the French reiected, for that he was wholie giuen to the
fashions of the Germans, which are much more tollerable to the French than those of
the Spaniards, who seek at this day to pretend a right vnder fained genealogies, to quarrell
for the crowne of France, if opportunitie serue: whereupon they did conclude, that if
their auncesters could not indure a prince of France Germanized, they should hardly euer
accommodate themselues with princes of the German race, but Spaniolized, yea
transformed into meere Spaniards, both by nature and education, if they should prooue
directly that the house of Austria come from the Earles of Habsbourg, were descended
from the Merouingians and that pretended Sigebert. They added moreouer, that if the
historians of the house of Austria could prooue, that their fained Sigebert had beene in
the world, and could trace out his posteritie directly to Philip King of Spaine now raigning,
yet could they not make it appeare, that either he or Theodebert his father were capable
of the crowne of France, by reason of the vncertainty of their blood, for that queen
Brunhalt reported that Theodebert was a supposed childe, and that hee was not brother to
Theoderic, nor son to king Childebert of the blood of France. Moreouer, they demanded
of these curious searchers of the rights of the house of Austria, where these princes descending
from the pretended Sigebert were hidden, whenas the scepter of the French was
transferred into the familie of Charles Martell to Pepin, and then to Hugh Capet: why did
they not shew themselues then, or at the least make some solemn protestation to preserue
their pretensions and rights to the crown of France, if they thought they had any. For they
might haue done it safely, especially since that they of Habsbourg came vnto the empire
and were growne mighty: but it is strange that neuer any prince of that race opened his

mouth, nor imploied any Chronicler to colour this imaginarie title, no not the emperor
Charles 5, who wanted no ambition, seeking to lay hold of it by force only, and the right of
co^quests. D. Philip his son is the first of his family that talks of this antie^t Merouingian nobilitie,
and hath begun to cause instructions to be drawne to entertain his greedie desire to
denour France, imploying also with the like designe the aliances made by them of his race
with the blood of France, by mariages, thinking thereby to maintain in the house of Spain
some hereditary prete^sions to the realm of France, if he had no other support. The which
in good termes of Law is called, to slaunder or to cauill, which is when one contends for
that which is notorious: for euery man knows that the realm of France is no inheritance,
but a succession of the males, by reason of the blood, and that it respects not the women,
being contrary to the inueterate custome of the French. Thus the French and their partisans
restrained the Antiquity and the Nobilitie of the kings of Spaine, and brought them to
the house of Habsbourg in Germanie, saying notwithstanding that they of Habsbourg
and Austria haue great reason to commend the aliances contracted by marriages with the
house of France: for if they haue drawne any lustre from the Germane empire in Rodulphius
the first, and other Emperours of their familie, they haue made it perfect by the
marriages which some of them haue contracted with the Princesses of the blood of
Fraunce: witnesse the Emperour Maximilian, who hauing married the heire of Burgondie,
had so great lands and possessions by her, besides the companie of a noble ladie, as he
made a waie thereby for Philip his son, and his descendants to attaine vnto their greatnes.
But comming now to the chiefe points, which should be decided in this question propounded
in a generall Councell, which are, the pietie and religion of people and their princes;
and their duties and merits to the church of God, and to his ministers. The Spaniards
(said they of the French partie) tell wonders and miracles vpon the relation of their Writers,
and their Spanish traditions: That if God hath giuen preheminence in these things
to their nation, it ought to be allowed and confirmed among men, yea in ecclesiasticall
assemblies. They bragge that they first saw and heard the chiefe Apostles in their countrie,
and that they had beleeued the Gospel before all other Gentiles. Hereof they giue
no better proofe than the French might doe, if they should say that these great lights S.
Iames, S. Peter, and S. Paul going into Spaine had passed through Gaule, going by land rather
than by sea, desiring to profit more, as it is likely, according to their dueties and commissions,
and that in passing they had preached and made Churches. That by this probable
reason the Gaules had beene instructed before the Spaniards, and had seene the Apostles
first. As for the Apostles disciples, it is most certaine that Gaule did see the first, and
the most renowmed, according to good Authors, the which was Crescentius disciple to S.
Paul: and if we shal beleeue traditions, Lazarus, who was raised from death by our Sauior,
came and preached at Marseille, Nathaniel in Berry, and Denis Arcopagita at Paris. There haue
bin councels in Gaule since the time of pope Victor,Councelles in Gau^e. about 180 yeres after our sauior I^sus
Christ wheras that great doctor Irenaeus, gouernor then of the church of Lion, did preside.
And there is an Epistle yet extant written before that time by the Martires of Vienna
vpon Rhosne, and from the^ of Lio^, to co^fort them of Galacia and Phrigia in Asia, during the
persecutions of the Emperor Commodus. As for the Councell Elibertin (that is Eliberris)
that neither the time nor the place where it was held are not verie well quoted by them
that haue written, and it is probable that it was not in Spaine, but rather at the foote of
the Pyrenean mountaines, vpon the strait of Gaule, where there was also an other good
towne of the same name, reduced to a village in the time of Constantine the Great: the
which was called in regard of the portion which hee had giuen to Constantine his eldest
sonne, in the which Gaule and Spaine was comprehended, to which two great prouinces
this place confining was commodious: but admit (said they) it had bin held in Spaine, it
would no more adua^ce the Spaniards cause, tha^ the councels of Arles that of the French,
assembled in a maner at the same time, to compound the controuersies of the Bishops of
Afrike, by the authority imperial of Constantine the great, in whose empire and long before,
Gaule was full of goodly churches, at Arles, Vienna, Lion, Autun, Treues, Angers, Poitiers,
in Berry, Auuergne and elsewhere, which were furnished with learned and catholike Pastors,
famous by the writings of the learned that were neere that age, the which are come

vnto vs, and that Synodes were as frequent then and some ages after in Gaule, and more
then in Spaine, but they were all nationall, or called vpon some priuate subiects, where
if they beleeue that the kings, Gothes, comming into Spaine did assist, we may beleeue
that the kings of France haue done the like in their country. But to maintaine as the Spaniards
doe,Kings christned in France before them in Spaine. that the kings of the Gothes raigning in Spaine, were Christians and Catholikes
before them of France, there is no ground, vnlesse they will say, that the A^^ians
were Catholikes and Christians: with which vice all the Gothish kings in Spaine were
infected vnto Ricarede, who was conuerted by the catholike Doctors, among which was
Nigith of Narbona, and hee abiured Arrian heresie, at the third Councell of Toledo
in the yeere 589, a whole age after the conuersion of Clouis king of Fraunce to the true
Christian faith; in the which the kings of France, and the French in generall haue always
persisted, vnlesse they will impute to the whole nation the priuate blemishes of some,
which will be found trifles in regard of those which haue beene raised in Spaine, for the
which it hath bin often troubled,Heresies in Spaine. as by the heresie of Basilides and Martiall mentioned in S.
Cyprians epistles, wherof the one was bishop of Legio Gemina, and the other of Emerita, and
that of Prisulian a Spaniard, which was condemned at the councell of Burdeaux, and him
selfe with other his confederats executed at Mentz: and in like maner by that of Felix: the
which shews that heresies haue been lesse countenanced in Gaule than in Spaine.
But leauing these old things, seeing that prioritie of time doth not carrie it, being said,
That in the kingdome of heauen the first are many times found last; it is requisit to know,
how both Spaine and France haue gouerned themselues for matter of beleefe and godlie
works during these later raignes. It were not fitting for the French to contend of the holines
of the kings of Spaine, who did rise first after the inuasion of the Moores; nor to dispute
if their Armes came from heauen, whether S. Isidores standard be true or a fiction,
nor in like maner the graces and gifts which they maintaine to haue been in some of their
princes, to cure diseases, and to cast out diuelles. For by the same grounds they beleeue
that Charlemaigne and Lewis 9, kings of France, are Saints, and their feasts are celebrated by
the Church, that the flowers de Luce of gold, with the holie oyle are gifts from heauen,
and that it is most apparent the Kings of Fraunce cure the Kings Euill, which things the
French would not haue any man call in question. Wherefore let them be allowed of eyther
part without preiudice to their rank: but (said the French) the Spaniards should shew
themselues hollow hearted, if they should deny that they had not been often retained in
the true doctrine, and instructed in the exercises of Christian religion by the Prelats, and
Doctours which Fraunce hath sent them from time to time, whilest that the nobilitie of
Spaine, and their Kings also, defiled themselues with the too familiar conuersation of the
Moores,Marriages profane of the kings of Spaine. when they were not in armes, alying themselues vnto them by marriages, as D.
Alphonso 5 of Leon did, who without scruple gaue his sister D. Theresia in mariage to Abdala
the Moore king of Toledo: and an other Alphonso 6, of that name at Leon, and 3 of
Castille maried Caida a Moore. They wil not make any doubt, that by the diligence of D.
Bernard Archb. of Toledo a French man borne, and other clergy men of the same nation
which did assist him, the exercises of the Romish seruices was brought into that Church,
insteed of the Musarabic, which they had vsed in Spaine vnto the yeare 1086. Wherfore
the exercise was called Gallican. And they must confesse, that for want of worthy men to
gouerne the churches of Spaine, the said D. Bernard was constrained to furnish his bishopriks
of Braga,Churches of Spaine gouerned by French Prela^es. Ozma, Siguenza, S. Iames, Segouia, Palenza, Valencia, Zamorra and others,
with Prelats which he had brought from France, in his returne from Rome. And that an
other Bernard of Agen succeeded him in the archbishopricke of Toledo: all learned and
holie pastors, and so reputed in their owne Annales.
The kings of Spaine haue built store of monasteries and churches, and do entertain many
orders of religions, wherof the heads be in Spaine, and haue giuen the first fruits of their victories
to popes as to Christs vicars. The French contradicted it not, seeing by the effect
that the prelats and clergy men of Spain are very rich:Riches of the clergie of Fra^ce but wil they say that they are poore
in Fraunce, whereas they finde by a true computation, that of twelue parts of the lands
they hold seuen, and receiue the reuenews, besides the tithes, the deuotion of good men,
and other casualties? And as for the heads of religious orders, it is well knowne that the

chiefe and most auncient are in Fraunce much honoured,1564 and that the kings of Fraunce,
and other princes of that nation, haue not onely giuen the first fruits of their victories to
Popes, but they haue giuen them whole realmes.
Whereas the Spaniards brag that by the discouerie of the west Indies, they haue encreased
the number of Christians, and gotten a new world vnto the church: The French
confesse, that doubtlesse this designe in the beginning was royall, and that the respect
wee owe vnto princes, and Christian charitie doth bind euerie man to beleeue, that
such was the intention of the catholike kings D. Ferdinand and D. Isabella, whenas they
first gaue meanes to Christopher Columbus to vndertake this voyage: but they maintained
that there were neuer Commissions worse executed, nor more ^alitiously diuerted than
those by the Spaniards which haue beene sent since to the Indies, and that in all their
gouernement there is not any shew of good zeale nor of true religion. If they will say,
there are many religious men of all Orders, and especially Iesuites, well entertained, they
replied, there were many reapers, seeking haruest to feed them, reaping where they had
not sowen:Excesse of the Spaniards at the Indies. That so many religious men went not thither daily to instruct the Indians,
but to gather the fat of the earth. That it was well knowne there were few naturall Indians
left at the west Indies, and that the Spaniards, as well souldiers, as fermers, and officers
of the mines, had slaine and murdered them by millions, and did seeke to root out
the race of them, vsing them like bruite beasts, and causing them to burst vnder the burthen
of an insupportable labor, in searching into the bowells of the earth to find gold, and
into the depths of the sea to draw forth pearles. It is not the way to increase the number
of Christians, and to get a new world vnto the Church, to captiuat so many poore soules
so tyrannously, and to take away their liues without reason, against all humanitie, by such
cruell, vile and miserable seruices. That these things were not spoken at randon, nor inuented;
for the cruelties vsed vpon these poore Indians, had beene verified by good informations
made by the commaundement of the Emperor Charles the fift, vpon the complaints
which had beene made by certaine good religious men, who were eie witnesses of
those insolencies, but yet there followed no great reformation: Finally, that great number
which liue there in religious habits, vnder a colour of deuotion, be at leisure enough,
hauing no cure of soules, wherewith Spaine and other countries of that iurisdiction on
this side the seas, are ouercharged, and cannot well entertaine them without the west Indies;
and that is the chiefe mark of religion which they can shew in regard of those Indies.
For it is neither pietie nor charitie which drawes them thither, it is couetousnesse and an
insatiable greedines of gold, which entertaines this nauigation; and without doubt this
traffike will cease, the memorie of those places, and the name of Iesus Christ will be forgotten,
if others than the Spaniards do not raise it, as soone as their mines be dried vp, as
they are in some places, and therefore abandoned.
As for the Inquisition which is an other great trophie of the Spaniards reputation
with the Church and Christendome, for that (say they) it keeps both great and small in
obedience: whereunto the French answered, that it is hatefull to the best Catholikes, and
to all men of honour in Spaine, by the report of those which haue frequented that countrey;
for that it is iniurious vnto them, and by extreme rigour doth seeme to note them
with infamie, making the world beleeue, that they are not Christians, but by a seruile co^straint.
Besides, the abuses which are daily committed, to fill the treasorie, and to inrich the
Inquisitors,Inquisition of Spaine iniurious and abusi^e. and their ministers and spies, by fines and confiscations, procured vpon fained
and supposed crimes, make it vnprofitable in it chiefe duty, which is to maintaine the puritie
of doctrine, and holines of maners; and therefore this Inqusition practised after the maner
of Spaine, is abominable to euerie honest man. That many haue held this bridle necessarie
in former ages in Spaine, where there was a great medley of nations, and of diuers
religions, which made many to beleeue what they thought good of the diuinitie, yea vnto
our fathers times: in the which (as it is related in the historie of the wars which were in
Italie during the raigne of D. Ferdinand the fift, and of the emperour Charles his graundchilde)
many of the Spaniards which were slaine in any incounters or battelles, beeing
stripped, were found circumcised: but it may bee the nation beeing now somewhat
setled and resolued in the religion of Iesus Christ, it seemed high time to moderate this

sharpe rigour of the Inquisition of Spaine,1563 and that it should be practised with more charitie
and modestie, if it had no other end, but the glorie of God, and the health of mens
soules. That in France the vse is more free and sincere, to edifie mens soules, and not to
ruine them, and that the French had no need of such spurres; for there was no nation that
did more willingly obey the Sea of Rome. The kings of Fraunce haue alwayes shewed
themselues most deuout; they reuerence the Popes and their authoritie: the holie Decrees
and Constitutions of lawfull Councells, are in great recommendation with them,
referuing the dignitie of their estate and crowne, which bindes them to be protectors of
their clergie, and of the immunities and liberties of the French church. It is an article of their
duty, office, and roial charge. These are old rights without dispute, wherat the sea of Rome
was neuer offended, but when as it hath bin held by some, who forgetting all fatherly duty
towards France, would adhere too much to the passions of their enemies: yet notwithstanding
the kings of France haue bin alwayes ready defenders of the church of Rome, and
benefactors and deliuerers of Popes, and their sole and safest refuge in all afflictions. And
therefore they do rightly carry the surname of Most Christian,Tule of Most christian. since the time of king Clouis,
yea of the eldest son of the eldest son of the catholike church, the which can not be disputed but by inconsiderate
rashnes, nor supprest but by ignorance or malice. That the Spaniards did not
defend his Holines predecessors from the insolencies of the six gouernors, lieutenants to
the emperors of Constantinople in Italie: nor from the violences of the Kings of Lombardy.
It is not by any benefit of the kings of Spaine, that they are lords of the citie of
Rome, and that they enioy so great a country, and so many faire townes. That they are not
the forces of Spaine which haue chased the Sarazins out of Sicile and Calabria. That
the goodlie realms of Naples and Sicile are not come vnto the church by the bounty of the
kings of Spaine: but the French made them these rich presents, and haue maintained the^
in it. That it was princesse of the blood of France, which gaue vnto the popes that which
they hold in Prouence. That Spaniards hands are more accustomed to ransome Popes and
cardinals, and to spoile, burne and destroy the patrimony of S. Peter. Finally, the church of
Rome must acknowledge all her bountie vpon earth to come from the French nation, and
from their kings, and ground vpon these new and vndoubted titles, the rights and possessions
of her lands and seigniories, and not colour them with a donation from Constantine, nor fro^
the fauour of such a mediator as Ozius bishop of Cordoua might be, the which haue no
ground but vpon Spanish reports which are not autentike. By these benefits, by the continuall
obedience, and by the ready succors so often tried, the dignity and preheminence of
the crowne of France should be maintained at Rome, in the Councel, and in all places, so
much the more iustly and necessarily, for that by long acquaintance, it hath bin made as it
were essentiall and substantiall with the Popes dignitie, so as for the support thereof, they
haue no need but of the crown of France, to resist the attempts of her bad children, which
are frequent and dangerous. Moreouer, if they should presume to put the kings of Fraunce
from their ranke, it could not be done but very difficulty, and by a forgetfull and very hatefull
ingratitude, which doth not befit the holie Sea, and could not in their opinions fall into
the Popes thought,Office of Popes wherein it consists. who did then preside. Concluding, that for the best and most wholesome
expedient for Christendome, he should containe himselfe in his pastorall office,
which is, to iudge of causes concerning the faith, religion and the discipline of the church, and
to abstain (specially during the general assembly) to enter into knowledge of a controuersie,
which is meerly temporal, in the which soueraigne princes doe not willingly acknowledge
any other Iudge but their owne swords, and so leauing euery one in his possession, to
admonish the king of Spaine, to giue peace vnto the Church, and not to trouble the
Councell, not the publike peace.
Thus did the French maintaine the precedence of their king,Question of precedence vn^ecided at Rome. with their naturall freedome
and vehemencie against the pretensions of the Spaniards and their partisans: but the
Pope to whom this controuersie was sent, would not take vpon him to iudge it, but left it
vndecided, as it is at this day; which made the impatient spirits of the Spaniards to pursue
this question, and to maintaine their pretended rights of prioritie, by writing, wherof there
are great volumes printed, with priuiledge from their kings, which the French doe not
trouble themselues to answer.

The yeare following 1564 the Acts of the Councell were confirmed by the Pope at
Rome,1564 in the open Consistorie of Cardinalles, yet against the aduice of some fathers,
who held this confirmation to be needlesse, and all Christian princes were commaunded
to cause the Decrees thereof to be published and obserued. At these last Sessions of the
Councell, D. Claudio Ferdinand of Quignones Earle of Luna, was embassador for the king
of Spaine, to whom by reason of this difference there was a place appointed apart, out
of ranke, by prouision and without preiudice.
This yeare D. Iohn de Benauides marshall of Nauarre died,Nauarre. and at the same time there
died also D. Francis of Nauarre, Bishop of Valentia, who was brother to D. Pedro of Nauarre,
that last marshall of the bloud royall descended from D. Lyonell. The interest to this
Realme remained in Queene Ioane of Albret, widow to Anthonie of Bourbon, by whom
she had two children, Henry and Katherine: In the meane time there were Viceroyes or
Lieutenants for the King of Spaine to gouerne it, and about that time D. Gabriell de la
Cueua left the gouernement of Nauarre, to the Licentiat D. Michel Ruis of Otalora, Regent
or President of the Iustice in that Countrie, and passed into Italy to gouerne the estate
of Milan, but D. Alphonso of Cordoua and Velasco Earle of Alcaudete, who had
beene gouernor of Oran, and had defended against the Turkes which held Alger and the
Moores, was sent thither for viceroy, where at the end of 3 months he died, yet hee caused
an assemblie of the estates to be held at Tudele, where it was concluded to make an
Vniuersitie in that towne,Vniuersitie at Tudele in Nauarre. that the Nauarrois might haue meanes to studie, and not goe
out of the Country. After the Earles death D. Ioseph of Gueuara came to gouerne the
Realme of Nauar^e. And in the yeare 1565 D. Lewis last earle of Lerin of the house of
Beaumont, and Constable of Nauarre died, leauing one onely daughter and heire called
D. Brianda de Beaumont, who was maried to D. Diego de Toledo, sonne to D. Ferdinand Aluarez
de Toledo duke of Alba; who in her right was Erle of Lerin, and Constable of Nauarre.
D. Ieronima of Nauarre, widow to the marshall of Benauides, being married
againe to D. Martin of Cordoua and Velasco, brother to the Earle of Alcaudette, she
brought him the title of Marquesse of Corces, and the estate of Marshall of Nauarre.
The Pope hauing delayed, during the Councell, to satisfie the king of Spaines demaund,Clergie of Spain help the king with money.
touching a subuention from his Clergie toward the maintenance of his war, the
king sent Lewis d Auila great Commander of Alcantara to Rome, to solicite the dispatch
of this supplie from the Clergie, towards his preparation, which was graunted to be 400
thousand ducats yearely for fiue yeares onely, giuing him hope, that if they might see anie
good effects, they would continue to assist him. And the king hearing in what estate
they stood for matters of religion in Fraunce and Flanders, fearing some alteration also
in the state of Milan, he caused this embassadour to demaund leaue of his Holines, that
he might with more seueritie restraine the curiosity of his subiects, and their liberty in matters
of faith, the which he might do, bringing the Inquisitio^ into those prouinces, according
to the custome of Spaine. And for that he had seen what an alteration it had caused
some yeeres before in the realme of Naples, and that being a remedy of great violence it
could be easily applied, he sought to atte^pt it first in the state of Milan, for that he doubted
that as the Netherlands being so much altered, would make some great resistance,
so in like he did hope, that when they should see it pla^ted in the duchie with good effect,
they would be moued by their example. The Pope not onely seemed difficult to yeelde
vnto this demaund, but the whole colledge of Cardinalles protested that it was a verie
dangerous thing, not only for fear of some insurrection in the beginning, but also that in
processe of time the ministers of the office might conuert their extraordinarie authoritie
to their owne profit, so as not onely a bad conscience, but great wealth might bring anie
man in danger both of life and honour. Notwithstanding at the kings great instance the
Pope did gratifie his Maiestie,Inquisition of Spaine attempted at Mila^. and presently the duke of Sesse gaue them of Milan to vnderstand
how desirous the King and the Pope their countryman were, to see that important
busines of the faith firmely setled in that duchie. But the gouernor was not willingly
heard by them, who seemed resolute not to subiect themselues to such a seruitude, saying
that they would send embassadors both to the Pope and King, whereupon the duke of
Sessa promised to write and dissuade his Maiestie, as he did.

About the end of this yeare there came two sonnes of Maximilian King of Romans into
Italie, Rodulphus and Ernestus being much desired by their vncle in Spaine,Princes of Austria goe into Spaine. that they
might spend some yeares in that realme, and know the great men of his court, but aboue
all to be bred vp with prince Charles, who did trouble his father, for that hauing much
wit, hee could hardly be gouerned: some saying, that this froward disposition, grew by
reason of the hurt hee had in his head. These two Princes beeing called by the Catholike
King, and sent willingly by the father for diuers respects, arriued in December (beeing
accompanied by manie German Barons, and by the Cardinall of Augusta) in the state of
Milan, being feasted in many places.
The King of Spaine hauing beene disquieted, for some alteration which had beene
growing among the Moores, who since the taking of the realme of Granado, had liued
dispersed in those countries, and were suspected to haue intelligence with the Moores
of Afrike and with the Turkes, and that they practised some notable rebellion: wherefore
it was thought fit to disarme them, and to forbid them to haue anie, vpon grieuous
penalties, yea they that were become Christians of that race, shewing themselues not
to be sound in the Faith, retaining much of their first breeding. About the same time
news came vnto the King, that Dragut had beene seene at Sea with some thirtie gallies
and galeots,Oran besieged and wel desended. in the which hee had many souldiers with twentie peeces of batterie, whilest
on the other side the King of Alger went by land with tenne thousand foot Moores,
and some Turkes, and Renegados to besiege Oran, the which they brought to great extremitie
for want of victuals, so as they could not haue held out many dayes when as the
kings fleet arriued to succour them. The King hearing in what extremitie the besieged
were, wrote first into Italie, and into all parts of his dominions, where there were anie
gallies, that being presently furnished with victualls, men, and munition, they should
come to Barcelone, where he meant to make his fleet vnder the commaund of Iohn Andrew
Doria, and then send it to succour Oran. Doria and the kings other ministers went
from place to place to gather them togither, the viceroy of Naples sent 25 gallies to Barcelone,
vnder the conduct of Sancho de Leyua: Doria staying somewhat long, the King
feared hee could not come in time to succour the besieged, and therefore hee gaue the
charge vnto D. Francisco Inigo de Mendos, (others write that it was D. Iohn de Cordona.)
Doria arriuing, was much discontented, who hauing satisfied the King with good reasons,
went as a priuate man in this action, giuing the command of his gallies to his brother Pagano.
There met in the port of Barcelone 34 gallies, and some of Spaine, that were repaired
since the last shipwracke, so as in all they were aboue 40 which bent their course towards
Afrike, whereat the Turkes and Moores were so amazed, as they presently vpon
sight of them, set saile, and the armie at land fled to their houses, abandoning their artillerie
and baggage very basely, so as in an instant they were freed from that great danger.
Some write, that before the army arriued, they fed only vpon horses and asses, so as they
must either haue starued, or yeeld vp a very important place. The Admirall pursued them
in their flight, and took 25 galeots and 3 great Morisco ships, forcing the rest to call their
ordnance ouer-board, that they might be the lighter to flie; yet they threatned to return
the next yeare with forces from the great Turke.
The catholike King had made great preparation of shipping to defend the coasts of
his owne kingdomes from the inuasions and spoiles of Pirates, who hauing a retreat at
Pegnon de Velez, might easily set vpon the shippes which passed from the strait of Gibraltar
into diuers other parts.Pegnon de Velez how situated. This rocke stands almost in the middest of the gulph of Velez
de la Gomera, which was sometimes called Bedis or Bilis. And for that in former
times Spaine was much annoyed thereby, for that from this rocke which is very high, and
diuided by a small distance from the land, they discouered the shippes a farre off at Sea,
comming from Spaine, so as the Pirats, who had their galleots and frigots ready below,
went forth with aduantage to meet them, fought with them, and spoiled them, King Ferdinand
resolued to fortifie that place, to restraine those theeues which retired into the
port of Velez, whither he sent an army, where they built two castles vpon that rocke, putting
into them sufficient men and ordnaunce to gard them: The which the King of Fez
seeking afterwards to recouer from the Spaniards, they were repulsed with great losse,

and it was kept for the Spaniards,1564 vntill that in the yeare one thousand fiue hundred
and twentie, it was betraied by a Spanish Souldier, who brought in the Moores to
bee reuenged of his Captaine that had taken away his wife.
King Philip to recouer this place, being verie prejudicall to their nauigation, caused a
fleet to be made readie of about one hundred and 30 saile, among the which there were
aboue forty ships of burthen, Galleots, and lesser vessels, with one great Galeon of Portugall:
There were eightie and seuen gallies, that is, two and twenty of Spaine, eleuen of
Naples,Armie sent against Pegnon de Wels. ten of Sicile, eight of Portugal, twelue of Dor^a, eight of Flore^ce, three of Sauoy,
sixe of Marc Antonio Colonna, three of Malta, and foure of Marco Centurioni. There was
in them aboue ten thousand Italians, Spaniards and Dutch, among the which were many
Noblemen and Gentlemen voluntaries; the chiefe, besides the General D. Garcia de Toledo,
were Francisco Baredo, who co^manded the ships of Portugal, Sanchio de L^yua those of
Naples, the Lord of Plombin the duke of Florence galleyes, Iohn Andrew Doria his owne,
Marc Antonio Colonna, Chiappin Vitelli commander of the foot of Tuscaine, Hanibal Altemps
with his Germans, Fernando de Sylua and others.
They came not to the port of Malaga, which was appointed for the Rendez-vous,
vntill the end of August, and then the army parted, meeting with the aides of Portugall:
being all vnited together, they arriued neere vnto the port of Velez, where they had some
trouble to vnship their ordnance and men: for the rest they had no great difficultie, for the
Moores and Turkes fainted, when as they saw the artillerie (planted in two batteries) began
to annoy them, the which would soone haue ruined that fort being but small, and therfore
they studied rather how to fly than to defend themselues. So, in the night the greatest
part of them escaped in barks; there remained about 25 who yeelded. The Moores came
down in great troupes of Horse, and did skirmish with the Christians. The generall Toledo
hauing taken this place, furnished it with all things necessarie, and left a garrison in it of 800
Spaniards. After which they consulted if they should vndertake any thing else, this conquest
seeming but smal in respect of the great charge; and they propounded that of Bugia,
but considering that the season of the yere was far spent, being in the middest of Septem.
and that their men had endured much at sea, especially the galley-slaues of Tuscaine, being
vnacquainted with those seas, and the Germans who were much wasted, so as they held it
not fit to ingage themselues in an action which would require time, whereupon they returned
with their galleys to winter, and D. Garcia de Toledo went to be Viceroy of Sicile.
King Philip remembring that the emperor Charles his father had sent Ferdinand Magellanes
in the yere 1519, to discouer the Moluques and other Ilands thereabouts, some of
which were more plainly discouered in the yere 1542,Ilands of Philip pina discouered* he gaue order this yeare to D. Lewis
de Velasco viceroy of Mexico, to make ready a great fleet, with the which entring into the
South sea, and sayling towards the west, he should discouer those places better, whereof
they had yet but a generall knowledge, which they held were inhabited by good sensible
men. But for that the preparation was long, and the charge great, they parted not till towards
Christmasse. The fleet being commanded by Velasco sailed towards the Moluques,
he had with him Michel of Legaspo, who by order from the king should be gouernour of
the first place he should discouer and hold worthie to leaue a garrison and to plant a Colony
there. They therefore found out Tendaia or Tendain, Punel, Bohol and Pauilogen, all
which foure in honor of the king were called Philippine: they also set footing in the Iland
of Luzon, which is bigger than all the rest, being more towards the North, where the city
of Maniglia is built, by the which the whole Iland is also called. It was not difficult for the
Spaniards to become master of those places, for that they of China hauing abandoned
the gouernement which they had enioyed, there was not any Lord, but they
that had most power, did tyrannize ouer the weaker. They found the Countrie fertill, and
abounding in many things necessarie for the vse of man; but it was a verie commodious
dwelling for the great traffike of gold, silke, and other rich Merchandize,
which they had with them of China, wherefore they planted diuers Colonies in a
short space, finding the inhabitants inclined to ciuilitie, especially in the Island of
Luzon, and the citie of Manigila, Michel Lopes of Legaspo, remained Gouernour
of those places, where hee dyed twelue yeares after, with the title of Adelantado.

The king of Spain being aduertised of the great preparations the Turke made at Constantinople,1565
to send a great fleet to Sea, gaue order for the fortifying of those places which
were most in danger.Malta beseeged by the Turkes. But Solymans intent was to attempt Malta, and it did behoue king Philip
to defend and preserue it, for the interest of his neer estates of Naples and Sicile, this Iland
lying verie co^modiously to annoy them, if the Turks shold take it and keep it as he might
easily do, by the care and diligence of the kings of Algier and of Tripoli, mightie Pirates, and
his tributaries, who are alwaies in armes, and ready to furnish it vpon any sudden occasion;
besides his own means which are great: whereof hee might make there a good staple, or
store-house for his warres against Europe.
The Iland of Malta is a great and spacious rock, about 60 miles in compasse, lying betwixt
Sicile and Afrik,Description of Malta. from the which it is aboue 50 leagues or 200 miles distant, and from
Sicile 60 miles, or 15 leagues, accompting 4 miles for a good league: towards the North,
it looks to Cap Passaro in Sicile, and on the South to the towne of Tripoly in Barbarie.
This rock is couered some six foot thick with earth and no more: it doth yeeld excellent
fruits, feed some cattel, brings hony and cotton which is the inhabitants wealth; it hath many
ports and landings, which are reasonably safe for their ordinary trade, but not to receiue any
great fleets. The names of the chiefe are Marsamusset, Marsa Scala, Marsa Sirocco,
Cala S. Georg, and Cala of S. Paul: Marsa in the Moors to^g signifies a port, Cala is a shore
or strond. The citie is almost in the middest of the Iland, carrying the name thereof, being
inhabited by them of the countrie, but the aboad of the knights who are Lords thereof,
is about the port of Marcamusset towards Sicile, wheras the sea makes many smal gulphs
leauing tongues of earth or rock betwixt both, where they are lodged and well fortified.
Vpon one of these points which made a passage to one of the gulphes, was built a fort called
S. Herme, which kept that entrie, and defended the Maltois gallies which lodge within
the gulph: right: against it on the other side towards Sicile is the castel S. Ange, the which
was strong and wel furnished, co^manding towards the Sea: vnder it was the Borogh (where
the knights were lodged, and there make their assemblies) wel walled and flanked, to the
which is ioyned an other Castell called S. Michael. Iohn de la Valette was at that time great
master of the order,Iohn de la Valette great master of Malta French by nation, a man of great courage and wisdome, who being well
aduertised of the furious tempest that threatned him, made all prouisions necessarie
in such a danger: he sent for all the knights of his order to come to Malta, he had recourse
to all Christian Princes for aid; he caused the Borough and other places of the Island to
be viewed and fortified; he bought armes, munition, victuals and al other things which hee
held necessarie to defend a great seege. Wherein the Princes of Italy did assist him liberally,
and the Viceroys of Naples and Sicile, had commandement from the king of Spaine to
aide him: especially D. Garcia de Toledo of Sicile had charge to keepe the gallies of Sicile
and Naples in a readines, with whome should ioyne the gallies of Spaine, the Popes, the
duke of Florences, those of Genoua, and the duke of Sauoys, and make a sufficient power
to hinder that seege.
The reason which made the Turks to vnder take this enterprise with so great preparation,
was a surprise attempted by the great Master of Malta vpon the town of Malaoisie in
Morea, which the ancients called Epidaurum Limeria, but it succeeded not.
The 28 of May,Turkes army at Malta. in the yere 1565 this great armie of enemies came to the Iland of Malta,
about the port of Marsa Sirocco, being in number 145 gallies, 8 Maones, which are
vessels which do both saile and row, hauing 5 men to euerie oare, but they are not so big
as the galleasses, many foists and galleots, with a number of ships and vessels to carrie artilerie,
horses, victuals, pouder and al prouision for war; with which Draguts forces shold ioin
and the gallies of Algier, of Vluccialy, and of all the Pyrats in the Mediterranean sea, vpon
the coasts of Afrik, Asia, the Ilands of the Archipelagus, and other places; all which were
sent for to come and serue there vnder the great Turks banner, vpon great penalties for the^
that shold faile. Pialy Bassa had the chief command at sea, it is (...) who chased the Christia^s
from the Iland Gerbe; and Mustapha Bassa was generall at land. At the ariual of this armie
the great master had with him 500 kinghts of his order, men of resolution and experience,
and 8000 soldiers, as wel of the Iland, as others leuied in Italie, and some companies
of Spaniards and French: whom he distributed into the citie, the castel of S. Ange, the forts

of S. Herme,1365 and S. Michel, the Borough and other places. D. Garcia being doubtful whether
the Turk would set vpon Goulette by Tunis, sent a supply of 700 old soldiers, Spaniards,
thither, besides the ordinarie garrison that was entertained. At the Turks landing, which
was somewhat difficult, for that the ports were smal, and the banks of the Ilands steep, they
were incou^tred by some knights and soldiers, who slue many, but they retired soon, for their
number was but smal; hauing in this skirmish lost Nicholas Delbene, and two other valiant
knights. But the Turks landed at this first time 30000 fighting men, some Ianisaries, some
Spachi, who serue co^monly on horseback, but at that time they had bin imbarked as footme^,
hauing with the^ great store of ordnance for batterie, among which there were Basilisks,
whose bullets weied aboue 120 pou^d. At their la^ding they disarmed at their gallies,
except some 60 which they kept for their gards, and came and lodged before the sort of S.
Herme, by the aduice of Pialy, who desired to take the port of Marsamusset, the which was
couered with this fort, that he might lodge his gallies which lay dispersed in diuers parts
of the Iland, for want of commodious ports, and therfore exposed to many dangers. The
camp being lodged and fortified with a rampar, and a fort of earth which they suddenly cast
vp, S. Herme and the other places were diligently viewed, the which cost many Turks and
Christians their liues: In the end there was a batterie pla^ted against S. Herme, the which
plaied furiously, and was often changed and renued and many assaults giuen and valiantly defended.
The commander Broile was within the place, but he was changed by reason of his
age, and Monserra^ an Arragonois substituted in his place: Broille had behaued himself valiantly,
yet the Turks had won a Rauelin which was without the fort, where they fortified,
and filling the ditch which was betwixt bo^h, they gaue rash and desperat assaults, not
making any spare of their men. They cast the yards of their gallies vpon the breaches to
serue the Assaila^ts for bridges, they had deuises to couer their shot when they went to an
assault, and they planted many ladders, but all was in vain for a time, for the defendants ouerthrew
or burnt their engins; and repulst them with great slaughter; so as seeing how difficult
it was to take this fort, they were doubtfull whether they should leaue this place,
and discharge their rage vpon the rest, into the which all the victuals, cattell and other
commodities of the Iland were drawn, especially into the citie, which was not farre from
the fort of S. Herme, where the inhabitants had fortified themselues with some troups of
horse and foot, which had bin giuen them for their gard, co^manded by the knight Mesquile a
Portugal, who made many sallies and attempts to diuert the Turks, who for their part repulst
them roughly into their town: for there was not a hamlet nor house there abouts,
where they had not planted a gard to stop their courses. Hauing spent many daies about
the fort of S. Herme,Dragut comes to Malta. Dragut arriues with a great troup of Turks, in 12 gallies and 3 galleasses,
the which did much incourage the beseegers, for he was in great credit among them.
He did not allow of their beginning to make war by the siege of this strong place, the co^quest
wherof wold be lo^g, and difficult, wishing they had first atte^pted the city, where there
was more hope and more spoile, but it was now too late said the Bassaes, wherfore the batterie
against Saint Herme was renued, and diuers new assaults giuen, the which were more
obstinately obtained than before, with the losse of 4500 turks, and Dragut himself was mortally
wounded in the head with a stone which was driuen by a great shot,Death of Dragut. wherof he died
soon after; which made the Turks retire. There was also come vnto the camp Aluc-Ali,
whom wee cal Vluccialy, ar^negado of Calabria, who afterwards was made king of Tripoly
in the place of Dragut, a great soldier. During these atte^pts in the Iland of Malta, the
great master foreseeing that in time he might be va^quished by the Turks force, which increased
daily by new supplies, and contrariwise their men decreased by their continuall assaults
and skirmishes, so as in the end their number wold grow verie smal, he sent often to
Messina, where they made slow preparatio^ to relieue the^, to acquaint D. Garcia with their
estate, and in what da^ger they were to lose S. Herme, and afterwards the whole Ila^d, beseeching
him to make hast, but he neither ansuered his request, nor the necessity which prest
the^, for D. Garcia besides that he was tedious and graue after the maner of Spain, he esteemd
himself too weak to make any attempt that might auaile the besieged, saying that he must
gather forces together consisting of many peeces, according to the time and will of the^ that
did co^tribute, the which was true, wherfore the Turk hath a great aduantage ouer vs, hahauing

alwaies a great nu^ber of vessels armed belo^ging to himself, hauing no need to beg
or borrow them of any other, as we do, with great charge and losse of time, the which is verie
preiudiciall in warre; whereas the Turke hath the assignat^ons of his treasure certaine
which may not be diuerted: and in this war of Malta, he had an extraordinarie aduantage,
Rosa Sultana his best beloued, being dead a little before, she had left a great mas^e of ^seasure
to be especially imploied in war against the Christians, for to helpe her soule. D. Garcia
besides his naturall slownes was growne into a conceit, that it was good to suffer the
Turke to waste and consume themselues in the Iland of Malta, about those places which
he held to be strong and well furnished, and that hee should come time enough to assaile
them, when they were weakened with hunger, which did alreadie presse them, and with
other disco^modities which follow long sieges. This was to make war by discourse, but in
the mean time he held his arms a crosse, which is against the rules. With much pressing and
importunitie, he did hazard some gallies to put certain knights and souldiers, which came
late, into the borogh of Malta, the which attempting often, some entred, and others were
many times forced to return from whe^ce they came. He also sent to sea to cut off the victuals
that went to the Turks army. The two commanders were not very sory for Draguts
death, whom they hated deadly: wherefore to haue the honor to haue taken the fort of S.
Herme without him, they doubled their battery with 32 Canons, with the which they so
ruined the fort as the defendants lay open, and then presently they gaue a generall assault
both by land and Sea, the which was so cruell and bloudie, as they were forced to yeeld.
Thus the fort of S. Herme was won by the Turkes,S. Herme taken by the Turkes. the which had cost the liues of 10000
of their men, and 20000 canon shot, in diuers batteries and assaults. All that were found liuing
in it, were put to the sword, and among others, 30 valia^t knights, who had bin reserued
by the Ianisaries to draw a ransom from them, but others comming in murthered them
cruelly: they found 24 canons and culuerins within the place, with some remainder of munition,
which they imployed against the other fort^. This losse was greeuous to the great
Master, and to al those that were with him, their number being much decreased; for they
had lost aboue 1500 of their best men, and among them many knights. Wherefore the rest
being grown mercilesse, hearing what cruelties the Turkes had shewed to them of S. Herme,
they resolued not to take any more to mercy, and so it was ordained by the great master,
who had resolued to dy with al his company; but to sel their liues dearly vnto the enemy,
dispairing in a maner of all succours from Italie. But these desperate men were somewhat
reuiued by the vnexpected co^ming of Hen. Parisot the great masters nephew, who broght
him about 500 good soldiers, with some knights; they had bin 14 daies at sea, before they
could find an oportunity to recouer the Iland, the which they did in the end on the 29 of
Iune, landing at a place called Pietra Negra, from whence they slipt without discouerie
into the citie of Malta, and were from thence conducted with a conuoy to the Borough,
and receiued there with great contentment and ioy. Some of this new supply were put into
S. Michels fort, which they thought would be presently attempted. The losse of S. Herme
being vnderstood in Sicile, many made offer to D. Garcia to hazard themselues to lead succours
to Malta, through the Turks gards, the which could hardly be effected by sea; for
hauing taken S. Herme they were masters of the entrie which went vnto the Bourg, vnder
castel S. Ange. Iohn Andrew Doria was confident, that with ten gallies he wold land as many
men as he could carry in some part of the Iland, and lead them himselfe into the Bourg:
which D. Garcia would not suffer, for that hauing not any newes of the gallies of Spaine,
(which was his best excuse in his dilations) he wold not hazard those he had, which were
for the safetie of Sicile, and the realm of Naples. The Turks hauing clensed the ruins of the
fort which they had won, they lodged 300 Ianisaries in it, and then they planted 60 cano^s in
six seueral batteries at la Grotte,Batteries made by the Turkes at Malta. Coraasin, Mandrasse, at Sancta Maria du Secours, at Sancta
Marguerita, and elsewhere, making so wonderful a thunder, as they were heard into Sicile
beyond Messina, assailing the Bourg, and fort of S. Michael both together, by sea and
land, but it pleased God so to strengthen the beseeged, as they had alwaies the better against
the Turks since the taking of Saint Herme, who in the end did no^ fight but with an
obstinate despaire, battering the houses of the Bourg, more than to make a breach to enter:
their pouder began also to wast, for at their comming to this seege, they had lost a

great ship at Sea,1563 in the which were sixe thousand barrels of pouder, with (...) hundred ^^nisaries,
and they had sent into the Leuant to haue new, with other things which they
wanted. In the meane time H^scen king of Alger, son to Barberousse, came vnto the (...)
with seuen great gallies, many foists and other vessels, carrying many Turkes and other
good Souldiers; for whose welcome Mastapha seeking to doe some extraordinarie exploit
against the fort of Saint Michael towards the sea, and against the Bourg by land,
was repulst, and lost aboue fiue and twenty hundred Turkes, some were drowned with
their barkes, and some were slaine with the canon and the sword: at which charge there
dyed also about two hundred Christians, and many were hurt: yet the Turks fainted not
for all this, but increased their batterie against the fort and Bourg, ruining the flankes and
courtines, and leauing the beseeged ^^most naked to the shot of the canon, from whome
notwithstanding they could not take any thing,(...) althogh they did assaile them fiercely by
all meanes and de^ices, casting bridges made of their maine yardss, ouer their ditches, and
vpon their ruines, as they had done at Saint Herme, with many other inuentions, all
which were ouerthrown by the Christians, who couered themselues as wel as they could,
but they could not preuent the death of many of them:Death of Parisot. among others Henrie de la Valette
Parisot, the great masters nephew was slaine: but there hapned an accident which did
much fauour the beseeged, the noise of the canon was so great, as they of the citie being
some seuen miles off, heard it as easily as if it had beene neere them, which made them
resolue to sallie forth with all the men they had able to carrie armes, both horse and foot,
and came and charged a gard of two thousand Turkes, which was set towards the Sea: the
which cast forth so great a crie, as their companions which fought at the breaches being amazed;
fearing that some great succours were arriued and came to compasse them in, retired
in disorder, leauing aboue fifteen hundred of their men dead vpon the place, and they
of the citie had meanes to retire themselues before they were discouered. In the end news
came of the so much desired and so long expected succours, for D. Garcia, being aduertized
that thirtie and seuen gallies were parted from Spaine, with souldiers, to come and
ioine with him in Sicile: hee resolued not to stay their comming, making his accompt
that if they found him gone, they would stay in his place and assure Sicile and
Naples at all euents. Hee commaunded that all the Ships laden with Souldiers
which attended in diuers po^ts of Italie, should come to Messina, which was the Rendez-vous
for the whole army, which being met, the question was how they should lead
these succors, wherin there appered many difficulties to men that were not aduenturous
like vnto D. Garcia and his Spanish Councell. Hee had gathered together some twelue
thousand good souldiers, and fifteene hundred voluntaries of the nobilitie of Italie, who
were desirous to shew themselues and to winne honor, but they wanted gallie slaues and
mariners for such a number of vessels, whereof the Turkes had double the number: so
as there was no meanes to assaile the enemies fleet at sea; and to land men in any
part of the Island, to make the bodie of an armie, and to giue battell vnto the
Turkes, they feared also in this Councell to doe it vnseasonably, not knowing what
forces the Bassaes had yet remaining, hauing vnderstood that, as well at their first
landing, as afterwards by those that came from Barbarie, and the Pyrats which had ioyned
with them, they had had vnder their ensignes aboue fortie thousand men of Mahumets
sect. They feared also they shold want victuals in a small, barren and ruinous Iland;
and to carrie with them, there was also danger how to conuey it safely: and they fell
into the difficultie to be forced to fight, hauing a conuoie, with disaduantage, against
a greater number of enemies.
Beeing in these dangerous speculations, in the necessities of warre, which require
speed and hazard, there was a Spaniard called Andrew Salezar presented himselfe, hee
was an old politike captaine, and could speake the Turkish language, who offered to goe
as a spie into the enemies Campe at Malta, and to bring them certaine newes. Whereupon
hee was sent with two gallies of Malta, which were then at Messina, who
landed him in so commodious a place, as hee got into the Citie without any incounter,
where haning remained some time, he went disguised into the Turkes campe, and there liued
among them some daies where he discouered the estate and necessities thereof, and then

returned in safetie to D. Garcia, to whome hee reported that there was great amazement
among the Turkes by reason of those succours, that the Souldiers were tyred with
those troublesome seeges, and that there were many sickemen, that their numbers were
not so great but tenne thousand fresh men might winne an honourable victorie, and that
they kept gard onely by night; for the Bassaes fearing these succours, they caused euerie
night two great Squadrons of gallies to goe about the Island, the which going from the
port of Marca^usset, one on the right hand, and the other on the left, they met on the backeside
thereof towards the west, and passing on made the rouud and came to the same port,
where they remained, all the day after and stirred not. Vpon this report the fleet went
forth, with an intent to land their men in the Island, and hauing recouered the citie, to
march in battell against the Turkes. Iohn Andrew Dori^ was sent before to giue aduice
vnto the greatmaster,Succours come to the Iland of Malta. but hauing contrarie windes the fleet was forced to put to Sea, and
was driuen to the Island of Fauignana, aboue two hundred miles from Malta, and then it
returned, toucht at Sicile, failed towards Goze, and in the end came to the aboue mentioned
place of Pietra Negra, whereas the men were landed, and in their landing they layed
vpon euerie souldiers backe a bag of biscuit, weighing aboue fifty of our pounds, besides
their armes, with sufficient shot and pouder, and so they marcht in three battailons,
two of Spaniards vnder D. Aluaro de Sandy, and one of Italians, vnder Chiappin Vitelli, and
all vnder the Marshall generall of the field, Ascanio de la Corne, towards the Citie of Malta,
where after two restings, they arriued, the Maltois going forth to meet them with horses,
and cattell to ea^e them of the burthens which they did beare.
This done, D. Garcia returned into Sicile, and passing in view of the enemie, hee caused
euerie one of his gallies to discharge three peeces, to busie the Turkes, that they should
not goe to incounter the succours, or to diuert them from giuing an assault to Saint Michaels
fort, if they continued: wherein doubtlesse hee erred, for if he had gone away and
not giuen them this aduertisement, they had not made any hast to imbarke, and had vndoubtedly
beene surprised, with great aduantage to the Christians, and the gain of their
artillerie and baggage, the which they shipt presently vpon the discharge of D. Garcias
canon. They had a will to retire, but it should haue beene after a generall assault, being
resolued to giue it the same day they had this aduertisement, or the next. The Bassaes
were in a maner resolued to fight with the succors, not thinking them to be so strong, but
hauing sent fiue hundred of their men forth to skirmish with them, they were almost all
slaine, and the rest of the armie fled to their gallies which they had drawne out of Marcamusset,
and other places, and ioyned together towards Cale of Saint Paule with such disorder,
as many were drowned being prest by the Christians.
They retired towards the Leuant: where some said, that D. Garcia lost a goodly opportunitie,
for hauing furnished his Gallies with new Souldiers, and being come to Siracusa, he
saw this Turkish armie retyre close together, and neuer followed them. His excuse was that
he had not souldiers enough to fight with them, and therefore hee returned to Malta for
his Spaniards, where hauing manned fiftie of his best gallies, hee directed his course after
the Turkes armie, hoping it would diuide it selfe, and that hee might get some bootie, but
he returned empty handed to Messina;Retreat of the Turkes armie from Malta. sending shipping to transport the Italians and the
rest of the Spaniards, which he had left at Malta, into their Countries, but some of them
were cast away in a tempest. Thus Malta was deliuered in time, for they that defended
it were reduced to extremitie by a great disorder which seemed to bee in the Councell of
Spaine, so as the blame ought not to be attributed solely to D. Garcia de Toledo, if it had bin
taken, for if he shewed himselfe slack, and of a small courage to succour the beseeged, and
if hee were not faithfull in the dispensation of the treasure, as some would accuse him, the
irresolution of king Philips Councell, and the malice and crosses of his enemies in Court,
did bring Sicile, Naples, and all Italie in danger of ruine if the Turkes had depriued him of
this assured rampar. But God fortified the great Master, his knights and souldiers, and all
the people of the Iland, arming them with patience, courage, and constancie, for by human,
reason they had bin all lost. They that did aduenture to come out of Sicile, and to enter
into the Bourg, haue their share in the honor, neither are they that broght the succors
to be excluded. The constancy of the great master, the resolution of Parisot his nephew,

the vndaunted courage of Romegas, the brauerie of Barragan, a Nauarrois, Mon^errat,
Miranda, and others which defended the breaches, the willingnesse of Iohn Andrew
Doria to succour them, if they would haue suffered him, the resolution and good conduct
of Ascanio de la Corne, of D. Aluaro de Sandy, of Chauppin Vitelli, and other captaines
of the succours, and their souldiers, are remarkable in this warre: the which continued
foure monethes, from the middest of May to the middest of September, whereas
three hundred and thirteene knights lost their liues honourably, 3600 souldiers, and aboue
six thousand of the people, men, women, and children. The Turkes spent aboue
fourescore thousand canon shot, and lost at the least thirtie thousand men. The great
Master after the retreat of the remainder of their armie, gaue God thankes for this deliuerie,
and in like manner the Princes and Estates which had assisted him; but he was not
without great apprehension of the returne of the Barbarians, fearing hee should not
be able to resist them, by this former experience: so as it was often propounded to abandon
the island, and not seeke obstinatly to repaire and keepe those lamentable ruines:
for except the castle of Saint Ange, and the old citie, all the rest was reduced to powder.
But in these difficulties their generous resolutions were comforted, incouraged, and assisted,
as well by the Pope, the duke of Florence, and other Princes and States of Italie,
as by the king of Spaine, who among other prouisions appointed three thousand Pioners,
which hee caused to bee leuied in Sicile and Naples, to repaire the ruined forts,
and also to begin the new citie which was alreadie proiected, and had beene traced out
vpon that peece of ground, at the point whereof had beene the fort of Saint Herme, and
which diuides the port of Marcamusset from that of the gallies of the religion.Valette a new towne built in the island of Malta. This new
towne was called Valette, to be a memorie to posteritie of the vertue and valour of that
great knight Iohn de la Valette, who liued not long after his worthie exploits in the defence
of this siege: to whom there succeeded Peter de Monte, who was Admirall of the Order,
and had behaued himselfe valiantly.
The gouernours of Prouinces, with the Nobilitie of the Netherlands, subiects to the
king of Spaine, seeing the generall discontent of all men, tending to a lamentable confusion,
they besought the duchesse of Parma, their Gouernesse, to preuent these inconueniences,
which grew from the crueltie of the Edicts and rigorous persecutions, from the
new bishops, and feare of the Spanish Inquisition: Whereupon they resolued to send
one into Spain, with ample instructions, to acquaint the king with all those inconueniences,Earle of Egmont sent into Spaine.
and the apparent daunger. The earle of Egmont had that charge, hee went into
Spaine, he told the king, That mildnesse was the best meanes to preuent this mischiefe;
and was sent backe with hope and promises conformable to his instructions; which gaue
great content to the Netherlanders at his returne, but the effect proued contrarie, and
their hope was turned into despaire: For this yeare 1565, in December, the king signified
his pleasure to the Gouernesse, by his letters, what hee would haue obserued in the
Low Countries, touching matters of religion. He commaunded, That all Edicts made
by the Emperour his father, or himselfe, touching matters of religion, should bee duely
executed: That the Inquisitors should bee fauoured in their charges, for the good of
religion, it being his pleasure that the Inquisition should be put in practise: And lastly,
That she should assist the bishops to haue the Councell of Trent setled: all which was
contrarie to that which he had promised to the earle of Egmont, and to the expectation
of the poore Netherlanders. And for that the Inquisition was the cause of so great
troubles, and the shedding of much innocent bloud, I haue thought it fitting the subiect
of our historie, to relate it somewhat particularly, as it is now practised in Spaine, and its
beginning.
D. Ferdinand and D. Isabella,Beginning and progresse of the Inqu^sition. kings of Castille and Arragon, hauing wholly subdued
the Moores and Sarasins of Spaine, and being assured of them, they suffered them to
liue quietly vnder their obedience, paying a certaine tribute, liuing but a toyling life for
them that were of a free condition, but yet tollerable, seeing they were not questioned
with for their religion. But as all things in this world are inconstant, and subiect to
change, king Ferdinand was persuaded to chuse some men that might look into the superstitions
and infidelities of these Moores, least in the end the Iewish and Mahometane religion

should suppresse the Catholike: whereupon hee imployed himselfe with great
zeale to religion. Wherein he was so happie, as, in testimonie of his pietie, he was honoured
by the Pope, as well for himselfe, as for his successors, kings of Spaine, with the title
of Catholike, which Gregorie the third had in the yeare 1230 giuen vnto Alphonso
king of Castille. Whereupon many of the Moores, Sarasins, Africanes, and Iewes,
were either forced to confesse Christ, or to abandon the countrey: so as many thousands
retired themselues into Africke, and other places. But they that desired rather to liue in
Spaine with their wiues and children, did either willingly, or by constraint, quit their religion,
and were baptised. But the Spaniards finding afterwards of what force the opinion
of a diuinitie grauen in the hearts of men is, be it good or bad, true or false, and how
hardly it is rooted out, they being bred vp in it from father to sonne, they did forbid the
Iewes the exercise of their religion; and as they could not sincerely forget, nor leaue the
said exercise, the Spaniard had recourse to persecutions (but with some forme of justice)
to root them out: But king Ferdinands meaning was, to draw them to religion by instruction
and doctrine, which should conuict them in their errours. And as the Order of
Saint Dominike was then newly instituted,Iacobins first Inquisitors. and they were called Iacobins, being then in
credit for their pietie, sinceritie, learning, and zeale, before all other Monkes, Preachers,
and Doctors, the charge of matters concerning conscience and religion, was committed
to them. And although there were some forme of Inquisition before, yet was it
confirmed by these Iacobins, who seeing that they could not conuert the Iewes neither
by prayers, persuasions, nor preaching, they tooke the materiall sword in hand, to force
them to the Christian religion; holding, That any thing which is practised (especially religion)
although it be by force and constraint, turnes to a custome, which growing auncient
by succssion of time, is allowed by them that did not feele the first constraint and rigour.
This sword which the Iacobins vsed then, and continues to this day in Spaine, was
the cause that they said the Inquisition began in the time of D. Ferdinand king of Arragon,
for that this manner of reclaiming them was more rigorous than the first, against the
heretikes, whom they called Marans. Thus the Iacobins were the authors of the Inquisition,
which the king allowed, and Pope Sextus confirmed. The king had reason to doe
it, to root out the cursed doctrine of the Mahometans and Iewes, who committed great
impieties in Spaine.
These Iacobins for the institution of the said Inquisition, were called defenders of the
Christian religion. Their first Commissions extended but to Iewes and Mahometists,
but since they extended their authoritie ouer all in generall, calling themselues Inquisitors
of hereticks, to persecute all them that did not punctually obserue the orders of the
Church of Rome. Whereby in the end they did purchase such hatred, as king Ferdinand
was forced to set learned Clergie men in their places,Iacobins loose the title of Inquisitors. who before had beene fauourers of
this Inquisition. But least the Iacobins should take this depriuation ill, the king gaue them
authoritie to be present at the deliberations and judgements of the Inquisitors of the
Faith: so as the examination of such as they call heretikes, is at this day taken by them.
And although the said Inquisition were not so rigorously executed in those dayes, as it is
now,Inquisition reiected by the Arragonois. yet in some parts of Spaine the Spaniards themselues would not receiue it, for the
Estates of Arragon opposed themselues against it (yet reuerently) first by words and admonitions;
but when he sought to force them, they fell to armes, and would by no
meanes receiue it, the Estates considering that it would be prejudiciall to the liberties and
priuiledges of the realme: so as they did not receiue it without great force and effusion
of bloud of either side, as appeared by the death of M. Aepile, who being sent with commission
from the king to settle it, was murthered in the Cathedrall church of Sarragosse,
the chiefe citie of the realme of Arragon.
Experience hath taught vs what men these Inquisitors bee,Inquisitors what they be. who by their wickednesse
peruert all; against whom no lawes, priuiledges, statutes, nor customes of the countrey
can preuaile; proceeding in all things against the accused according to their passions, be
it right or wrong, by all cruell executions vnworthie of Christians, obseruing no ordinarie
course of justice, but presuming to deale both with ciuile and criminall causes; citing
sometimes before them men of grauitie and authoritie, noblemen and gentlemen, for

trifles vnfit for children. When any one is accused, they send a Sergeant (whom they call
a Familiar) to cite him to appeare personally before the holy office of the Inquisition;Manner of the Inquisi^ors proceeding.
whereunto he must of necessitie obey. If he denies that wherewith he is charged, they suffer
him to goe to his house, but one of their flies followes him, who obserues his countenance:
if he finds by word or shew, that he hath any bad impressions, they declare it to
the Inquisitors, who make a new Proces. When as the accused appearing at the day appointed
confesseth freely, or by intricate examinations (to make him forget his first aunswers)
they draw any thing from him, the accuser, or flie, is hidden behind the hangings,
to heare if he confessed the truth. If he be a towne dweller, they send him ho^e to his
house, if he be a stranger, they send him to prison. Then they write vnto the curat or bishop
of the diocesse where the accused is resident, to the end (say they) they should not
rashly lay hands vpon the sheep of a strange pastor, sending him word, that they haue one
of his flocke in their prisons.
He that hath a dwelling house in the towne, being sent for againe, and committed to
prison, they demaund of him the keyes of his coffers and closet, to deliuer them to a publicke
Notarie, who must take an inuentarie of all his mouables, writings, jewels, or what
else is in his house: which inuentarie is deliuered into the hands of some rich neighbour,
who keepes it vntill the end of the Proces, all the said goods being forfeited to the king, if
the accused be condemned: for their custome is (although the sentence be not capitall) to
make a prey of his goods, declaring the accused to bee vnworthie to enjoy any of them.
The accused being once in prison, the keeper searcheth him if he haue no knife, papers, or
any other thing, stripping him to his verie shirt. Eight daies after the Inquisitors will the
Gaoler to aduise the prisoner to demaund audience: whereupon the poore man intreats
him to aske it for him, the which, after much pressing, he promiseth, and in the end, after
some delayes, doth it. Being come into the Auditorie, he intreats them to dispatch his
Proces: then they admonish him to discharge his conscience, and to acknowledge his
faults, promising him all fauour and mercie, so as he will conuert. If hee confesseth, he
is not freed therefore, and if he doth not confesse, they send him backe to prison, and tell
him that they will dispatch his Proces. It is in vaine for him to demaund audience againe,
neither will they tell him whereof he is accused, but he must diuine it, seeking to conuict
him by his owne confession. Then they bring him againe before the Inquisitors, who tell
him sharply, That if you will not otherwise discharge your conscience, you shal be deliuered
into the Atturney generals hands, who will intreat you after another maner, by torture.
But when the craftie admonitions of the Inquisitors cannot shake his constancie,
then they haue recourse to another practise. They cause a crosse and a booke which they
call the Messall, to be brought, whereon they will haue the accused to sweare: if he refuseth,
he is conuicted, if he sweares, they inquire first of his countrey, kinsmen, profession,
companions, and other such like things, from the which they draw great arguments: but
they that are well aduised will answer nothing, if they haue not first seene the informations
whereof they are accused. In the end they giue it him in writing, to defend himselfe
by his Aduocate, who vndertakes his cause, after that his Proces is in question, according
to the custome (the which is only to get money from the poore prisoner) on the third day
after the Inquisitors send for the prisoner with his Aduocate; then they commaund him
to speake the truth, seeing in that Auditorie they require nothing else: If he doth not confesse,
then they send him backe to prison. In the end they acquaint him with the depositions,
but doe not name the witnesses. But if any man will charge him with any thing, the
prisoner, if he be well aduised, will inquire of the qualitie of the person which hath beene
heard against him: When as the prisoner can diuine of his accuser, and doth remember
with whom he hath discoursed of religion, they grant a confrontation with him. They
that are best aduised demaund a copie of the conclusion, to make answer thereunto by
writing: but if there be two witnesses, they judge to death, or otherwise: one witnesse alone
is sufficient to put him to the racke.
The kings Atturney is his aduerse partie, and the witnesses be his accusers. Two or three
dayes after the prisoner hath beene called before the Iudges, his Aduocate comes and declares
vnto him the chiefe points whereof he is accused, and doth propound vnto him

the most pregnant reasons, and the testimonie of his accusers, to vnderstand if they bee
true or not. He wils him to consider what the witnesses may be, to the end he may take
exceptions against them; giuing him some daies of respite, to call to mind what his enemies
may be, that haue witnessed against him; if he cannot coniecture who they be, he is
conuicted; if he doth name any, they doe not tell him they be they, but his Aduocate doth
secretly aduertise him, and they aske him before the Inquisitors, what he can reproach against
them. When as the prisoner will justifie himselfe, and can proue that he hath alwayes
beene a friend to Churchmen, that he hath obserued all Popish ceremonies, that
he hath frequented Masse, gone often to confession, honoured the crosse, and images,
and that he is contrarie to that which his accusers haue deposed (the which he must commonly
doe within nine dayes) his cause is much bettered; but no justification will serue
if he wants authenticke witnesses. Afterwards some Iacobine Friers, or Doctors of Diuinitie,
examine him of his faith, interpreting his aunswers according to their owne fantasies.
If he hath said well, in their opinions, they iudge him free, but not without losse
and preiudice.
When they haue sufficient matter,Proceeding to the torture. as they thinke, to condemne a prisoner to be extraordinarily
rackt, they lead him into a caue through many doors, where he finds the judge
with his assistants set, being all masked with blacke cypers, the executioner presents himselfe
in a cassocke of blacke linnen cloth (such as the Spaniards weare the Thursday before
Easter, when they whip themselues) with a blacke hood ouer his head and face, hauing
but two holes before his eies; being thus attired to terrifie the prisoner, as if the diuell
himselfe should torment him. Then doth the Iudge admonish him to tell the truth,
protesting, that if otherwise any member of his be broken through torture, the fault shold
lye vpon himselfe. Then they strip the poore prisoner naked, hauing nothing couered but
his priuie parts. After which they make a signe vnto the executioner, what torture hee
shall suffer, the which he is often put to, sometimes in one sort, sometimes in another,
vntill that he confesse. If he continue constant, and confesse not any thing, they carrie
him into a church, where there are Chirurgians, to put his joynts againe in their places,
the which doth double his torments. The patient being in this miserable estate, they wish
him to confesse, where if they find of what religion he is, confessing himselfe, there is a
Notarie hidden, to write his confession; for they make him speake with a lowd voyce, the
priest telling him, that he hath power to deliuer him out of the Inquisitors hands. Sometimes
poore men, deceiued with these words, confesse things which make them punishable.
Whereupon the Inquisitors giue it out, That this prisoner hath confest much, and
accused some of his companions, although there be no such matter: wherewith some being
terrified, come and accuse themselues, before they be called in question, to reconcile
themselues to these Inquisitors.
Two daies before that sentence is to be giuen,Proceeding of the Inquisition to execution. they send for the prisoners which are condemned
to die, whom the Inquisitors command to declare vnto them all their goods mouable
and immouable, and that they conceale not any thing: to the end that they that are
in their houses be not taxed of theft; or that they themselues by the will of God do not fal
dead to the ground, like to Ananias and Saphira, who fell down dead at the Apostles feet, for
that they had co^cealed part of their goods. On the day of execution (the night before they
that will being confessed) the officers of the Inquisition bring them in the morning, the
Sant benita, which is a kind of mandillion, whereon are painted great heads of diuels, and
on their heads they weare a miter of paper, whereon is painted a man sitting ouer a fire,
which a diuell doth kindle,Pompe at an execution of the Inquisition. and torment him. When they lead him to execution the schoole
boyes go before singing Lettanies. Those which are condemned to die, follow them with
two Sergeants of the Inquisition, and some Monks and Iesuites, which exhort the people.
The chanons and priests of Cathedrall churches, abbots, priors, and other of the clergie, assist
at these executions. The Aduocate fiscall, and the Atturney generall, are on horseback,
with one that caries the banner of the Inquisition displaied, being of crimson damask richly
imbrodered, hauing on the one side the name and arms of the Pope which confirmed the
Inquisition, and on the other the name and arms of D. Ferdinand king of Arragon, and on the
top of the banner a siluer crosse gilt. The Fathers Inquisitors of the Faith, and all the

officers are there also on horsebacke. This troupe is followed by a great multitude of
people, which come running in great troupes from farre, to see this feast, vnto the field,
where there are two scaffolds made, one for the accused, the other for the Inquisitors;
whereas one makes an oration in praise of the Inquisition, and condemnation of heresies:
which being ended, they pronounce with a lowd voyce the sentences of these poore condemned
men in order, beginning with them that haue the mildest sentence, and the easiest
punishment. After the publication of these sentences, the Inquisitor Major sings the
Collects of Oremus and Qusaeumus, for them that are conuerted, praying God to shew
them mercie, and that they may perseuere in the Catholike Romish Faith vnto death.
This done, all the Clergie sings Miserere mei Deus, etc. which ended, the Inquisitor
Major sings certaine verses, and all the other singing men answer him in Musicke. Then
the Inquisitor sings absolution, by the which the penitents are absolued from the sinne of
heresie, but not from the pecuniarie fine, the which is executed without mercie, yea against
all right and equitie. This absolution being giuen, the Inquisitors cause them to
sweare vnto the people, That they will liue and die in the Faith, obedience, and religion of
the Romish Church, and that they shall defend it and the Inquisitors against all men, hazarding
their bodies and goods against them that shall offer to resist them: and moreouer,
that they abjure all things contrarie to the doctrine, institution, and ceremonies of
their Church; and will defend with all their power the said holy office, with all the officers
or Sergeants, calling them all to witnesse, for assurance of the oath which hee had
taken. If there be any Churchman among these conuerts, which hath deserued lesse punishment
than death, he is degraded onely by words: but if hee be condemned to dye,
then they degrade him as followeth.Degrading of a priest by the Inquisition. First they put on him his priests habit, as if he were
to say Masse, whereof he is presently disrobed, the bishop (being in his Episcopall robes)
vsing certaine ceremonies vpon euerie peece they take from him, with words directly
contrarie to those which they vse in giuing the order of priesthood: then they scrape the
ends of his fingers, his lips, and his shauen crowne, with a peece of glasse, or a rasor, to
take away the oyle wherewith he was annoynted at his consecration. These ceremonies
are publikely done in the view of all the world. When the sentences are pronounced,
and the priest degraded, the temporall officer receiueth them that should die, according
to the judgement of the Inquisitors, and brings them to the place of execution, hauing
Iacobines, Iesuites, or others crying in their eares, to diuert them from the Faith which
they haue confessed: but when as the Inquisitors vnderstand, that they are not truely penitent,
they deliuer them into the hands of the secular power, beseeching them to intreat
them mildly, and not to breake any member, not to shed one drop of bloud: and to the captiall
sentence they insert:Hipocrisie of the Inquisitors. Seeing the paine we haue taken to conuert this man from his errours
is vaine, we deliuer him into the hands of the temporall magistrat, to be punished according vnto
law and iustice, yet we intreat, in case that he acknowledge his errours, and turne, that they shew
him mercie. But the officer proceeds, and causeth them to be burnt aliue, being tied to
stakes. Such as are not condemned to die, are carried backe to prison, being constrained
to looke vpon them that haue dyed constantly: but the next day they whip some through
the streets, some are condemned to the gallies, some to perpetuall prison, or for a time,
and others to carrie the Sant-benita during their liues, or for a season: but if any of them
fall into a relapse, there is no more hope of mercie. And after this cruell maner the Inquisition
of Spaine is practised.
30 This yeare there was an enteruiew betwixt Charles the French king,Enteruiew betwixt the French king and the queene of Spaine. and D. Isabella
his sister, queene of Spaine. This princesse parting from Madrid, came by Areualo, Medina
del Campo, and by Vailledolit, to Burgos; in all which places she had sumptuous
and stately entries made her: then continuing her journey, shee entred into Nauarre by
Tudele, Valterre, Caparosa, Tafalla, and so to Pampelone; and passing from thence to
Huerta, Araguil, and Alsalua, the last place of Nauarre, shee came into Guipuscoa,
whereas the gentlemen and people did her all the honour they could; for shee found
deputies well accompanied in nine seuerall places, to kisse her hand, and to make
her those offers which subiects are accustomed to doe vnto their Queene. The
Duke of Anjou, her brother, went to Hernant to meet with her, and passing by

Saint Sebastians, la Renterie, Ocarson, Yrum, and Vransu, they came vnto the riuer which
diuides France from Spaine, where there were boats prepared, into the which the queen
mother came to receiue her, and led her vnto king Charles, who attended her on the other
banke, at the end of the bridge. After their imbracings and complements, they went all
towards Bayone, with a great traine of lords and ladies of both realmes. The queene mother
and her three children marcht in one ranke, she holding the right hand, the queene of
Spaine next her, the French king joyning to his sister, and the duke of Anjou on the left
hand. She stayed at Bayone seuenteene dayes, and at her returne the queene mother did
accompanie her vnto the riuer, and the duke of Anjou vnto Segure. The cause of this enteruiew
was knowne by many effects which followed: with whom the duke of Alba was
sent, with full authoritie from his master. This princesse of France hath left vnto king
Philip her husband two daughters, D. Isabella, and D. Catherina. The Spanish histories say,
that she was brought in bed of her eldest daughter on the twelfth of August 1566, in the
royall palace of Segouia, who was named D. Isabella Clara Eugenia, and was baptised by
the bishop of Rossano, the Popes Nuntio, by reason of a contention growne betwixt the
Archbishop of S. Iames, and the bishop of Segouia; the Archbishop saying, That hee
ought to Christen the kings child, being chiefe chaplaine of the kings house, and that all
that concerned the Spiritualtie in the kings palace, belonged to his charge, the bishop
on the other side maintained, That this act belonged vnto him, for that it was done in his
diocesse.
31 There were great complaints made in the Court of Castille,D. Garcia de Toledo in disgrace. against D. Garcia de
Toledo, Viceroy of Sicile, where he had many enemies which taxed him of arrogancie, malicious
negligence, and neglect of all good occasions, yea he was accused to haue retained
three hundred thousand crownes, which were sent him for the war of Malta, and the last
prouision thereof, and that he had suffered the remainder of the Turkish armie to escape,
who fled in disorder (said his ill willers) whom he might easily haue defeated. He sought to
purge himselfe of these imputations by his friends, and sent Alphonso Ruis, Secretarie of
State for that realme, expresly out of Sicile; but his disgrace increasing, he was forced to
come in person. He was there discharged by the king, and sent home to his house, being
depriued of all his offices and estates. D. Iohn de Austria was made Generall at sea, and the
marquesse of Pescare Viceroy of Sicile.





@THE 29 BOOKE OF THE
Historie of Spaine.

The Contents.
1 TRoubles in the Low Countries.
2 Tumult made in Spaine by the Moores of Granado.
3 Scio taken by the Turke.
4 Duke of Alba sent Gouernour into the Low Countries.
5 Sentence of condemnation against the Nether landers.
6 Imprisonment and death of the prince of Spaine, and of the queene.
7 Charles Archduke of Austria sent from the Emperor Maximilian into Spaine.
8 Causes which moued the Moores of Granado to rebell.
9 Mariage of the king of Spaine with his neece the Emperours daughter.
10 Rights of the Seigneurie of Venice to the realme of Cypres.
11 League concluded betwixt the Pope, the king of Spaine, and the commonweale of Venice.
12 Famagusta yeelded to the Turke.
13 Battell betwixt the Christians and Turkes at Lepanto.
14 Duke of Medina Celi sent to succeed the duke of Alba in the Low Countries.
15 Enterprise of Tunis made by D. Iohn of Austria.
16 Tunis and Go^lette recouered againe by the Turkes.
17 D. Sebastian king of Portugal goes into Afrike.

TOwards the end of the last yere Pope Pius the fourth died,1566 in whose
place was chosen Frier Michael Gislieri, of the Order of S. Dominicke,
cardinall Alexandrino, and he was called Pius the fifth.Election of Pope Pius 5. He had beene
bred vp in diuers charges of the Inquisition, and therefore he sought
to aduance it being come to this dignitie. The people of Rome
knowing him to be of a sowre and seuere disposition, were somewhat
troubled at his election: which being reported vnto him, We hope
in God, said he, so to behaue our selfe, as they will bee more grieued
to heare of our death, than they are now at our creation. But the king of Spaine rejoyced
much at this election, commending the authours thereof. He did obserue him with great
reuerence, commanding all his ministers with whom the Pope was to treat, not to oppose
themselues against his Holinesse just demaunds.Archbishop of Toledo drawne in question by the Inquisition. And this yere Bartholmew Caranza, Archbishop
of Toledo, being called in question by the Inquisition of Spaine, for misbeliefe, requiring
to be judged at Rome, as his Holinesse should determine, he being not well satisfied
with his Spanish judges, the king wold not refuse him to the lord of Camojano, who
was sent vnto him to that end, notwithstanding that it was against the priuiledges of the
Inquisition in that realme: wherein the cardinall Sansisto being sent the yere before by the
Pope, to judge the cause, could not preuaile, the Spaniards seeking to maintaine their jurisdiction,
and to determine it absolutely. Notwithstanding the Archbishops person was
granted to Comoiano, who was caried prisoner to Rome, with his Proces which had beene
begun there.

Pope Pius the fift hauing beene made cardinall by Paul the fourth, a Caraffe, in requitall
of this fauour, being aduanced to the Papacie, he caused the proces of cardinall Caraffa,Carraffas proces reuiewed.
and others of that house, which had beene executed by his predecessors commandement,
to be reuiewed, restoring the familie of the Caraffas to their honor and fame.
The Pope persisting in his accustomed rigour against them that did seeme to decline
from the obedience of the Church of Rome, did not faile, after his assumption, to admonish
all Christian princes to obserue the decrees of the Councel of Trent, and did quicken
the diligence of Inquisitors in all places: But he had no need to reiterate his commandements
in that point in Spain, where they had for a long time vsed hard persecution against
them whom they called Lutherans, whom king Philip was prest to root out in other places
of his obedience, especially in the Low Countries, and to publish this Councell,
which was ended so fauourably for him, as it was rather called the king of Spaines Councell
than a generall.
Betwixt the Spaniards and the nobilitie of the Netherlands,Causes of hatred b^twixt the Spaniards and Flemings. yea betwixt these nations
there raigned an inueterat hatred, since the Infancie of Charles their king; which grew as
well by the diuersitie of manners, as by occasions which sprang from charges in Court,
being alwayes accompanied with enuie, and many times with attempts of courteors one
against another, abusing the fauour of their princes: For the Flemings had been in great
credit with the Emperour, and had made their profit of the commodities of Spaine, yea
against the lawes of the countrey, during his raigne: And at this time in the Court of
king Philip his sonne, the Spaniards had the aduantage, and were in most credit. From
 this spring grew the priuat dislikes betwixt the duke of Alba, and other noblemen of
Spaine,Troubles in the Low Countries. and the earle of Egmont, prince of Orange, and other great men who had the
chiefe gouernments and charges in those hereditarie countries of king Philip. Of whom
they thought they might well be reuenged (as reuenge is sweet and pleasant to men of
that sort) by reason of the publication of the Councel of T^ent, and the obseruation therof,
and of the Edicts which they called Placards, which the Emperour had made in regard
of religion, containing many articles of extreame rigour, in imitation of the Inquisition
of Spaine, whereof notwithstanding at the instance of the Estates of the Countrey,
he did moderate much of the rigour, and, giuing ouer the gouernment, he did admonish
D. Philip his sonne,Aduice giuen by the Emperour Charles to his sonne. to intreat his subiects liuing vnder diuers climats, according
to their naturall humors; letting him vnderstand, that it might be austeritie was necessarie
for Spaniards, but that the Netherlanders must be gouerned with a certaine familiaritie
and mildnesse. Against this good and wholesome aduice king Philip had other counsell
as soone as he came into Spaine, being animated as well by them of his Councell
that were about him, as by Anthonie Perrenot, cardinall of Arras, who concurred with
the king and them in that point, to settle a soueraigne absolute power ouer that nation,
and to take their priuiledges from them: whereof they had made some triall by the creation
of new bishops, without the consent of the Estates. Wherein he found great opposition,
as we haue formerly shewed, and as you may read at large in the Netherland Historie,
to the which this subiect doth more properly belong.
Most of the prouinces of the Netherlands being in combustion, it was bruted, That the
king of Spaine would goe in person thither, carrying peace and mildnesse with him: but
the chiefe of them that fauoured religion, were soone aduertised of a contrarie resolution
taken in the kings Councel,Resolution in Spaine touching the gouernment of the Low Countries. which was, That the king would not come among them, but
that the duke of Alba should be sent with a great armie, to enter the countrey in hostile
manner, as you shall heare in the following yeare. King Philip was doubtfull indeed, whether
he should goe in person into the Netherlands, but he knew not well to whom to
leaue the gouernement of Spaine, in his absence, being due to D. Charles his sonne, whom
he trusted not:Charles prince of Spaine vnpleasing to his father. for whether it were for want of vnderstanding, as the brute was, or that
he had too much, as hee presumed, his father had conceiued a bad opinion of him, which
some of his Counsellours did feed, for that it seemed vnto them, that this young
prince, both in his words and actions, did scorne them, or at the least did not esteeme
them as they desired. Aboue all, the Inquisitors were no friends vnto him, as you shall
heare.

2 Whilest they consulted in the king of Spaines Councel, how to punish the Netherlanders,Tumult made in Spaine by the Moores of Granado.
the Moores of Granado were called in question, being pursued by the Clergie,
and accused of many crimes, especially of secret impietie, as retaining in their hearts the
precepts of the law of Mahomet, and hauing their exercises secretly in their houses, althogh
that publikely they aduowed themselues to be Christians, went to Masse, and to other offices
and ceremonies in the parishes where they dwelt. Their spleene was chiefly against
the inhabitants of the Albaizin, which is a quarter within the citie of Granado, being
then peopled with a great number of families of that nation, who were rich and well accommodated;
being people which imploied their time in the trade of marchandise, in
making of silkes, and in many gainfull trades: and among them there were some knights,
professing nobilitie and armes. Moreouer, in other towns, and in the countrey and mountaines
of Granado, and thereabouts, there were aboue an hundred thousand other families
of Moores of diuers conditions, some rich, but most labourers and shepheards, liuing
vnder the protection of lords which enjoyed the castles, fees, and seigniories, to whom
they paied rents and dueties, as subiects, descending from them that remained in the countrey
since the realme of Granado had beene conquered by the kings D. Ferdinand and D.
Isabella, who had promised in capitulating with the last king of the Moores, That they and
their successors might remaine there with all assurance and libertie, and not be forced in
their religion, obseruing the lawes in generall, and paying the rights and tributes to the
king, like to his other subiects, yet the same kings breaking their promise by the persuasion
of some Prelats, they would force them to be baptised, and receiue instruction in religion,
by reason whereof they fell againe to warre against them that dwelt in Alpuxarra, a
mountaine countrie, rough, and of hard accesse, joyning vnto the sea, the which after many
hard incounters, with diuers euents on either side, was ended by another co^position:
by the which it was concluded, That they that would be Christians should remaine in the
countrey, and the rest should passe into Barbarie, whom they should furnish with shipping
for their passage. They that remained were called Madejares, and they that passed
were tearmed Moores Andaluzes, by the inhabitants of the prouinces depending vpon
the realmes of Fez and Marroc, whither they retired themselues. Notwithstanding,
howsoeuer the Moores which remained in Spaine behaued themselues, they were still
hated,Moores ill i^treated in Spaine. and held to be vile and abiect persons by the Spaniards, who called them, in reproach,
New Christians, and in stead of making them receiue the religion of Iesus
Christ gently, they tormented them both in word and deed; which the magistrat could
not remedie, or, it may be, would not: for the Clergie, who are exempt from aunswering
before any ciuile magistrat, and haue their justice apart, being wonderfully fauoured
in Spaine, were they that committed the greatest insolencies against them: yea these
poore wretches were continually troubled to giue an account vnto the Inquisitors of
their actions, and to vse all meanes possible to obtaine some rest of them that were ordinarily
in the countrey: But their superiours, and the Prelats which were of the Councell
at Court, gaue them no rest; so as since the time of D. Ioane the Emperours mother,
queene proprietarie of Castille, Arragon, etc. and the Emperours raigne, there
had many seuere Edicts beene made against them, and strange restraints in their
conuersations and manner of liuing, whereof notwithstanding they had suspended
the execution, at their humble suit, and protestation of their innocencies, purging
themselues reasonably well of all the imputations wherewith they were by them
charged.
At this time in the kings Court and Councel, all the old accusations against the Moors
were reuiued, and to set an order to the content of the Inquisition, and the Prelats which
pursued them,Commissioners appointed to order the Moores. there had beene Commissioners deputed, which were D. Diego d'Espinosa,
President of the Councell, who was afterwards made a cardinall, D. Fernando Aluares de
Toledo, duke of Alba, D. Anthonie de Toledo, Prior of the Order of S. Iohn, D. Bernard
de Borea, Vicechauncellor of Arragon, the bishop of Origuela, D. Pedro of Desa, of the
Councell of the generall Inquisition, the Licenciat Mechaca, and Doctor Velasco,
Auditors,Edict against the Moores Mudeiares. or Councellors. These hauing met, made an Edict containing many articles,
wherof the chiefe were: That all Moors, new Christians, were commanded to leaue their

Arabike or Moorish tongue, and to vse the Spanish; and therefore they should send their
children to schooles which should be erected for the vulgar Spanish tongue, and to the
masters which should be appointed to teach them. That they should keep no books written
in the Arabike tongue in their houses. That they with their wiues and children shold be
bound to assist at seruice in their parish churches, on Sundayes and other festiuall dayes
celebrated by the Church. That on Friday, Saturday, and Sunday, they should keepe
their doores open in the day time, and to a certaine houre of the night, and suffer them
to enter to see what they did. That they should keepe no other armes but their swords,
and if any were suffered through fauour to haue any, they should be markt by the gouernours.
That all Moores, men and women, of what age and condition soeuer, should leaue
their Moorish habits and attire, which they had been accustomed to vse, and attire themselues
like other Spaniards. That they should leaue off the vse of bathes after their manner,
and their Moorish daunces, which were vndecent, lasciuious, and scandalous to Christians.
That the Moores residing in the Albaizin should not flie into the villages and jurisdictions
of other lords: for thereby the decrees of justice were made void. There were
other articles contained in this Edict, confirming the former old ordinances made against
them, or newly inuented, with rigorous penalties vpon euerie one. This Edict being signed
by the king, and put into forme, D. Pedro de Deca was dispatcht to be President of the
Chauncerie of Granado, being injoyned to cause it to be executed from point to point,
according to the forme and tenor thereof, without delay or fauour, not respecting the
admonitions of any whatsoeuer. All the Commissioners were of this opinion, except
the duke of Alba, who aduised them to proceed in the execution thereof article after article,
after some pause, and not all at one instant. And soone after the duke parted to goe
into Flanders, to gouerne there according to the seuere and injurious instructions which
he carried with him, and those which he procured to be sent vnto him.
3 During these troubles in the West,Scio taken by the Turke. the great Turke Solyman seised vpon the island
of Scio. The Bassa Mehemet, vpon a priuat grudge hee had against the inhabitants of
that island, thinking that by their helpe a slaue of his was fled, and had carried away a
good summe of gold, hee persuaded Solyman to make it subiect, making his owne p^iuat
respect an apparent reason; saying, That many slaues fled daily away by their fauour
and aid; and besides, they were spies to obserue what was done at the port, and in
those seas, giuing aduice to Christian princes, and especially to the king of Spaine, the
chiefe of that nation being Genouois, and confederats with the said king. Moreouer,
he pretended, That they ought two yeres tribute, of ten thousand ducats a yere, the which
had happened by the fraud of their Agent, who kept in Constantinople. The Turke
was not verie well prouided that yeare at sea, for his losse had beene verie great before
Malta, whereas hee had not onely lost many men of commaund, and especially that famous
pyrat Dragut, but also the best of his forces: And his gallies were so weakened,
as he could hardly draw fourescore gallies with some galliots together: Yet for that hee
would with the shew of a great fleet diuide his enemies forces, he yeelded to Mehemets
persuasions commaunding him to annoy the Christians where they might most conueniently,
after the taking of Scio. This island lyes in the Archipelagus: it is almost an
hundred miles in circuit: about two hundred yeares since it was taken by the Genouois,
and giuen to the Iustinians their citizens, for their charges, who afterwards had the inuestitute
from the Paleologui, paying a certaine rent, which was increased to tenne thousand
ducats, by Mahomet the second, king of the Turkes. Thus they had liued at libertie
vnto this time, without any annoyance, being gouerned in forme of a commonweale, the
gentlemen hauing the chiefe command. Pialy, who was Generall of the fleet, directed his
course thither, where he arriued on Easter day in the morning, and landed vnder a shew
of friendship. Then with a practise he drew the gouernor of the towne aboord the Admirall,
with 12 men which were euerie yere chosen to be moderators of publike businesse:
These being staied by him, the publike palace and the fort were presently seised on by the
Turks, who carried away all the chiefe men, and appointed another forme of gouernment
for them that did remaine, depending vpon the Turkes Empire. Pialy leauing that island,
failed towards the Adriatike sea, which put the Venetians into a great jealousie.

The king of Spaine vnderstanding that there was no feare of Malta for that yeare,1567 hauing
a great fleet and an armie readie, commanded they should attempt Alger. Wherfore
they began to send certaine ships laden with souldiers, artillerie, and munition, towards
Malaga, whilest that Garcia de Toledo prepared the gallies, to passe with all their power. It
happened notwithstanding,Losse receiued by the pyrats of Alger. that those ships were taken by certaine galliots of Alger,
which kept those seas. This losse was of such importance, as it disappointed the resolution
for Alger.
4 It had beene resolued the yeare before in the Councell of Spaine, that the duke of
Alba should go with an armie into the Low Countries. This Spring he was dispatcht away
with an ample co^mission,Duke of Alba sent into Flanders. or rather with an vnlimited authoritie; the which was pleasing
vnto him, for the hatred he bare vnto the Netherlanders. As for his armie, there was
commaundement giuen to the dukes of Alcala and Terranoua (the one being Viceroy of
Naples, and the other of Sicile) to send into the duchie of Milan the old regiments of
Spaniards which they had in those realmes, and in Sardinia: and commaundement was
also giuen to Gabriel de la Cueua, duke of Albuquerque, gouernour of Milan, That hee
should not only haue the regiment of Lombardie in a readinesse, but also the light horsemen,
increasing their companies from fiftie to an hundred; and that Lopes Zapata, and
Sancio d'Auila, should raise two more, besides two of harquebusiers on horsebacke, Spaniards,
leuied by Pedro Montagna, and Gonsaluo Montero. The king had also giuen order
in Germanie, that Alberico, earle of Lodron, should raise a regiment of 12 companies
of foot, and 300 in euerie co^panie, according to the custome of that nation, and in the
county of Bourgondie there should be leuied 300 lances, and 100 harquebusiers on horsbacke.
Francisco d'Ibara was victualer generall, and D. Garcia de Toledo had charge to transport
in his gallies the said Spanish footmen, vnto the ports of Genoua, that they might
be readie in Lombardie at the duke of Albas arriuall. This order being taken in Spaine for
the voyage of Flanders, and new souldiers (whom they call Besognes) being sent into Sicile
and Naples, to supplie their places that should goe in that action, in the beginning of
May the duke of Alba imbarked at Carthag^na, in the gallies of Iohn Andrew Doria, and
of the duke of Florence: he carried with him seuenteene companies of Spanish foot, to
fill vp the garrisons of Lombardie, from whence he drew the old souldiers, making also
choise of foure companies of these new souldiers, to lead with him into the Low Countries.Armie led by the duke of Alba into the Low countries.
He arriued late at Genoua, hauing beene troubled with a feuer vpon the way. He
mustered his army betwixt Alexandria and Asti, where he found 8800 Spanish foot, and
1200 horse, Italians, Spaniards, and Albaneses: and the foot were thus diuided; of the
regiment of Naples 3230 in 19 companies, vnder Alphonso Vlloa their colonell; in the regiment
of Sardinia (in the which the foure companies of Besognes were put) were 1720
men in ten companies, commaunded by Gonsaluo de Bracamont: the regiment of Sicile was
of 1620 souldiers, in ten companies, vnder Iulian Romero; and that of Lombardie, being
but 1200 foot, in ten companies, was commanded by Sancio de Londogno. There were seuen
companies of horse, Spaniards, wherof fiue were lances, and two harquebusiers, three
of Italians, and two of Albaneses, all light horsemen. Besides these troupes, and their captaines,
he led with him many men of knowne valour, to imploy them in this seruice, and
to aduance them to charges as they should fall: among which were his base sonne called
also Fernando Aluarez, who was a knight of Saint Iohn, and Prior of a rich commaunderie,
Chiappin Vitelli, marquesse of Ce^ona, Gabriel Serbelloni, a knight also of Saint Iohn, Sancio
d' Auila, Girolamo de Salinas, Iohn of Epuccia, and Andrew de Salezar, one of which foure
last was Castellan of Pauia, the other of Portercole, the third of Piombyno, and the
last of Palermo. And besides these, hee led with him Paciotto de Vrbino, an excellent
Enginer, hauing gotten him from the duke of Sauoy, whom hee then serued. Hee
made his sonne Fernando Generall of the horse, Vitelli was Marshall of the field, and
Serbelloni (besides the charge of the Artillerie) was made Counsellour at Warre.
How hee entred into the countrey, and what his proceedings were, that Historie
doth relate at large. After which they hauing certaine informations sent them into 
Spaine, from the duke of Alba, and the aduice of the holy Inquisition taken
therein, all the lay people of the said countries, both noblemen, gentlemen, townes and

comminalties were by the kings sentence condemned as heretikes, or fauourers of heretikes,
or in some other sort guiltie of high treason in the highest degree, without exception
of estate, qualitie, condition, age, or sex; except some which were particularly named
in the information, which made the inhabitants to flie into diuers other countries.
This yere, in May, there was great ioy and feasts in Spaine, and in all the kings dominions,
for the birth of his second daughter, who was baptised, and called Katherine.
But whilest the warre grew hot in the Low Countries,1568 there happened a tragicall accident
in the royall house of Spaine. We haue before made mention how that D. Charles
was in disgrace with the king his father: the cause (as the Spaniards say) was, for that he
was viciously giuen,Obiectio^ against the prince of Spaine. and that he spake ill of the present gouernment: that he had a meaning
to attempt against the kings person, and to raigne in his place, hating him, for that
he had often reprehended him, and threatened him, for his disorder courses: or, if that
succeeded not, that he would steale away, and flie secretly, with some of his confederats,
into Italie, or somewhere else, and trie, by confusion and tumult, to depriue the king of
his Estates. That he carried himselfe arrogantly, and incompatible to them that had the
chiefe offices in Court, and that he disdained all those that were appointed to attend
on him, yea hee would outrage and strike them. The Inquisitors expected no good
from this prince, neither did the kings Councell, of the which those that were then
most hated of him,Enemies to the prince of Spaine were D. Ruis Gomes de Sylua, a Portugal, the earle of Feria, and D.
Anthonie de Toledo. The king was aduertised by them of many particularities concerning
the princes carriage, and entertained in dislike of him. By their counsell the king
resolued to come from the Escuriall to Madrid, where the prince was, and to surprise
him in his chamber in the night, they attending on him, and to take him in his bed.
They came, and found the chamber doore so well barred, as they were forced to breake
it open. The prince hearing the noise, leapt out of his bed, and seeing the king his father,
hee was much troubled, beginning to crie out, What is the reason that you will
kill me? The king willed him that he would pacifie himselfe, and that he should goe againe
to his bed, telling him, that what he did was for his good. They seised on his
sword, and some say that hee had a pistoll charged and bent: He complained, that they
 meant to bind him, as if he had beene madde. His chamber and clothes were searched,
and they left no instrument of yron,Imprisonment of the prince of Spaine. wherewith he might hurt himselfe: all his papers
and writings were carried away, among the which there were found many copies of
letters written to some princes, full of complaints of hard vsage which hee receiued
from the king, whom he accused of crueltie and bad gouernement in his affaires, and it
seemed hee did inuite them to assist him, by compassion, making great promises vnto
them. His whole designe was also discouered by certaine remembrances which were
found,Designes of the prince discouered. being resolued to escape away in the gallies, which should passe into Italie,
whereby they might easily see whom he loued, and whom he hated in Court, whom he
trusted, and whom he would imploy in his enterprises. Hee had beene seene some daies
before, to discourse long and verie earnestly with D. Iohn of Austria, Generall at sea;
and it was thought, that hauing acquainted him with his designes, hee reuealed them
vnto the king, which made him resolue to put him in gard. The earle of Feria, and
D. Ruis Gomes, had that charge, who watcht him carefully in their turnes; and hee was
serued by two gentlemen, who carried no armes, and vpon the passages to his chamber
there were gards, who would not suffer any other to goe vnto him. This continued some
dayes: but the king who obserued all that hee spake, caused him afterwards to be put
into a strong tower, giuing the whole charge and care of him to D. Ruis Gomes: it was the
same prison whereas king Francis had beene kept. There hee attempted many times to
kill himselfe, as they said, and being preuented, hee forbare to eat any thing eight
dayes together. The king aduertised all the noblemen, townes, and comminalties of
Spaine, of this imprisonment, that they should not take it ill, letting them vnderstand,
that it was for the good and quiet of them all, forbidding them all expresly, not to
speake not mediate for the prince. He imparted as much to the embassadours, and did
write vnto their masters.
The emperour Maximilian being aduertised of this fact, imputed the cause to D. Iohn,

and was offended with him: for he meant to make the prince D. Charles his Son in law, and
(if this accident had not happened) to haue consummated the marriage within few daies,
as the fathers had concluded: and he was so much discontented, as hee would haue called
home the Princes Rodulph^s and earnest his Sonnes, who were bred vp in the Court of
Spaine, but the king D. Philip would not suffer them to depart, but sought to pacifie the
Emperour with reasons, either true or probable. But in the end he persuaded him that
the cause was most vrgent and iust to assure himselfe of his Sonnes person, whome hee
should loue and spare if it might be, hauing at that time no more Sonnes. Whatsoeuer
was the true cause of the Sonnes detention by the father, being not well manifested from
Spaine, the prince D. Charles the presumptiue heire of so many realmes, dyed in Iulie; some
say he was poisoned,Death of the Prince of Spain others write that he was strangled by foure slaues: He was buried in
the Monasterie of S. Dominike, the royall at Madrid, whereas the king D. Pedro the cruel
had beene interred. Peter Mathew in his French Historie, writing of the life and death of
king Philip the second, he sets downe a formall proceeding of the father against his Sonne
in this action: the which for that this subiect is so rare and memorable, I haue thoght good
also to insert.
After the Princes restra int^,Mathews vpon the death of Prince Charles as wee haue saied the king (saith hee) propounded to his
Councel of conscience, what punishment a kings son deserued, that had made leagues against
his estates, and conspired against his fathers life, and whether hee might be called
in question? His Councell laied two remedies before him, both iust and possible, the one
of grace, and the other of Iustice and punishment, shewing him the difference betwixt the
mercie of a father, and the sinceritie of a king, saying, that if by his clemencie he did pardon
them which loued him not, hee must of force pardon that creature which should be
most deare vnto him. They desired him to imitate the emperour Charlemaigne, who imputed
the first conspiracie of his Sonne Pepin against him, to the follies of youth, and for the
second he confined him into a Monasterie, protesting that he was a father not a king, nor
a iudge against his Sonne. The king answered that by the law of nature he loued his Son
better than himselfe, but by the law of God the good and safetie of his subiects was to be
preferred. Moreouer hee demanded, if knowing the miseries which the impunitie of his
Sonnes offences would breed, whether he might with a safe conscience pardon him, and
not be guiltie of these miseries. Whereat his Diuines shrunke in their shoulders, and with
teares in their eies said, that the safetie and health of his subiects ought to be dearer vnto
him than his sonnes, and that hee ought to pardon offences; but such crimes should bee
supprest as abhominable monsters. Hereupon the king committed his Sonne to the censure
of the Inquisitors, commending them not to respect his authoritie, no more than the
meanest within his kingdome; and to regard the qualitie of his Sonne, as if he were borne
a king, making no distinction thereof with the partie accused, vntill they found that the
excesse of his offence would no more admit of this consideration, remembring that they
carried in their soules a liuelie image of the king, which had iudged Angels, and should
without distinction iudge kings and the Sonnes of kings like vnto other men; referring al
vnto their consciences, and discharging his owne.
The Inquisitors,Iudgement of the inquisitors against the Prince of Spain for that he was charged to haue practised with Castillion Admirall of
France, the prince of Orange, and other enemies of the Romish^ Religion, declared him
an heretike, and for that hee had conspired against his fathers life, they condemned him to
die. The king was his accuser, and the Inquisitors his iudges, but the sentence was signed
by the king, which done, they presented many kinds of death in picture vnto the prince,
to make choise of the easiest. In the end he demanded if there were no pitie in his father,
to pardon him, no fauour in his Councell for a Prince of Spaine, nor any wisdome to excuse
the follies of his youth: when as they told him that his death was determined and could
not be reuoked, and that all the fauour was in the choise of the easiest death, hee said that
they might put him to what death they pleased: that there was no choise of any death,
seeing that they could not giue him that which Caesar held to be the best. These words deliuered
with passion, were followed with a thousand imprecations against his fortune, against
the inhumanity of his father, and the crueltie of the Inquisition; repeating these
words often: O miserable Sonne, of a more miserable father.

He had some daies giuen him to prepare himselfe for death.1568 One morning foure
slaues entred into his chamber, who awaking him, put him in mind of his last houre, and
gaue him some time to prepare himselfe vnto God: He start vp suddenly and fled to the
bed post; but two of them held his armes, and the third his feet, and the fourth strangled
him with a cord of silk. Many hold that he died of letting blod, his feet being put in warm
water. But Campana in the life of Philip 2 writes, that being in prison he fel verie sick, by reason
of his disordred diet, and drinking too much cold water, wherewith his stomack grew
so weake as he could not digest any meat, which the Phisitions could not helpe so as hee
died (as he affirms) of this sicknes, verie religiously and penitenly, to the great griefe of the
king and the whol state: and moreouer he writes, that the king being much perplexed for this
great losse, retired himselfe into his chamber with two seruants, and wold not giue any audience
and then for many daies into the monasterie of S. Ierosme, a mile without the town, sequestring
himself of al affairs, writing only to princes and potentates, and causing his secretaries
to write vnto all his realms and states of the death of his deare and only son. Thus writers
discourse diuersly of the death of this Prince: the which I leaue to the iuditious Reader to
beleeue what he shall thinke most probable.
Within foure months after the death of the Prince D. Carlo,Death of the queen of Spain. the Queene. D. Isabella his
mother in law died also, being broght in bed of her third child before her time, the Phisitio^s
hauing ignora^tly caused her to take too much Phisick, fering some other infirmitie; this
was the brute of the court of Spain. But in France they had reason to think that the life of
this princesse was shortned like vnto that of D. Charles, by some notable malice, and by the
same instruments. For they to whom D. Isabella did belong in bloud, had been verie carefull
to auer the causes and maner of her death, but not so resolute to call it in question, as
Clouis sons were to reuenge the iniurie done vnto their Sister in Spaine, where she also had
beene maried.
As for the Prince,Turkett. it was verie co^mon in Spain, that the great hatred the king bate him,
grew rather from the suggestions and reports of others, than from his own misdeeds, for
by nature he was neither giuen to any odious vices,Disposition of the prince D. Charles. neither was he of so harsh and sower
a disposition as commonly great men of that cou^trie be. It is true, that D. Charles kept his
grauitie to courtiers, that he shewed himselfe verie ambitious, and too desirous to mannage
affaires, and to be imploied; and was giuen to some kindes of pleasures. Such as would
excuse him, said, that it was seemly and befitting his ranke to be graue, being the son of so
great a king, sworn prince and acknowledged for successor to such rich and great estates,
and also that it is the first lesson and most recommended instruction of fathers in Spaine, to
their children, to shew the^selues graue in their words and actions, and that it was a co^mendable
thing especially in the^ that were of great houses. If he were ambitious and desirous of
honor,Ambition a vice of great men. they were affections incident to princes, and were so necessarie in them that were to
gouerne people, as if any had not these motions in them, they were the lesse esteemed,
both in Spain and elsewhere. If he desired to know and learne by practise how estates shold
be gouerned, and justice duly administred, that it is a thing wherein kings children should
be bred from their youth, and practised therein all their liues, and that it is the nature of all
men well bred, feeling the seeds of vertue in their minds, to aduance it by their actions;
wherein all men know that vertue doth consist. And yet all these things commendable in
other men, were blamed in Prince Charles, by them who (it may be) would not haue their
misdemeanors discouered by the Infant of the house.Vices common to yong Noblemen. As for worldlie pleasures, they be,
said they, appetites which doe commonly accompany yong noble men, especially being
bred vp in the idlenes of court; vices which are tollerable in many of mean condition, and
therefore were lesse strange in great men: but, said they, there was no better means to diuert
this prince from delights which are superfluous and hurtfull, than to imploy him betimes
in the gouernment affaires; what greater bond, said they, had the king his father to
his subiects, than to fashion his onely Sonne, (hee that should raigne after) to command
wel, and to make him knowe both by reason and experience what the duetie of a king is,
both to God and men, that they be not as dum Idols among their Councellers, hauing
not iudgement to discerne the good from the bad. The thing wherein the Prince
was most to be blamed, was an inconsiderate rashnesse to attaine vnto his intentions, and

could not obserue time nor fit occasions to make his poursuit. The which they thought
proceeded onely from the heat of youth, which might easily haue been corrected by conuersing
with men of state, if hee had beene accompanied by some men of respect, wise, and
willing to moderate these fumes which did rise through the heat of youth. And they complained
that the meanes that might haue made D. Charles a vertuous Prince, were hindred
by the practises of the kings bad Councellors; who also for his part had shewed himselfe
too credulous, and in the end blind in that action, by some secret iudgement of God. These
were the ordinarie reasons of temperate spirits, who thought affaires of state might well
be managed, and not stray from pietie nor humanity. Adding, that admit the Prince D.
Charles, had bin found inflexible to all proofes of reason, so as hee had been held incapable
to raigne, yet should they not haue taken away his life. That there were Monasteries in
Spaine, whether they might haue sequestred him, and sought by the conuersation of some
good religious men, to draw him to a contempt of worldlie greatnesse which perisheth,
and to the contemplation of heauenly things, and the life to come: whereof both Spaine
and other Countries could furnish the like examples.
But the Councell of Spaine consisting of Clergie men and secular,Considerations of the Councell of Spaine. did not like of these
old maximes in matters of consequence, and especially they that had more particular
knowledge of that which past in the kings house, did greatly apprehend what this tryumphant
crowne would come vnto, if king Philip dying, it should fall into the hands of such
a man as D. Charles his Sonne was, whom they held to bee vnable to vndergoe so great a
burthen; and there was great probabilitie that this prince had both his bodie and his spirits,
weakened since his fall at Alcala of Henares, whether hee was gone to pay a vow after a
long quarten ague, by which fall his braine was somewhat crazed, so as his iudgement did
sometimes faile him, not being able to containe himself with the respect which he ought
vnto the king, and to them that had the honour to be of his Councell.
Moreouer,D. Charles prince of Spaine vnable for women. whether it were by accident, or by some defect of nature, the facultie of generation
was in a maner quencht in him, so as he was held vnable for women: the which
did also import the state. All these things gaue a great apprehension to the chiefe of the
kings Councel, being guided by worldlie wisdome; the which could not suggest a better
expedient than to be rid of him, and to find out some fit meanes to effect it. It is certaine
that the beginning of the kings hatred to his sonne, was throgh jealousie of State, taking
an occasion for that the Prince seemed verie desirous to goe from Court, and to bee imployed
in forein expeditions, at the least to accompany them that were sent with charges,
to the end, said he, that hee might learne. Whereupon they presently made D. Charles
a monster of ambition, who would presently seaze vpon the Prouinces, and take away the
kings crown and life to raigne: and yet on the other side they taxed him that he was dull and
wanted iudgement, contradicting the^selues, for such actions are not attempted by fooles
and madmen: the which the king should haue duely considered; but not doing it, he did
blemish his house with the most fatal misfortune that could happen vnto it: for he did so
readily receiue these suspitions, and did so graue them in his heart, as he detested his Son,
and he neuer saw him, but he sent him away with sower vsage and threats: and that which
did most trouble the Prince, some of the Councellors and mignons of court, presumed (in
imitation of the father) to contemne him.Zeale inconsiderat of the prince D. Charles. He gaue them a great aduantage ouer him, for
that when as the Marques of Berghen and the Lord of Montigny came to court, being sent
fro^ the estates of the Low-countries, to present their petition vnto the king touching the
breach of their priuiledges by the Cardinall of Granuelle, hee became a solicitor for the^,
being moued as he said with the zeale of Iustice, and hatred of ciuil wars, which hee foresaw
and detested, blaming them openly which persuaded the king and his Councel thereunto;
saying that they were practises of insatiable and cruel vultures, who would gorge
themselues with the losse of the kings subiects.
By these free speeches vsed often when as they treated of the warre of Flanders, and against
the Moores of Granado, whereas religion was made the pretext, at the poursuit and
by authority of the Inquisition, D. Charles made himselfe odious to them that were the
motiues, giuing them great meanes to confirme the king in the opinion wherewith they
had seasoned him, that he sought all meanes to trouble the state, and to make himselfe pleasing

vnto the Netherlanders, that he might haue a refuge there, and by that means begin
to make a breach in the Crowne of Spain; adding with all to season their imputations,
that he was a fauourer of Heretikes, so as hee was sharply and disdainfully reprehended,
and namely by the Inquisitors,Inquisitors sharp persecutors of Prince Charles. the which did wonderfully incense him: so as beeing vanquished
with impacience, and griefe, he presumed one day to enter boldly into the priuy
Councell chamber, with admiration of all them that were there, but especially of the
king, who did preside, for he feared to see or heare some impertinencie from his Sonne in
that place where he neuer had accesse, nor was not then called. Hee demaunded of him
with a feuere countenance, what hee had to say, and what had moued him to come thither.
It is said he, my Lord, to beseech you to giue me leaue to aske you one thing, and
that it will please you to satisfie me before the lords that are here present.

The king who feared to heare some importune curiositie, sought to dismisse him instantly,
telling him that hee had other places to heare him, and that hee should retire
for that time. But the prince insisted, saying that it was onely to know if he tooke
him for his Sonne, and lawfull successour: what demands of a Sonne are yours? said
the king;Vertuous (...) of a Son to a father. yea you are my sonne, and depart in the name of God. Seeing then, replyed
the Prince, that I am your sonne, and that by nature I shall one day succeed you in the
gouernment of your realmes, I beseech you take it not in ill part, if in this honourable
assemblie, I let you vnderstand that I haue not yet found that you haue thought of my
future condition: for you bred me vp as a stranger, giuing me neither cause nor means
to bee instructed in matters of gouernment, or justice, importing the good of your
subiects, hauing not yet libertie, being of this age, to come where it is treated, nor to
conuerse with such men as you imploy, who rather seeke to estrange me; which
giues me iust cause to complaine vnto you, and to beseech you my Lord to consider
thereon, and to excuse mee: and then hee departed. Hee was then full two and
twentie yeares old.

This action ministred matter of discourse to them of the Councell, whereas there
was not good concluded for Prince Charles, for that the opinions of his enemies,
which were the greatest number, swaied it, and the king continued in his conceit
that his Sonne was a franticke young man, without iudgement, and that hee had
an intent to inuade some Countrie, to put all into Combustion, for which cause
hee desired to be imployed.
The Prince not content to haue made this had triall of his fathers inclination towards
him,Speech of the Prince to the Duke of Alba. hee continued his course, hearing that the duke of Alba had beene appointed
to goe to bee gouernour of the Low-Countries: for hauing sent for him,
hee told him that hee desired nothing more than to goe from Court, intreating him
instantly to assist him in so honourable and reasonable a desire, and to get leaue from
the king that hee might goe with him, whome hee did reuerence as a great Commander
in the warre, and one of the greatest statesmen in the world, in whose Schole
he should thinke himselfe happie to take instruction.
The Duke vsing many complements, seemed also to desire it, saying that he
could not receiue a greater honour than to commaund vnder him in that troublesome
charge, where hee might assure himselfe of his humble seruice and assistance,
yet hee gaue him some admonitions, knowing well how the king stood affected towards
him: wherewith hee was discontented. This being auoided (for the Duke of
Alba, what shew soeuer hee made, had no will to be troubled with such a Scholer)
hee adrest himselfe a while after, to increase his miseries, to D. Iohn of Austria his vncle,
who it may bee had more ambition in his head than he, to whose designes which were
great,D. Iohn de Austria contrarie to Prince Charles. those of the Prince D. Charles must needs bee preiudiciall, yet hee discouered
himselfe freely vnto him, being Generall at Sea, saying, that hee would steale
away, and passe with the Gallies into Italie, persuading D. Iohn to assist him, but
hee deceiued him; for hee presently aduertised the king, which made him to cause
him to bee watcht, and his actions to bee obserued.
But behold, the Queene was ingaged in these miseries: The prince in all his afflictions
had often recourse vnto his mother in law, who being mild and courteous, did willingly

heare his complaints, did pittie him, comfort him, and sought by all meanes to
reuiue his hopes, persuading him to vanquish his passions, and to yeeld vnto the rigour
and choler of the king his father, and to let time moderate them with patience,
the which past not from the Queene without some free inuectiues, after the
French maner, against them that were enemies to her and to the Prince, threatning
one day to be reuenged on them that were authors of of her c^osses, and namely against
D. Ruy Gomes, and a Confessor of the kings, who possest him aboue all others, and were
the chiefe practisers of these Tragedies. The which was reported vnto them, for they had
spies euen in the Queenes Cabinet, by whom they were aduertised, and the king by them,
of all the speeches which past betwixt the prince and her. They fearing that by the force
of coninguall loue,Practises of the court of Spaine. shee should put some consideration into the kings heart, by the which
hee might bee moued to examine this businesse with iudgement, and that discouering
their bad offices, hee should take reuenge, they resolued to presse the princes ruine,
and to draw the Queene into the same hatred, that the king had conceiued against
the prince his Sonne.
These men wrought so by their practised and coloured reports as they drew that heart
alreadie vlcered into a deadlieiealousie of his wife, slandering her with loossnesse, adding
that crime to the impression which they had giuen him, that she fauoured the princes designs,
tending to open rebellion against God and the king. Moreouer to omit no imposture
which might serue to transport this king beyond the bounds of humanitie and reason,
they let him vnderstand, that, by the reports of Phisitions and women attendants, vnto his
Confessor, who made relation, and to whose words he gaue great credit, there appeared
on the bodie of this Princesse certaine markes and spots, which shewed an impuritie and
corruption of the bloud, which might infect the kings person, if hee did accompany with
her, and so disperse it selfe into all the royall familie, which was to be auoided.
All which passions together,Inquisitors chiefe of the Councell of Spaine. were of such force with the king, as he beleeued the Inquisitors
(without whose aduice there is nothing of importance done in Spaine) and others
which were of that Councel, persuading him that it was lawfull and expedient to make away
the prince his son, and the Queene his wife, and the child shee went with, which they
held to be a son, but it proued a daughter, whereof they caused her to be deliuered with
drinks. This Historie was thus reported to queene Catherine, dowager of France, mother
to D. Isabella, by such as she had imploied to vndersta^d the truth therof, and by some which
had serued the prince D. Charles when he was committed to prison, who retyring themselues
into France, she would heare.
The suspition the king had of the loyaltie of queene Isabell his wife, was not for the
prince his Son, as many haue beleeued: for he was (as wee haue said) insufficient for women.
And although he would be idle in speech, and that there were found among his papers
some notes of his owne hand touching that subiect, yet carnall pleasures were the
least of his desires, and as for the Queene there was nothing more modest in Spain, by the
report of Spaniards themselues, who haue written bookes. But it hath beene verified by
credible informations, that her ill-willers which sought her ruin, made vse of the notable
malice of a French gentlewoman, one of those which was suffered to stay with her, when
as soone after her comming into the countrie, they did order her houshold, and limit her
traine.Treacherie, a diuelish reuenge They say that this vnworthie woman (for that the Queene had giuen away a place
which was void to one of her companions, hauing promised it vnto her) to be reuenged of
her Mistres, had giuen it out, that she had been indiscreetly and scandalously familiar with
the Marquesse of Poza, who according to the custome of Spain, termed himselfe seruant
in shew to her that had bene preferred before her.
This comming to the kings eares, was easily beleeued, for hee was alreadie in
some doubt, hee beeing informed by some wayward spirits, that this Marquesse
who was of the house of Rojas, being a gallant knight, did talke more familiarly vnto
the queen than any other, and entertained her with pleasant discourses, whereat shee did
laugh after the maner of France, more freely than it seemed fit for their Spanish grauitie:
This wound being now again toucht, the king sought an occasion to haue this Marquesse
apprehended, commanding him to keepe his house being in Madrid; where going one

night forth to visit his mother, and an vncle of his that was a bishop, retyring verie late
home in a night-gowne and slippers, being accompanied by two pages which carried torches
before him, he was set vpon by men vnknown, and slaine vpon the place. There were
diuers opinions concerning this murther, but most thoght it was done by the kings secret
commaundement,Death of the Marquesse of Poza. although hee seemed to bee much offended: For there being a great
sum of money promised by proclamation to them that should discouer the authours and
doers of this murther, there were many bils set vp in the Portugall tongue, declaring that
it was the king himselfe which had caused the Marquesse of Poza to be slaine: challenging
him, by way of mockerie, to pay the money which hee had promised, but they had
not set to their names.
Hereupon there was great search made, and some Innocents taken, and so cruelly
tortured as they died: being onely suspected for that they were Portugals. The
Queene soone after the death of the Prince D. Charles, began to find herselfe ill, with accidents
and apparent signes of poison, whereof notwithstanding shee did in no sort doubt,
but tooke light remedies, as one that was with child, by the order of such as had bin accustomed
to giue her phisick. The businesse proceeding slowly contrarie to that which they
expected, the king hauing one night discoursed long with her touching her infirmitie, hee
told her plainly that she must take some strong purgation, and that his Phisitions (who
by his commandement did looke vnto her) had told him that they despaired of her life, if
she tooke no other phisicked than that she vsed. But as she tooke no delight to change her
vsuall maner, nor to be phisicked by any other than her owne, trusting aboue all others in
an Apothecarie of hers borne at Blois, she excused her selfe vpon her being with childe,
saying that shee thought it was a Sonne, for that shee found herselfe otherwise disposed
then she had beene, and that they must consider well thereon. But being much prest by
the king, shee said vnto him that shee would doe what hee pleased, not thinking that
what they intended was so readie.
But earely the next day in the morning they brought her a drinke, a bole and tablets,
all of one composition as they said, but so varied in form, to the end she might take that
which was least distastfull vnto her. She tooke the poison, not distrusting any thing vntill
she felt her selfe opprest with great pangs, which made her be deliuered of a daughter,
that was some fiue moneths olde, after which shee had vomitings and strange voidings
which quencht all the force and vigour that remained in her. Being neere her end,
the king came to visit her in a mourning weed, seeming to be much afflicted; whome she
comforted, and among other words, shee said vnto him, That shee reioyced that she
was going to a quiet kingdome,Speech of the Queen D. Isabell dying to the king. not subiect to alteration, as worldlie states be, that
shee did not craue pardon of him, knowing in her conscience that shee had neuer
willingly offended him. She recommended her wiating women and some French
officers, whom shee had not meanes to recompence for the seruices they had done
her, and in the end of October, on Saint Francis eue she dyed, Christian like, She
was lamented of all Spaine, where they did beleeue that this Princesse was a Saint, she
was assisted in her sickenesse for matters of conscience by the Cardinall of Espinosa,
Inquisitor generall, D. Bernard of Fresueda bishop of Cuenca, the kings Confessor,
Frier Dominicke de Chauas, another of the kings Confessors, who had also beene to
the prince D. Charles, and others: She was interred in the Monasterie of las Descalsas
built at Madrid by the Infanta D. Ioane, Mother to D. Sebastian king of Portugall. The
Gentlewoman which had slaundred her, and was the cause of her misfortune, was
married in the Countrie, and died there: the lady of honour serued her daughter
D. Isabella Clara Eugenia: the rest were sent backe into France, from whome they vnderstood
these particularities.
A notable example of the practises of Princes Courts, of the vanitie and instabilitie
of worldlie greatnesse, and of the miseries wherein kings plunge themselues by suspitions
and bad impressions lightly receiued, and especially how they stray dangerously from
the dutie which they owe to God and nature, when they enterlace religion with their human
policies to countenance their actions. Whilst the duke of Alua seeks to afflict
the towns of the low countries by strange and intollerable impositions, exacting the tenth

penie of all marchandise that was sold, and the twentieth penie of euery mans estate. He
began to quarrell with the Queene of England,Quarrell betwixt the duke of Alba and the English. pretending that shee had staied a great
summe of money, which was sent by sea out of Spaine into the Lowe Countries, the
which (said the Duke) did belong vnto the King of Spaine his master, whom she should
intreat with all brotherly loue. Whereunto the Queene answered, that shee was duely
informed, the said money did belong to certaine Merchants of Genoua, and hauing
then occasion to vse it, shee would staie it for a time, and pay them reasonable interest.
Despes Embassadour in England for the Catholike King, made great instance for this
money,Englishmen and their goods arrested in the Lowe Countries and Spaine. but he could get no other answer. Whereupon the Duke of Alba did presently
arrest all the English merchants, with their shippes and goods that were at Antwerp, or
within his gouernment. Whereupon all commerce was broken betwixt the king of
Spaines subiects, and the English, who left the trade to Antwerp, and carried their goods
to Hamborough. The Queene of England published a declaration of her proceeding
in this businesse, complaining that the Duke of Alba had dealt vniustly with her and her
subiects; but all this could not procure any restitution for the English Merchants, who
had letters of reprisall granted them against king Philips subiects, to recouer the losses
which they had sustained by these arrests, both in Spaine and the Lowe Countries. The
English Merchants became men of warre, and so many went to sea, some with a desire
of gaine, and others with hope to recouer what they had lost, as not a shippe could passe
betwixt Spaine and the Lowe Countries, to the ruine of many poore men: wherof
great complaints came to the Court of Spaine. The Duke of Alba seeing what a
breach he had made betwixt those two States, to the preiudice of his masters subiects;
seeking to repaire the errour which he had committed,Queen of England refuseth to heare the duke of Albas Embassador. he sent Christopher d'Assonuille, a
Counseller of Estate, to the Queene of England to reconcile this quarrell; but shee refused
to heare him, vnlesse he came from the king his master, and had letters of credit, signed
with his owne hand: but comming from the Duke of Alba, her Maiestie sent him to
treat with her Councell; which hee hauing no warrant to doe, returned without audience.
Yet shee let him vnderstand, that although shee found her selfe much wronged,
shee would not take Armes vnlesse the Duke of Alba began. The like shee wrot to the
king of Spaine, complaining of the Duke of Alba's presumption. Soone after, the Duke
sent Chiapin Vitelli Marquis of Cetone, with some others, to demand the money, and to
free all arrests of either side, but they effected not any thing: whereupon the Duke sold
all the English mens goods that were vnder arrest. These were the seeds of warre betwixt
the two Princes, which continued vnto their deaths, to the ruine of many of their
subiects, especially Spaniards and Portugals.
The Princes of Germanie hearing what cruelties and spoiles the duke of Alba and his
Spaniards committed in the Lowe Countries, they prest the Emperour Maximilian to
deale in those matters, betwixt the king and his subiects there; yea to take knowledge
thereof as Emperour: saying, that without doubt the Prouinces which are beyond the
riuer of Escaut, towards the East, were of the Imperiall Iurisdiction; as those that are on
this side were of the soueraigntie of France. But the Emperour did not thinke it fit to
vse his Imperiall authority, but prayers and intercessions. Whereupon he sent the Archduke
Charles his brother into Spaine,Charles Archduke of Austria sent into Spaine vpon colour to aske the king of Spaines aduice for
the mariage of his two daughters: and withall hee had giuen him ample instructions to
treat with him touching the affaires of his Netherlands, and to intreat him by all faire
meanes, to grant a generall pardon to his people there, and to call home the duke of Alba
and his Spaniards; assuring him that in so doing, he should be obeyed: but if he did persist
in that cruell persecution, they would be releeued both with men and money from Germanie,
the which he could not preuent.
The Archduke came to Genoua, where he imbarkt in the duke of Sauoys gallies, and
was receiued by the king of Spaine with great honour:Treatise of mariage. his embassage was very pleasing
touching that which concerned the mariages of his two neeces, for he found the king disposed
to marrie the elder, the which had bin appointed for the vnfortunate Prince D.
Charles his sonne. And as for the second, which the Emperour desired to match with the
king of Portugall, who was yet very yong, hee had a promise from king Philip to imploy

himselfe to haue the French king marrie her, although he had alreadie demanded the other;
and they were entred into treatie, by the means of the Cardinalles of Guise and Espinosa.
But as for the affaires of the Netherlands, the Archduke could not obtaine anie
thing in fauor of them that were banished, nor of the poore prouinces afflicted. For making
relation vnto him of the speeches held by the Princes Electors to the Emperor, and
that they pretended he had a right of protection ouer those people, and that hee should
make himselfe iudge of their quarrels, as depending of the Empire, it did much incense
the king, who answered, that the Germanes were much deceiued in their conceptions
in that regard, and that he had sufficient right and power to shew that he was a soueraign
Prince, and did not acknowledge any other superior on earth. He knew well that the
duke of Alba had vsed some excesse, but he was woont to say, that he had rather loose all
those Prouinces, with others, than to haue rebellious subiects, especially in matters which
concerned religion.
Thus the Archduke was dismist, hauing receiued a present of 100000 crownes, to
helpe him to furnish his frontier places against the Turke, with many iewels of price.
And he had commission when hee came into Germanie, to doe the ceremonies of their
contracting, in his name, with his future Spouse. Returning by Italie he did visit his sisters
and neeces, the duchesses of Ferrara, Florence, and Montoua, and then he came vnto
the Emperour, to giue him an account of his negotiation with king Philip, whom hee
had left ingaged in a warre against the Moores of Granado, almost as difficult as that of
the Netherlands.
 Wee haue formerly made mention of the discontents of the Moorish nation, dwelling
in the mountaines,Moores. plaines, and valleyes, and in some of the good townes in the countries
of Granado and Murcia; which was by reason of the contempt they were in with the naturall
Spaniards,Causes of the rebellion of the Moores of Granado. whom they call old Christians: among whom they liued in continual
vexation, especially by the Clergie, and officers of the Inquisition, and also by them of the
Iustice, which was not equally distributed vnto them. But that whereof they most complained,
was the kings Edict, whereof we haue made mention, tending to alter their manners,
their apparell, and their language: whereof the President D. Pedro de Desa was appointed
to see the execution, with the assistance of the Gouernour Domingo Lope de Mendosa
marquesse of Mondejar, and the aduice of the Auditors and Counsellers of the Chancerie
in th^ Parliament of Granado, and of the Archbishop if need were, wherein they
found no small difficultie.
To begin therefore by gentlenesse, the President gaue charge to Alphonso de Horosco,
Chanon of S. Sauior, which is a Collegiall Church in the quarter of Albayzin of the
citie of Granado, beeing in a manner wholly inhabited by Moores, to persuade them to
receiue the Edict, yea to demaund it themselues: but hauing imparted some copies
vnto them, they reiected it, sending vnto the President and Gouernour, George de Bacsa
Proctor general of that nation, and Francis Nugnes Muley a knight, one of the most auncient
among them, to intreat them to deferre the publication of the Edict, vntill they had
acquainted the king with their reasons, and the inconueniences that might growe by the
execution thereof. But notwithstanding all their sayings and allegations, the Edict was
proclaimed the first of Ianuarie, 1567; and to shew the diligence of officers, all the baths
and hot-houses of the citie were instantly forbidden, and most of them beaten downe:
yet they vsed some moderation, for that during the yeare 1567 there were not any penalties
leuied of them that did infringe it. In the meane time they sent their deputies to
Court, where by the meanes of some noble men, they procured audience of the Councell;
and there were some of opinion, that if they would haue the Edict stand in force, the
execution should be suspended, as it beene in the time of the Emperour Charles, and of
his mother.(...) The Cardinall of Espinosa was of another opinion, and brought all the rest
to concurre with him; which was, that the Edict should bee speedily executed in all
points, and the penalties exacted vpon them that should not obey. There was among the
new Christians, some that were descended of the blood of the auncient kings of the
Moores, the which were honoured in Spaine, and well respected in Court; among which,
D. Alphonso of Granado Venegas laboured by good perswasions to hinder this rash execution,

but he was willed to desist, for such was the kings pleasure. So as all the Moores
of the citie, townes and mountaines of Alpuxarra, of the boroughs and villages towards
the Sea, were brought to despaire, apprehending this strange alteration, euen in their
language and habites, which persuaded the^ that they were thereby reduced into seruitude,
and confusion of their houses and families: for this nation is verie curious to keep remembrances
and registers of their families as by a tradition of their ancestors, after the maner
of the Arabians and Iewes. And then beganne to appeare the distrust they had of them,
all the Moores hauing beene commaunded by proclamation to keepe themselues within
their dwellings and parishes, and for all them that were come out of the villages into the
Albayzin to depart: the which was grieuous vnto them, for that the inhabitants of that
place being most Marchants and Artisans, they had need of many labourers and workemen
for their ordinarie works, which they did vsually draw out of the Countrey, and of
their owne nation. They saw that the marquesse of Mondejar had leuied 300 souldiers
for the safetie (said he) of the towne, and to haue better assurance of the Moores residing
there; if anie one of them did owe anie thing, he was presently subiect to arrest, and in
like maner they that were cautions for any other, and by this means the prisons were full:
The officers of justice vnder colour of seeking for such as hauing no meanes to pay, were
retired into the villages and mountains, they entred into the houses where they said they
were hidden, and co^mitted many insolencies, yea they sought out old actio^s, for the which
the Moores had compounded with their parties, and drew them into new suites. Finally,
as soone as they heard that this Edict was resolued in court, this nation was so basely respected
by all the old Christians, both clergie and others, as euerie man presumed to vex
and oppresse them, esteeming them no better than bruit beasts; wherfore seeing themselues
reduced to that miserable estate worse than if they had bin common slaues, and yet fearing
worse, they concurred all in one mind to reuolt. Those of the Albayzin who had more to
loose, incited the rest to begin, and they expected meanes from them of the Albayzin, and
councel how they should behaue themselues, for they were men of vnderstanding, ciuill,
and better experienced in the world, than the inhabitants of the mountaines, whereas the
force lay, but they needed councel: yea there did ordinarily co^uerse among them thieues,
banished men, and such as were condemned by justice, who desired nothing more than
to see some disordered seditio^. There was a bold audacious, Moore dwelling in the Albayzin,
his name was Farrax Aben Farrax, a dier by his trade, yet he said he was descended fro^
the Abenxaraces sometimes famous knights among the Granadins. This man was as a
trumpet to stirre vp the rest,Farrax Aben Farrax first motiue of sedition. he went and came to the mountaines, townes and villages where
the Moores dwelt, and carried them aduice and aduertisements, how they should gouerne
themselues in a generall reuolt, which was intended the 1. of Ianuarie 1568, the same day
that the city of Granado had bin yeelded vp to the kings D. Ferdinand and D. Isabella, but
being impatient to attend, he called before the time a troup of thieues disguised after the
Turkish maner, and made them to enter into the Albaizin by certain places where the walls
were low and ful of holes, on Christmas eue at night, when making a great noise, he awaked
them, shewing an ensigne displaied inuiting the^ to come with their armes into the street,
for the time (said he) is come that we must shew our selues men of courage, for that there
were a good number of Turks arriued in Alpuxarra, which were come to fauor them out
of Barbarie. This alarme did trouble all the other quarters of the town, for that they were
in jealousie touching the execution of the Edict: for otherwise they had not bin moued,
being no strange thing to heare a noise in the Albaizin, the Moores being accustomed to
make all their sports with tumults. Notwithstanding all this, Farrax could not draw anie
one out of his house, they thinking he had been drunke, but they cried to him out of their
windowes, that he should go sleep, and that they had nothing to do with his follies. This
troupe of thieues had walked vp and downe all the night, and no man durst goe and view
them. In the end Farrax led them to the place from whenee they came, and they were not
followed: the next day it was said they were thieues that were come to spoile. There
were some informations taken, and there was an order made that there should be gardes
throughout the citie, whereunto the Moores should contribute. The suspition increasing,
and some insolencies being done to them of this nation, they came vnto the President,

beseeching him not to suffer them to be outraged, protesting that they neuer had
will nor thought to rebell, that there was no reason to intangle them with other mens
crimes, with whom they had no intelligence, and for caution of the innocencie of the Inhabitants
of the Albayzin they offered, if it pleased him, that 200 of the chiefe amongst
them would yeeld themselues prisoners: the which being at the first refused, was afterwards
accepted, when they had somewhat discouered that they were all conspired together,
and that they had intelligence with the Turkes of Alger, by a packet which was surprised:
where there was found a book and letters which discouered much of their practises.
Among these people there were certaine fantastike and frantike spirites, which dispersed
certain prophecies amo^g the people,Superstitions amo^g the Moors. which they said were old, by the which they
had a deliuerer promised them, who should deliuer them from the oppressions of the
Christians, the which indeed were great and intollerable, to men whom they made beleeue
were free, and that they enioyed the Lawes equally with others. This nation thus
tired, superstitious by nature, and nothing instructed in the Christian religion, had a suddaine
desire in this persecution to call backe Mahomet and to abhorre the name of Iesus
Christ, whereupon they fell into open rebellion against the King and his magistrates, and
the first murders which they committed vpon the Christians, were certaine Clerks yong
practizers, which came from Vx^car in the Alpuxarra, to Granado, to passe the holydaies
there, as they had vsually done euerie yeere, and passing by the villages, they made good
cheere,Murders done by the Moores. vnder colour that they did belong to the Iustice. Of the which they dispatched
some, and then they did set vpon a troupe of 50 souldiers of the garrison of Adra, who
went also to Grando with the like insolencies, whom they slue in a maner all. The marquesse
of Mondejar, who was gone to Court to aduertise the King of the estate of the affaires,
returned with commaundement to suppresse the rebellion by armes, and the gouernour,
lords, knights, townes and comminalties thereabouts had charge to assist him.
Wherefore hauing taken aduice of the magistrates of the royall Audience and others of
the citie, and especially of the archbishop, hee prepared himselfe to set vpon them that
were alreadie risen in confusion, and without order; but there being among them the abouenamed
Farrax, one Daut, and Ferdinand of Cordoua, and De Valor, a knight of the
Moores, who said that hee was of the royall race of Aben Humega, descending from the
prophet Mahomet, they assembled at Bresnar in the Alpuxarra, to make election of a
head, where after much contention, they did choose this Ferdinand, to whom hauing giuen
the title of a King,Aben Humeia made king of the Moores rebelles. he called himselfe Muley Mahomet Aben Humeia. Farrax, who
would gladly haue beene, and had in a maner promised it himselfe, could not attaine vnto
it, but was content to be Alguazil maior, which is the second dignitie, like to that of
Constable. This Aben Hamcia was verie wel known in the city of Granado for his vanitie
and other vices, which decreased not in this great aduancement. If we consider wel (by
the report of such as had seene this war) the number of them that had rebelled, the expectation
that infinite others would rebell, being of the same mind, if they had well managed
the meanes which they had gathered together, as of Churches and Christians houses
which they spoiled, the neerenesse of the kings of Fez and Marroc, and of the Turkes
of Alger, together with the bad agreement which was betwixt the gouernours and the
royall Iustice of Granado, and the neighbour prouinces, who contended without all reason,
touching their manner of proceeding against these mutines, euerie one seeking to
make vse of his office, and to fil his purse with so many goodly confiscations, and rich preies
which fell daily. Without doubt there was matters in this warre sufficient to haue ouerthrowne
the Crowne of Spaine, if it had beene managed by men of more discretion and
iudgement than Aben Humeia, and Farrax Aben Farrax.
It is not to be imagined what insolences they co^mitted in the first furie of their raigne.
They slew all Christians males aboue ten yeres old that they could get, especially clergie
me^, with al Iudges and officers of iustice; the wome^ and children they made slaues, they spoiled
churches and fired them with most of the houses, yea their own: so as they made the boroughts
and good villages inhabitable, and in a short time grew sauage, liuing among woods
and rocks, where they made their retreats, being almost inaccessible, drawing their wiues

and children after them, and abandoning them vpon any difficultie or let, without any
feeling of loue or charitie. He might tearme himselfe happie among the Spaniards, who
beeing surprized in his house by Aben Humeias men, did meet with some Moore of his
acquaintance: and truely there were some, though very few, who mooued with compassion,
did hazard their liues to saue Christians, from whom they had receiued some pleasure,Farrax Aben Farrax disapointed.
the which is not strange among reasonable creatures, seeing it is often seene among
bruit beasts. Farrax Aben Farrax hauing had charge to gather together the gold, siluer,
and mooueable goods which had beene abandoned to the spoyle, to make a stocke for
the warre, and to buie armes in Barbarie (whereof they had great want) he committed so
many insolencies and thefts, as afterwards he was not imployed in any businesse, neither
durst he shew himselfe before king Aben Humeia, who hauing past like a violent stream,
or rather a lightning by Locrin, Lanjaron, Orgiba, Pugneyra, Ferreyra, Iubiles, Vxicar,
and other places of the valley of Sierra Neuada, hee was confirmed king at Andarax,
whereas he made Aben Zign^ Alcaide or Captaine, and Michel de Roxas his father in law
his Treasurer generall, and Hernando Caguer one of his Lieutenants or Marshals: it is hee
who saued most of the Christians from slaughter, and spared their goods in this warre.
This tumultuarie king seeing himselfe followed, hee threatned the citie of Almerie, hee
made Salobregna to wauer, with other maritime places, whither the mountaines and the
valleys stretch, and in like manner all that coast which is vpon the declining of Sierra
Vermeja, vnto Gibraltar and Maruela, so as in lesse than fifteene daies this mischeife ran
aboue sixtie leagues, and the law of Mahomet was openly profest among them. Then the
Moores dwelling in the Albayzin at Granado were in extreme danger, there beeing a
great garrison, and souldiers comming thither daily from all parts: and (that which moued
the Granadins to choler and compassion) many men and women came naked thither,
hauing escaped the cruell hands of the Moores, for in all places both champane and
mountaines, the old and new Christians had their dwellings mingled, but the Moores
were more in number, and stronger. The Moores about Salobregna contained themselues
long, for that their seat was not strong, as within the mountaines, neither did they
reuolt, but through the violence that was done them by the kings souldiers, and by his
Lieutenants, who were most insolent and disobedient to their Commanders in all this
warre.
Salobregna and Motril are vpon the sea, where there growes much good wine, the riches
of the inhabitants. In the citie of Almerie neere vnto them were aboue sixe hundred
families of the Moores, who did not stirre, and were preserued by the Gouernour: notwithstanding
that, one Mare Ramir a Moore, with some other indiscreet men thereabouts
sought to murther him. The Lords of villages, who had no houses of strength, did
wisely to retire themselues, for whersoeuer they were the weaker, they were set vpon and
slaine: as it happened to D. Iohn Zapate, who sought to make it good in the Church of
Guejares de Fondon, where he was forced and burnt with 150. men.
The Marquesse of Mondejar, and he of Velez, raised either of them an armie, by order
from the Councell, and inuaded the Moores, one by Granado, and the other by Basa,
the Marquesse of Zenete bending towards the sea to Almerie. These two Commanders
neuer ioyned during all this warre, although they came neere together vpon the declining
of the mountaines that were betwixt them, which were in manner plaine towards
the West,Dispositions of the marques^^ of Mondeiar, and he of Velez, Generals against the Moores. for they were of very different humors; D. Lewis Faiardo marquesse of Velez
was proud, ambitious, impatient of all superioritie, and bloodie: and hee of Mondejar
was milde and courteous, seeking rather to persuade, than to force the rebels: the marquesse
of Velez was suddaine in his exploits, he of Mondejar was staied, and did not aduance
without great deliberation, and therefore he was taxed to be slowe, and to regard
his owne priuate interest, for that he was Lord of many places in those mountaines, and
other parts of the countrie, which were vnpeopled by this warre, to the preiudice of his
rights and reuenewes. The first lodging his campe made beeing gone to field, was at Alendin,
and from thence to Padul, which is the first borough of the valley of Lecrin, hauing
with him the nobility and the troupes of Granado and Andalusia: he of Velez, that
of Murcia, Basa, and the neighbour places. In the absence of the marquesse of Mondejar

the Earle of Teudille his sonne commaunded in Granado for martiall matters, beeing
lodged in the Alhambra, the Castle and royall Palace there. At Dureal a league from
Padul Laurence d'Auila was lodged with the bands of seuen. Townes of the iurisdiction
of Granado, and Gonsal'd Alcantara with a company of horse, making as it were the foreward.
They were charged in the night by a multitude of Moores, whereof Michel de
Granado de Xaba was the chief, thinking to disorder them, but the souldiers made it good,
and repulsed their enemies, of whom there were two hundred slaine, whereat Aben
Humeia was in such a rage for this bad successe, as he had a desire to cut off Xabas head.
These two marquesses were not sole Commaunders of the warre in that Countrey, for
euerie Gouernour or Captaine of a place would make enterprises of his owne head, imparting
nothing vnto them, nor attending their commaundements, for euery man aimed
at spoile. D. Garcia de Villaroel gouernour of Almerie went to field to surprize a troupe of
Moores, which were assembled at Benahaduz, and threatned to besiege Almerie, whom
he dispersed,Alphonso Habis de Vanegas a faithfull Moore and slue many of them, among other Brahen Cacis their captaine. There was
with D. Garcia. D. Alphonso Habis de Vanegas a Moore, of the bloud of the auncient kings
of Granado, who had beene solicited by the rebells to be their King, the which hee reiected,
and persisted faithfully in the seruice of king Philip.
The marquesse of Mondejar passing on into Alpuxarra, tooke the pace of Tablado by
force, a place of importance for the passage, being betwixt two mountaines, where hee
built a bridge ouer a very deepe valley, the which being broken, or kept, they cannot go
from the one to the other, but must fetch a compasse of foure great leagues. The gard of
this bridge was committed to Pedro d'Arroio with certaine companies, and then the armie
marched towards Orgiba, the which was abandoned by the Moores being amazed.
Many women and children were freed, and they that had defended the Tower of that
place seuenteene dayes, where the Moores had giuen diuerse assaults, and reduced them
to great want of victualls. There was the like deliuery of prisoners with the gaine of some
booty made at Poqueira, where Aben Humeia had lodged with a great number of Moors,
but they durst not stay. There they had newes that the garrison which they had left at Tablado
had been surprised and cut in peeces with their Captaine,De^ote and death of Pedro d'Arroio of the Moores. who was found yet panting
amongst the dead, two daies after, whenas thee marquesse recouered this passage againe,
without the which they cannot come nor goe from the campe to Granado. D. Alphonso
de Reynoso was left there to keepe a more carefull gard, and had expresse commandement
to staie the souldiers which retired with their bootie without leaue: The greatest
disorder which hindered this warre, was the disobedience of the new leuied souldiers to
their Commaunders, who longed still to be at home when they had gotten any spoile:
and it was a hard matter to stay them, for they had no pay. The Moores in like manner
were without discipline, being ignorant of warre, and nothing apt to armes, yea most
of them were vnarmed, labourers, shepheards, and Artisans who could cast stones, and
handle slings well; their captaines were not much more skilfull in their charges and dueties,
but being once acquainted with the Turkes they recouered Crossebowes, and harquebuses,
and did learne to vse them. Their greatest feare in Spaine was, that they should
haue intelligence, with the Turkes of Alger, and the Moores of Barbarie their neighbours,
the which they could not preuent. The marquesse of Mondejar pursuing Aben
Humeia, hee brought his armie to Pitres de Ferreira, whereas Ferdinand Caguer made offer
of an accord, and continued it vpon all occasions; for hee was the least desperate among
all the Captaines of the Moores. At this place of Pitres, the Moores fought and
slew many of the marquesses men, but they presently left the place, and retired to Iubiles,
whereas Aben Humcia committed great cruelties, euen vpon the Moores of that place,
who did not so dainely satisfie his desire. There was an old castle which they had rampired,
with an intent to make it a fort, and their store-house for the warre, and had carried
most of their spoyles thither, the which notwithstanding they could not defend: for although
the greatest part of their forces were there, yet they had not the hearts to fight,
and being to dislodge, they were readie, beeing pursued, to kill a great number of Christians,
prisoners, of all ages, women and children, whose husbands and fathers they had
slaine before, but some that had more humanitie hindred it, their retreat was to Vercheul.

This miserable troupe of women and children came and presented themselues
before the Marquesse, hideous, leane, bare, and halfe naked, praising God with teares
for his comming and their deliuerance. The Moores which kept the castle fledde also,
where they found there hundred men, and a thousand and fiue hundred women, who
were in like manner set at libertie: but it was vnhappie^ for many, yea for most of those
poore women; for the campe beeing lodged; hauing placed most of those women in a
Church, and such as could not enter beeing laid before it for that night, it happened that
a disordered souldier comming about midnight among them, sought to take away a maiden
to abuse her,Excesse of a disordered souldier. who being staied and de^ended by the other women, one of them drew
the souldiers sword and hurt him: this villaine leauing his hold, began to crie out to
armes, saying, that there were Moores disguised and armed among those women which
had hurt him in that manner; whereupon they came running in disorder, and without any
further inquirie, discharged their peeces vpon these poore creatures, so as in a manner
all they that were before the Church, were either slaine or sore hurt, those within it
were preserued by the shutting of the doores: in the meane time the captaines came, and
caused the massacre to cease. The truth of this fact beeing knowne, the marquesse was
very much grieued, and caused many of these murthering souldiers to bee hanged; and
then he sent the rest of the women and children with a conuoy to Granado, where they
receiued them, and gaue them great almes. This pittifull spectacle increased their hatred
against the Moores dwelling in the Albayzin,Moores of the Albayzin in great numbers. whom they distrusted much, for they
were held to be ten thousand men able to beare armes; and therefore the Earle of Teudilla,
to be better assured, lodged souldiers in their houses: whereof thinking to complaine,
they were sharpely reprehended, so as they repented that they had not reuolted
when as Farrax did solicite them.
Whilest that the Marquesse of Mondejar imployed himselfe vertuously,Exploits of the marquesse of Velez. to chase
the Moores and their king, who were in the mountaines and strong places of Alpuxarra,
hee of Velez with such men as he had, gathered together in the territories of Valencia,
Murcia, Basa, Lorca, and other neere places, entred into the realme of Granado,
by Tauernas, hauing fiue thousand foot and three hundred good horse, and
came and charged a troupe of Moores, who had fortified themselues at Guecija, vnder
a diuellish captaine called Gorri: who, in vi^we of the marquesse campe, caused many
Christian men to be beheaded, whom he had kept prisoners, to expose them as a
spectacle to them that should come first to assayle him, and then he dislodged without
fighting.
The Christian armie marching towards Filix to besiege it, they were preuented by
D. Garcia de Villaroel gouernour of Almerie, who would haue the honour to free this
place, presuming that the Moores which held it, would abandon it as soone as they
should see him approach, thinking it to be the marquesse his fore ward: but he was deceiued,
for hee found them ready to make head against him, beeing many; wherefore he
retired with all speed to the marquesse his campe, to whom hee made his excuse, and
gaue him to vnderstand, that among these Moores, there were Turkes come out of Barbarie
to succour them: and then he gaue him a conuoy to returne vnto Almerie, from
whence he might not long bee absent. The marquesse passing on, found the Moores
which were come forth in battell, to incounter them which came to discouer them
beeing come to fight, they found they were not those whom they sought, and
knowing that it was the marquesse of Velez, who was a resolute man, and was called
among them, Ybilis Arraezel Hadit, that is to say, a deuill with an iron head, their courage
was somewhat quailed,Incounter at (...). yet they did fight, and did rallie themselues thrice together,
but in the end they were forced to quit the place, and retire to the mountaines,
hauing lost about seauen hundred men, and among them some women, which had
fought desperately, three captaines, Fulcy, Tezi, and the sonne of Porto Carrero de
Xergal, where two of his sisters, maidens, died also. On the marquesse de Velezside,
there were both slaine and hurt, but they did not publish the number.
The fort of Filix by this retreat was wonne, where they found much good
stuffe, gold, siluer, silkes, pearle, victualles, and a great number of women and children

Moores, whom they had abandoned, wherewith the souldiers being enricht, they disbanded
by troupes to carrie their booties to their houses; wherefore the Marquesse was forced
to retire to fortifie his armie. They of Guadix defeated a troupe of Moores at the
same time at Deyre, most of which had come out of the Marquisate of Zenete: they slue
400 men, and tooke aboue 1000 women and children, with great spoiles. The chief of this
enterprise was Pedro Arias d'Auila, and they said it was one of the best exploits of all this
warre.
King Aben Humeia being pursued by the marquesse of Mondejar, and was then at Vxixar,
a place situated in the middest of Alpuxarra, the which he had fortified as an assured
retreate, and had about him 6000 men; yet at the approach of the marquesse, this man
who was neither valiant nor of any commaund, retired with his troupes to Palerne. Fernard
el Caguer continued still his practises of peace, so as he had conference with Ierome
d'Apont and Iohn Sanches: And D. Alphonso de Granado, Venega, wrought so vpon the marquesse
word and promise,Aben Humeia killes his father in law and other Moores. as he drew Aben Humeia to a parle with him, but at the noise of
some shot inconsiderately discharged, hee was so am^zed, and fell into such distrust, as he
fled away, neither was it possible to bring him backe againe; and in this perturbation he
slew his father in law Michel de Roxas, and caused some other chiefe Moores to be slaine,
saying that they would haue betraied him: he put away his wife, and sware that he would
not leaue one of the familie of Roxas aliue, the which did purchase him many enemies, and
he blemished his reputation more, when he abandoned the fort of Palerne, and all that hee
had, retiring into the most desart places of the mountaines. The marquesse being come to
Palerne, he took the mother and sisters of the base king with many other womeu of qualitie
Moores, and set free a great number of Christians that were captiues, and from thence
hee led his armie towards Andarax. That of the marquesse of Velez being somewhat repaired,
was then at Ohanes, neere vnto the other, where there were many Moores gathered
together, whom hee did fight withall, and disperst: and it was thought that the two
armies should haue ioyned, and that the marquesse of Velez should haue beene sole commaunder,
whereunto hee did aspire, and the souldiers desired it, but either of them went
his course. The marquesse of Mondejar returned to Vxixar. One of the goodliest booties
of this warre, fell into the hands of D. Garcia de Villaroel, and of D. Francesco de Cordo^a,
being ioyned with the forces of Almerie,Bootie taken from the Moors and others whom they led against the Moores,
who had fortified at Inox, in rockes that were almost inaccessible: for hauing dislodged
them they found to the value of aboue 500000 crownes: but the diuision of this prey
bred great dissention among them.
Profit was the matter they chiefly aymed at that went to this warre, except the Marquesse
of Mondejar, who tended to peace, and to saue the Moores that were reuolted,
soliciting them rather to acknowledge their saules, and to shew themselues worthie of
pardon, than to ruine them by armes, and therefore hee was not pleasing to the souldiers.
Hauing led his armie to Guajares of the iurisdiction of Salobregna, whither many
Moores had retired themselues, and fortified among the rockes and precipices (which
were they that first receiued the Turks and Moores that came to succour them out of Barbary)
hee sent to discouer them,Defeat of Christians. but to their losse that went, being in a manner all slaine;
those of na^e and qualitie were Lewis Ponce de Leon, Augustin Venegas, Gonsalo de Orugna,
the visitor Ronquillo and Iohn de Villaroel: being charged, the next day they made great resistance,
but at night they retired, leauing their old men in that lodging, with many women
and children, whom the marquesse (being incensed with the losse he had the day before)
caused to be slaine in his presence, contrary to his maner. The rocks, woods, and caues
(beeing vnfurnished of all prouision for victualles) were no fit places to entertaine great
numbers of Moores,Crueltie of the (...) of Mandeiar. who had such great troups of women, children and slaues with them,
as if they had bin prest by arms, hunger and cold, with other necessities, would haue forced
them often to haue changed their lodgings; and they that came out of Barbary might easily
foresee that the end of their reuolt must needs be death or captiuitie: seeing they had
no means to prouide better retreats to keepe their goods, wiues, and children, nor any good
fort neere vnto the sea, with victuals and artillery to maintaine a siege at all euents, and in
the meane time to refresh the^selues there, and to retire such as were wounded, and to repaire

the^selues after any losse: war is maintaind by this means, and when there is question of any
accord, it is concluded with better co^ditions. These defects being knowne, was the cause
that the succors which they had fro^ Afrik, being al volu^taries, were weak and came slowly:
and they that came once to see it, were soon distasted, and being once returnd came no more,
and disluaded others. Finally, there appeared no other end in this natio^, of their reuolt, but
to powre forth their malice in reuenging themselues most cruelly vpon the Christians
which they met, for the wrongs and iniuries which they had receiued, killing, burning,
and murthering without iudgement of foresight of that which might happen,Moores vn^turall. and then
they died content, without either loue, o^ naturall affection to their wiues and small children,
whom they made to trot after them like beasts, and vpon the least crosse they did abandon
them without griefe. This warre had continned three moneths, when as king
Philip by some good inspiration considering the desolation of the countrie, and the innocencie
of many small infants which could not distinguish the right hand from the left,
he made a declaration, that his meaning was not that men children vnder tenne yeares
old,Pardon for the Moores proclaimed. and women vnder eleuen should be reputed slaues, commanding them to receiue all
Moores that would submit themselues to his mercie, and forbidding them to offer any
violence to those that had contained themselues in peace. By these meanes many beeing
forced by hunger and other discommodities, submitted themselues; who being inioyned
to deliuer vp their armes, they brought old crosse-bowes, halfe pikes, and such like weapons,
broken, and of no vse: and when they demanded where there other armes were,
which they vsed in incounters, they said that the strangers, and such as would not submit
themselues had taken them away. Notwithstanding these good orders set downe by
the king,Insolencie of the k^ngs souldiers. the souldiers being insolent and couetous, did them infinit mischeifs, carrying
many away, especially women: not onely out of villages, but of those which they found
in the citie, euen in view of the magistrates, the which all men of honour blamed and detested;
yea many strangers which frequented in the citie of Granado, for the commerce,
said, that it would be a hard matter for Spaniards to make the Moores good Christians,
seeing they shewed in their actions, that they were not so themselues, and that
there was more inhumanitie in their behauiou^s, than in the most barbarous Pirats
of Afrike.
Aben Humeia hauing taken some breath, resolued to continue the warre, sending to intreat
Vluccyaly to giue him some succours. In the meane time, hee and Fernand Caguer
came sometimes in the night to solace themselues with them that were reduced, and
who had safegards to remaine in their houses; whereof the marquesse beeing aduertised,
he meant to haue them watcht and taken: but they had some notice thereof, and stood
vpon their gards. They did foresee that the Spring beeing come, the warre would bee
more difficult, both for that the Moore should find themselues lesse incommodated in
their holes and sauage retreats, as also for that the sea would be more nauigable, and easie
to passe the Moores and Turkes out of Barbarie, which prepared to come to their succours;
wherefore the marquesse of Mondejar sent D. Alphonso de Granado Venegas to
Court, to acquaint the king with the estate of those affaires, and to tell him what prouisions
he thought necessarie to end those warres; and that if it pleased his Maiestie to come
vnto Granado; it may be it would be of more force than any other thing, and that
howsoeuer, hee must cause the sea to be kept, and the passage to bee stopt. The king
thinking that his presence was not so necessarie, was counselled to send D. Iohn of Austria
his brother thither, the respect of whom would make the Commaunders agree
better. The which beeing concluded, commaundement was giuen to D. Lewis de
Requesens great Commaunder of Castille, who was them Embassador at Rome for
king Philip, beeing also Lieutenant at sea vnder D. Iohn, that hee should come with
the galleys into Spaine, and bring with him the regiment of old souldiers which were at
Naples; that beeing ioyned with D. Sancho de Leua, hee might stoppe the passage of the
Turkes and Moores which came out of Barbarie.
As soone as it was knowne at Granado, and in the countrie where the warre was, that
D. Iohn of Austria was appointed lieutenant for the king there all the captains of towns and
castles, and those that were in the armies, with their souldiers, sought to make worke for D.

Iohn, committing all excesse, by spoyling, ransacking, and murthering: for they thought
that D. Iohn would haue better discipline obserued in the armies.Disobedience and insolencies of Christian souldiers. D. Aluar Flores, and
Anthonie d'Auila of Madrid, vnder colour of going to surprise Aben Hume^a at Valot,
whither they said he should come in the night to a certaine mariage, they spoyled all the
places where they past, notwithstanding that the Moores which inhabited them had
safegards, and made them the best cheere they could. Being come to Valot, they found
not Aben Humeta, but they did ransome all the Moores of that place, notwithstanding
that they had submitted themselues to the kings obedience, carrying away their wiues
and children as slaues,Defeat of Christians. in contempt of the Kings Proclamation. In their returne they
were charged and defeated, and the prisoners rescued. There were lost aboue a thousand
souldiers with their captaines, whereof the Moores sent to make great excuses to the
marquesse of Mondejar, offering to yeeld vp the armes which they had taken: the marquesse
answered them, that they had done well, and that they should doe so to all them
that should offer them violence, against his Maiesties protection and safegard. Diego
Gasca a cholericke captaine, b^ing incensed that they of Turon had slaine eleuen of his
souldiers which had gone forth to steale, led his companie thither to disarme them, and
to be reuenged: searching in a da^ke caue of a house, where there were certaine Moores
hidden, he was slaine; whereupon his souldiers spoyled and set fire of the borough, slue
a hundred and twentie Moores, and carried away the women. A Curat of To^ujos b^ing
grieued to see the Moores of the mountaine of Filabres liue in peace, for they had
not reuolted, he ^ed certaine leud persons with him, who surprizing them on a suddaine,
spoyled them: others did the like at Bayarca, and at Picena, whereas they slue three of
the marquesses gards, beeing sent thither to preserue them: but as they retired, carrying
away many women and children, and much ca^tell, the Moores which had escaped,
and had giuen the alarme to their neighbours, crost them in their waies and slue them all.
At Granado hatred did so transport some of the Iustice, as they suffered the prisoners
in the gaole to be armed, to kill the Moores of the Albayzin, who had put themselues into
prison, as hostages in the beginning of the troubles, as wee haue said, to whom they
carried swords and other weapons secretly in the night, and bruted it abroad that Aben
Humeia had intelligence, with the Moores of the Albayzin, to surprize the citie: and afterwards
in the night they cried to armes, for that towards Sieria Neuada, they had seen
a fire, to answer a signe which had beene giuen out of some house of the Albayzin:
whether it were true or not, the people ranne to the prisons, where finding the Christian
prisoners armed,Massacre of Moores which were in prison. and in fight with the Moores, who had no armes, ioyning with them
they slue a hundred and tenne; which were of the chiefe and richest Moores of the citie:
yet they durst not set vpon the Albayzin, for that in euery house there were souldiers
lodged, which were not of that partie. It was said, that some of them that were murthered,
were found circumcised, which made the Atturney generall demand confiscation of
their goods, whereby their wiues and children were depriued. It was thought for certaine
that this exces^e had beene committed by the instigation of the superiours. A good
part of the Alpuxarres was in a manner pacified, but the captaines of the garrisons which
were there, and in other neighbour places, as at Almerie, Salobregna, and such like forts,
gouerning themselues, as hath beene said, committed such cruelties and thefts indifferently
vpon the one and the other, attending the comming of D. Iohn of Austria, as they
that had laied aside armes, and submitted themselues, reuolted againe, and ioyned with
Aben Humeia, who became so strong and glorious, as hee bragd that he would not onely
defend the mountaines, but also b^siege the citie of Granado.
D. Iohn d'Austria made his entrie the sixt of April,1569 1569, beeing accompanied by the
marquesse of Mondejar,D. Iohn de Austria comes to Granado. by D. Iohn de Caruaial, D. Tello Gonsall d'Aguilar, Gonsalo Chacon,
the Earle of Miranda, with many other noble men and knights: the marquesse of Velez
would not bee there. Before his lodging there presented themselues about foure
hundred women, widowes, and many poore orphans, Christians, which had beene in
the Moores hands, crying and lamenting in most miserable manner, and demanding iustice
and reuenge for their fathers and husbands which had beene murthered, so as they
could hardly make them retire; but it was done of purpose. The Moores dwelling

in the Albayzin deputed some vnto him, to make their innocency knowne, and yet they
were ill intreated; but especially, they made great complaint of the massacre committed
of their kinsmen in the prisons, as it were in the kings bosome, into the which
they had willingly put themselues. D. Iohn heard them, and made shew that this act displeased
him, comforting and assuring them.Counsellers about D. Iohn of Austria. He had a Councell appointed him, whereof
were the Duke of Sessa, the marquesse of Mondejar, D. Lewis de Quixada President of
the Councell of the Indies, D. Pedro de Desa President of the royall Audience of Granado,
and the Archbishop of Granado, in cases of conscience: all these resolued how they
should proceed in this warre. The marquesse of Mondejar persisting in his opinion, said,
that they must drawe the Moores to the Christian religion by instruction and good examples,Aduice of the Ma^quesse of Mond^ia^.
and to the Kings obedience in doing them iustice, and that they should end the
warre by some good accord: hee held it fit they should drawe them out of the mountaines,
and places of strength, and giue them dwellings in the champane countrie; or if
they left them in their auncients habitations, they should place good garrisons there at
their charge. The President Desa said, that first of all they should clense the citie of Granado
of the Moorish nation,Aduice of the President Desa. and to send them with their families to dwell farther off, to
the end they should not aide the rebels, as they had done secretly, with armes, counsell,
and other things, and that they should take exemplarie punishment of some that had
slaine Christians, and spoyled Churches, and begin first with the inhabitants of Albunuela,
a place from whence the Moores were releeued, with victuals and other commodities.
Most were of opinion, that they should continue the warres, and that occasions
would giue them necessarie and fit aduice. There were three regiments leuied
vnder Antonio Moreno, Hernand de Orunna, and Francis de Mendosa of Alcala de Henares.
There was order taken also for the gouernment of the townes and forts, by
new Election, or confirmation of those that were in charge, all beeing commanded to
containe their souldiers, and to obey the ordinances vpon great paines. The marquesse
of Velez, who was not come to D. Iohn, sent him a note what he had done in his diuision,
and what hee thought remained to be done: hee had staied with his armie at Terques,
and had a designe to march toward Andarax, but D. Iohn sent a Post to stay him.
He had begunne a fort at Rauaha,Def^at of Christians. the which was ouerthrowne by the Moores, who slue
him, a hundred and threescore souldiers, and tooke an Ensigne; whereat D. Iohn was very
much discontented. Aben Humeia was aduertised of all the consultations and resolutions
which were taken at Granado, by them of the Albayzin, and accordingly made prouision
for the warre, and for those places which hee had an intent to defend. Hee also
made three regiments vnder Hanon de Cucuijar, Futey de Lautera, and Zer^a de Cuiar,
Captaines Moores. Hee made his store-house for the warre at Orgiba, hee appointed
a market at Vxixar of Albereta, whither they did bring victuals and marchandise,
and marchants came from Tetuan in the realme of Fez, to sell armes and other commodities.
He made Rio d'Almansora Gouernour of that Quarter which ioyned vpon
the Marquisate of Zenete, and Ierome Malech of the frontier of Guadix and Basa. At Poqueira
and Ferreira Diego L^pes Aben Aboo,Captaines and Counsellers to the Moorish king. vpon the frontier of Orgiba Michel de Granado
Xaba, on the iurisdiction of Luxar and Marchena S^erra de Fitabres Gadoi, and of the riuer
of Alme^ie Aben Meguenun was gouernour, in the valley of Locrin, and the frontier
of Almunexar, Salobregna and Motril, he placed Gironcillo and Rendal for gouernours:
to all which hee gaue Letters Patents signed by himselfe, and with a royall seale.
There were of his priuie Councell, Don Ferdinand ^l Caguer, Dalay Moxarraf, Calderon
of Vxixar, and Hernand Habagui: Farrax Aben Farrax was in disgrace, and
came no more in the Kings Presence, who had threatned to haue him hanged as
a thiefe.
Besides these prouisions, Aben Humeia did hope to bee fortified by the Xeriffe Abda^la
king of Maroc and Fez, and by Vluccyaly gouernour of Algier, whom he did
solicite and intreat, making them great promises, and assuring him that hee should
bee succoured by the great Turkes armie; which charge Vluccialy had taken vpon
him. Hee beganne the warre against Don Iohn by the taking of Peca, whither hee
ledde fiue thousand men, but hee could not take the Castle; and there

were many light skirmishes made on either side.1569 The great Commander who had
charge to bring the gallies, and the regiment of Naples into Spaine, had drawne together
24 gallies, in the port of Genoua, with some other vessels, and went to sea in a doubtfull
time, contrarie to the aduice of the Mariners; for that (said he) they had need of him
in Spaine:Shipwracke of the great Commanders fleet. but he was no sooner at sea, but hee was ouertaken with so furious a tempest,
as some of his vessels perished with their burdens, and the rest were so dispersed, some into
Sardynia, some into Sicilie, and some else-where, as all that preparation prooued vnprofitable.
The great Commander was by chance cast vpon the Island of Maiorca, and
so he past from Palamos into Cattelogne, so as the passage was open for some daies out
of Barbarie into Spaine.
The mountaine of Bentonis is in the countrie of Veles Malaga, vpon the sea towards
the South, a countrie fertill in wines, which they transport into England, and Flanders;
by which trafficke the inhabitants were rich: most of which had their beginning from
Moores, and they did reckon 22. Burroughs well peopled and inhabited: the which had
not risen vntill that vpon certaine reports the officers of Iustice began to vexe them; saying,Defeat of Moores.
that they were aduertised they had commerce and intelligence with Aben Humeia:
Ca^illes of Azeitunes is in this countrie, a strong place and of importance, belonging vnto
the Marquesse of Comare, and there is a certaine Rocke, called Fregiliana the old, whither
a good number of Moores were retired, and had there fortified themselues: whom
Areualo de Cuaco de Veles would go and assaile, but he was repulst with the losse of most of
his men.
The Marquesse of Velez beeing at Verja in the country of Almerie with a good strong
armie,Armie of Aben Humeia defeated. Aben Humeia who had ten thousand men, and among them some Turkes, came
and charged him couragiously, and forced the first gards and lodging of his campe, putting
all into disorder: the which was repaired by the diligence of souldiers well disciplined,
who recouered their places of armes, and repulst this violence of the Moores valiantly,
killing aboue a thousand and fiue hundred as they retired in disorder. There were
among the Turkes of Aben Humeias armie, many which carried girlands of flowers vpon
their heads, saying, that they were sent thither to reuenge Mahomets Martyrs.
The Marquesse had aboue twelue thousand fighting men, and beeing lodged at Adra,
he had commandement to enter into Alpuxarra, where hee came to fight with the
Moores at Vxicar, and then he charged Aben Hume^a at Valot, who was not much weaker
in number then he, yet he was put to rout; but the Marquesse was presently forced to
retire: for the mischiefe was, that as soone as the souldiers had taken any spoyle, they
stole away to carrie it to their houses. Through this disorder there remained not three
thousand men in his campe. D. Anthonie de Luna sackt Albunuela, according to the aduice
of the President D. Pedro de Desa, where he made a great spoyle of goods, and tooke
aboue a thousand and fiue hundred prisoners. According to the auncient custome, the
kings of Spaine should haue the fift of all the spoyles, but they made him bad reckonings.
The commander of Castille came in the end to the road of Velez Malaga, with such Spanish
foot as he could bring out of Italie, and did presently inuest Pegnon de Fregiliana:
there were some good Captaines with him, D. Pedro and D. Martin de Padilla, D. Iohn de
Cardenas brother to the Earle of Miranda, D. Pedro de Zuniga, with others. The Moores
which were lodged there, in a manner without armes, defended themselues notwithstanding
couragiously, and at the first assault slue Pedro de Sandoual, and foure hundred souldiers,
and wounded double the number: but the Spaniards continuing their assaults
with great obstinacie, in the end they forced it,Pegnon of Fregiliana taken by the great Commander. and of foure thousand Moores that were
within the place, there were neere two thousand slaine, the rest escaped, casting themselues
desperately downe the rockes, and many women with them, leaping downe the
precipices like goates, hauing their infants tied at their backes. There were women
slaine in these combats which made head against the assaylants as couragiously as if
they had beene old souldiers. There was also found within the fort three thousand
^oules, old men, women, and children, with much cattel, and great store of bootie.
The riuer of Almansora is also a good and fertill countrie, but the Moores which
dwek there had not rebelled, vntil that they were forced by the insolency of the souldiers,

who sought nothing else but to make them disobedient, by some opposition or defence
against their insolencies and vill^ines.Insolencie of the Spaniards makes the Moores reuolt.
This riuer takes its beginning from a fountaine called Fuen (...), and falles
into the Sea a league from Vera: Veles Rubio and Veles (...) are in this Countrie,
which is great, and hath many habitations bordering vpon Basa on the North
side, it hath the Sea vpon the South, (...) of old Castles and strong by situation. There
entred into this Countrie in Iune foure thousand Moores, of the rebels, to countenance
them that would reuolt, and to root out the rest. First they came to Porcena,
where they found not any Christians of the inhabitants, for being aduertised by a
certaine Priest, they were fled away.
Ierome (...) and H^^on of Cueillar assailed the Castle of Seron, which did belong
to the Marquesse of Villena; this place, that of Oria, and las Cueuas had held good, all
the rest being reuolted. Se^on being beseeged, D. Anthonie Henriques, brother to the
Lord of that place, attempted to relieue it with fiue hundred foot, and sixtie horse,
but hee was chased away,(...) taken by the Moores. lost two hundred men vpon the place, and (...) in
rout. In this charge the Moores got great store of armes, whereof they had good need.
Diego de (...) who was Captaine of the place went forth to seeke succours, but he
was taken, the which being knowne to the beseeged, they yeelded to the Moores,
who slue one hundred and fiftie men that were within it, and made eightie women
slaues. D. Iohn de Austri^ furnished Veles and Oria, and gaue the charge to D. Iohn de
H^ro. And for that they were out of doubt, that the Moores which inhabited in the
Albayzin,Moores put out of Granado. and other parts of the citie, gaue intelligence to them that made warre in
the Alpuxarres and other places, they put them out of the Towne the three and twentieth
of Iune. All were gathered together in the royall Hospitall, which is a great building,
made by Queene Isabell of Castille without the citie, and there a Register was taken
of their houses and goods, which they left to their great greef, for they were very well lodged,
being men of means: and they were despersed into Andalusia: the which bred a great
confusion in their affaires. Aben (...) came neere vnto Almerie, threatning to beseege
it, he made many skirmishes about it, and towards Sa^obregna; but he had not one peece
of Ordnance. Hee wrote vnto D. Iohn of Austria, intreating him to send him his father and
his brother who were prisoners in Granado, and in a manner threatning him, but he did
not much regard it.
To hasten the Turkes succours, without the which no enterprise could succeed
well, hee sent Ferdinand H^baqui to Alger, whereas Vluccialy made a proclamation,
that all men that would might goe freely to this warre, and many presenting themselues,
hee staied them to carrie them to Tunis.Turkes comes to succour the Moores in Spaine. Yet hee pardoned all malefactors
and banished men: and of this sort of people Habaqui ledde foure hundred Harquebuziers
with him, vnder the commaund of a Turke called Hoscein, and of a brother
of his, who imbarked in eight foists laden with munition and armes. H^scein who
was an adu^^turing Souldier, cunning and politike, visited the riuers of Almansora,
and of (...), Sierra Filabres, and all the Alpuxarres; hee found meanes also to
enter into the Citie of Granado, hee was at Guadix and at Basa without discouerie
and then returned into Barbarie, laden with presents: for hee promised to goe to
Constantinople, to make report vnto his Lord what hee had seene of the oppressions
and miseries of the Moores in Spaine. Aben H^m^ia had a designe vpon the towne
of Vera, being commodious for the Turkes descent, but it was releeued by them of
Basa; He ouerranne the Countrie, burnt Cueuas, and spoyled the gardins of the
Marquesse de Velez Lord of that place, hauing aboue ten thousand men in his traine.
But whilest he doth these exploits with more presumption and vanitie to his own then
hurt to the enemie, seeking his pleasures without respect of person, letting them
know that his will was a Lawe, certeine Captaines were offended therewith, whereof
hee that was most incensed was Diego Alguazil, whose cousin Aben (...) held
by force for his Concubine, both hee and the rest calling to minde the manie cruelties
which hee had committed, namely the murther of Michel (...), his father-in law,
of Raphael Arcos, and other Moores of name: whereupon they conspired to kill him

and to doe it with more colour, they published certaine ^etters which hee had
written to D. Alfonso de Granado, and other negoliators of a peace, the which they
had kept and opened, accusing him that hee would abandon the Moores, and betray
them. They did also counterfeit a letter in his name, directed to Aben Aboo,
commaunding him to kill the Captaine of the Turkes, that were come out of Barbarie
to his succours, vpon certaine counterfeit reasons: they shewed this letter
vnto the Turkes, whereat Aben Abo^ was amazed, who thought verily that hee had
written them, whereat the whole company being incensed, they went to Andarax
(where hee was with his Concubine,Death of king Aben Humeia. who was acquainted with this plot:)
there they tooke him, and strangled him, publishing in an assemblie of the Captaines
the causes of this execution, the which they disguised in such sort, as it
was allowed by them, choosing in his place Diego Lopes Aben Aboo to raigne ouer
them,Aben Aboo chosen king of the R^bels. a cruell man, but hee had more iudgement and gouernment than the other,
so as D. Iohn de Austria had more cause to thinke seriously of the affaires of the war.
Hee gaue the charge of the Riuers of Almerie, Bolodui, Almansora, Sierra de Basa,
and Filabres, and of the Marquisate of Zenete to Ierome Malech and to Xoabi;
and Sierra Neuada, the land of Velez, the Alpuxarres, and the Valley of Montojo
of Granado, to Hascien de Gueiar. Hee sent presents to Vluccialy, and to the
Mo^ti of Constantinople, to keepe him in grace with the great Turke, and to bee
a meanes for some succours: he made a regiment of foure thousand men for his gard,
whereof a thousand should be alwaies in gard. At his election he found tenne thousand
men in the armie, and among them six hundred Turkes.
The Marquesse of Mondejar at that time left the affairs of Granado, and went to Valentia,
where he was appointed viceroy, in which charge he continued not long, but past to
Naples to gouern there with like dignitie. The duke of Sesse was chief of the army which
the marquesse was wont to lead; who releeued the Garrison of Orgiba, which Aben Aboo
the new king beseeged, and kept the pace of Lantjaron, where there was a great
skirmish, the which continued long, through the Turkes valour, in the which there
were many slaine of either part. Orgiba was abandoned by the commandement of
D. Iohn, who sent the Captaine of that place with his men to Motrill.
In the Dukes armie, there were many Noble men of marke, as Pagan Doria, brother
to Iohn Andrew, D. Gabriel, and Lewis de Cordo^a, D. Lewis de Cardone, and others,
which armie was appointed to clense the Alpuxarra. In the other part whereas the
marquesse of Veles made warre, D. Iohn would commaund in person, hauing Malech
and Xoabi to make head against him. In these Christian armies there were certaine
couragious Monkes marching in the head of the troupes, who held a Crucifex in one
hand and a naked sword in the other.
The Moores attempted Galere,Galere taken by the Moores. a strong place of situation, belonging to Eurigue,
a league from Guescar, and tooke it. They went to beseege Oria, but they of Lorca
their neightbours (who were alwaies good souldiers) came thither, (...) foure hundred
Moores,Moores defeated. raised the seege, and carried away fiue Ensignes. (...) with
the bodie of his armie by the riuer of Almansora, D. Iohn led his by that of Xenil:
this Riuer runnes by Piuillos, and enters into an other called Aguasblancas, which
together passing by the village of Cene, runne towards Granado, and betwixt these
two riuers is the Mountaine of Guejar, one of the descents of Sierra Neuada, in the
which there kept about foure thousand Moores vnder the Captaines Xoabi, Choconcillo,
Macox, and Moxixar, who ranne euen to the gates of Granado: D. Iohn made them dislodge
and retire farther into the mountaines of Sierra Neuada.
Farrax Aben Farrax was among the Moores that were at Guejar,Farrax Aben Farrax, his miserable estate. in poore and miserable
estate, of whose aduentutur it is fit to make some little mention. Being in disgrace
with king Aben Humeia, and put from all affaires, his miserie had brought him to that despaire,
as hee was ready to yeeld himselfe to the Marquesse of Mondejar, who without
doubt had put him to an exemplarie death: being in suspence, and hauing changed his
minde, hee thought it better to yeeld himselfe vnto the Inquisition, thinking that making
his accustomed submissions, he should haue his life saued at the least. There was a

Moore with him which had beene his companion in the art of dying, to whom hauing
imparted this his designe, exhorting him to doe the like (for hee was no lesse
culpable than he) he liked well of it, and was content to go before to treat with them of
the Inquisition for them both. Farrax hauing instructed him, being to depart that night,
and therefore they were retired into a valley couered with wood to keepe their businesse
more secret, after that he had discoursed long, and reiterated his instructions to this Moor,
he fel a sleep in the wood, the other seeing him fast, thoght that he should make his peace
better if hee slue him, and being resolued, hee tooke a great stone wherewith he gaue
him so many blowes vpon the head, face, and bodie, as hee left him for dead, and
then he went as it is to bee coniectured to Granado.
Farrax being thus pittifully handled, remained two daies neither dead nor aliue in
that Vallie, whereas two Moores passing by, found him, whilest hee yet breathed,
and not knowing what hee was, but onely finding that hee was a Moore, they laied
him for pittie sake vpon one of their horses, and carried him to Guejar, where hee
was lookt vnto and cured; but hee remained so disfigured as his visage had scarce any
shape of a mans, and in this estate hee followed the troupes, liuing of almes, being
known of few men. This was the reward of the chiefe authour of the Moores rebellion.
Returning to Aben Aboo: he had a intent to gather the Oliues vpon the riuer of Boldni,
hauing sent a number of Moorish women thither, with a gard of eight hundred souldiers;Defeat of Moores.
but they were no good gardians, for being charged by the Marquesse of Velez, they
fled with the losse of two hundred of their men, slain vpon the place, and all their women
were taken. Guescar was also relieued by the Marquesse, who slue about fiue hundred of
the Moors. Winter broght many discommodities both to the one and the other, yet the
Marquesse of Velez held Galeres alwaies inuested; but seeing in the Spring that D. Iohn
would come and beseege it himselfe, he retyred: for he was so ambitious as he would haue
the honor of euerie thing that was done where he was. The body of D. Iohns armie which
was inte^ded against the fort of Galere, was made at Guescar, D. Iohn being at Basa, which
is 7 leagues off, where he prouided for all things necessarie. Galere was but a borough
without any wall, but seated among rockes which couered it, being enuironed with
deep precipices, the which the Moors by trauerses and barracadoes had made in a maner
impenetrable, and in th^se deep bottomes the riuer ran, wheras they of the Borogh were
forced to fetch their water; and to the end they might goe thither without danger, the
Moores had made a way like a wall,Galere beseeged and taken. and by this meanes they did water safely. There were
three thousand Moores and Turkes to defend this fort. The church without the borogh
had a high Tower, which serued them both for a watch and a Citadell. D. Iohn brought
his armie thither, and hauing made there batteries, he presently took this church by one
of them. But when he came to the Borough, there was great difficultie to batter it, by reason
of the rocks which did couer it. It was so well defended, as the Spaniards were many
times out of hope to take it: but obstinacy staied them, and made them to continue their
assaults furiously, so as in the end they took it by force, being fauoured by three mines,
which plaid happely to the great losse of the beseeged, who aba^doned the place, and sought
to escape by the rockes and precipices; there were 2400 Moores and Turkes slaine, and
a great booty taken of gold, siluer, and other moueables, with great store of come. There
were many women Moores found there, but for that the Souldiers lingred ^fter them, D.
Iohn caused them all to be slaine in his presence.Women Moores masacred. There were 4500 Christian women and
Children set at libertie, as well those of the Borough, as others which they had brought
from Oria, Castileije and other places thereabours: This victorie was dearly bought, for D.
Iohn of Austria lost many men, but the number is not specified; but of captaines and men
of mark,Spaniards of accompt slaine at Galere by the Moores. there were slaine at sundry assaults, Martin de Lorite, Iohn de Magueda, Baltazar
de Aranda^, Alfonso Beltram, Charles and Frederike of Antillon, D. Iohn d' Castille,
D. Anthony d' Gourmas, Abarca and others. Of wounded were Pedro d' Padilla, Pagan
Doria, the Marques of Fauara, D. Lewis Henriques, D. Lewis d' Auila, D. Pedro de Sotomaior,
D. Diego Vasques de Acugna, Bernardin of Quixada, with many Lieutenants
and Ensignes. This place being wonne, D. Iohn sent to view Seron, but hee lost aboue
fiue hundred men. D. Lope de Figueroa master of the Campe, was charged in another

place by sixe thousand Moores, led by Habaqui and Malech, who got armes to arme aboue
a thousand men. Lewis de Quixada was wounded there, whereof hee dyed soone after:
D. Iohn had a shot on his Caske: but it was of good proofe.
The duke of Sesse armie entred the Alpuxarres,1570 in March one thousand fiue hundred
and seuentie, by Pad^l, to goe vnto Orgiba. The Moores chiefe strength was at Andarax
with their king Aben Aboo, who had set good gards at Lanjaron, and in the West quarter
were Rendal and Macox, two Captaines, with foure thousand Moors. The duke had diuers
skirmishes about Lanjaron, which the Moores held, but in the end they abandoned it. After
which hee led his army to Albacete of Orgiba. In these incounteres there was a Turkish
Harquebuse taken, the Canon whereof was ten spannes long, carrying a bullet which
weighed an ounce and an halfe.
The Moores which were in the Castle of Velez of Benandalla seeing themselues inuested
by the Dukes armie, they corrupted some Souldiers of his campe, who suffered
them to escape with their women and what else they could carrie away. But being
in a place of safetie, they returned vnto the passages betwixt Velez and the campe,
where they spoiled and slue many passengers, and so recompensed themselues largely of
their losses. The fort of Lontegi was also taken from them, but some troupes going from
Aben Aboos campe,Conuoy defeated by the Moores. charged a conuoy which came to the dukes campe, and carried
away many beasts with their burthens, and had made spoile of all, if they had not
been relieued in time.
The two armies coasted one another for a time amidst these mountaines, skirmishing
vnto Campuxan, the Moores bending towards Iubiles, and the duke to Portillo
and Vxixar. The duke had in his Campe about eight thousand men, Aben Aboo
had twelue thousand. The duke to discharge his armie of many vnprofitable mouths,
as souldiers that were hurt, whome hee sent to Guadix to be cured, with some
women and children, whome hee had rescued from the Moores, and a good number
of Moores prisoners, sent away the Marquesse of Fauara, with a thousand foot,
and one hundred horse to gard them, and to bring backe certaine horses, and mules
laden with victuals to the campe: but the Marquesse fell into an ambush which
Piceni and Martel de Zenete Captaines among the Moores had laied for him, where
hee lost all his baggage,Christians defeated by the Moores. and eight hundred of his souldiers, the which fell out vnhappily,
for the dukes armie was in some extremitie for want of victuals, and therefore
sought to passe to Adra, being alwaies coasted by the Moores, who began to growe
souldiers vnder this new king. D. Iohn of Austria had better successe: for he fought with
Habaqui, who was come with seuen thousand Moores to raise him from Seron, and defeated
him.Moores defeated by D. Iohn. At that time Ierome Malech one of their best captaines died of sicknes. Throgh
the fauor of this victorie D. Iohn took Seron and Tyole; he chased the Moores from Porchena,
and then marcht towards Andarax, to seeke out the Moors king with their armie:
betwixt these two armies there were many skirmishes with diuers euents.
In the meane time king Philip came vnto Cordoua, being very desirous to haue this
warre ended in one sort or other: for hee was aduertised that the Turke had great
designes vpon Italie, and for this cause had broken the peace with the Venetians,
the king being solicited by them and other Potentates in Italie, and by continuall
letters from the Pope to ioyne in league with them. Wherefore being forced to send
his gallies, hee must of necessitie send his Brother D. Iohn, whome hee was desirous
to aduance. The Moores who were also aduertised of these things, and therefore out
of hope to be relieued by the Turke, who had other enterprises in his braine, desired, no
lesse than the king, to enter into some treatie of peace. The Gallies and Foistes of
Barbarie came no more to succour them: three galeots which had discharged, come
armes, and Arabian books, Alcarons and other, in the road of Dalias, had bin discouered
and taken by the inhabitants of the countrie: seuen other galeots or foists being come to
the same coast with souldiers, which Hassein a Turke brought out of Barbarie, they returned
vpon a false brute of peace, which had beene spred abroad, both the Moores and
the Christians being desirous of rest. Besides, enuy, disloyalty, and other vices raigning among
the Moors caused a diuision among the^, some of the captains hauing bin sent into

A^rike, sfaied there, and would no more return; many of the common people did the like
king Aben Aboo, and others which held good, were solicited and tempted by promises,
that they should receiue all fauour and good vsage from King Philip, and
they were well pleased also to keepe their pillage, so as they yeelded to enter into
treatie, but there was no cessation of armes. Habaqu^ and some other knights of
the Moores were at Fond of Andarax, where hauing conferred with king Philips deputies
they made an accord vpon these articles.
That Habaqui in the name of Diego Popes Aben Aboo,Treaty of peace with the Moores. and others of whome hee had
power, should kneele at D. Iohns feet, and demaund pardon of king Philip: That they
should yeeld vp their armes and Engines: That they should bee receiued into grace, and
all that was past forgotten: That they should not be wronged by word nor deede,
nor molested by the Inquis^^ion: That they that were reduced should bee sent withall
securitie, with their goods, wiues and children, to such places as should be assigned
them to liue in, for they must leaue the Alpuxarres. According vnto this accord a
submission was made by Habaqui to D. Iohn at Pad^les, and the Ensignes being deliuered
D. Alfonso de Granado Venega went to Aben Aboo, to giue him better assurance;
passing by Alcolea where hee found Xo^ibi they went together to Cadiar,
where hee was well entertained by Aben Aboo and Habaqui, and hauing had much
conference vpon the assurance which D. Alfonso had charge to promise them, such as they
should demaund, they proceeded so farre in their accord, as most of the Turkes that were
in the army were dismist, and sent home well (...).
But after D. Alfonsos departure,Moores after the accord retract. many of these Moores considering better of the
importance of this reduction, began to distrust, passing into Barbarie and returned not;
and for that they had left Aben Aboo in mind to retract, they did solicite the Turkes
and Moores of Afrike, not to fo^beare to succo^r them of Spaine, whereunto they
found many Lords among the Moores verie willing, So as in a short time there
came many vessels to that Coast, bringing souldiers, armes and munition from Barbarie.
The which confirmed Aben Aboo, and others in the resolution they had neuer
to put themselues into the hands of the king of Spaine, nor of his Lieutenants,
beginning to hate and curse them that had dealt in this trea^ise, and especially Hernand
Habaqui.
This confusion among the heads did so amaze the common people of the Moores,
as they came in great troupes to yeeld themselues to the kings mercie, and to his
Gouernours and Captaines, who had commandement to receiue them, and not to
suffer any outrage to bee done vnto them. Others that could escape did more willingly
passe the Sea, for they did not submit themselues but through hunger, and by
an opinion they had conceiued that they could not prosper vnder their heads, nor bee
freed from their miseries by them, seeing they were continually in discord. The armies
were still on foot during these Ambiguities, yet somewhat neglected and weake, for
they still expected when they should bee dismist.
The Duke of Sesse broght his armie before the Castle of Fer, which was a store-house
of Turkes to succour them, and tooke it: D. Sancho de Leua did also take certaine foists.
The Captaines of places ranne wheresoeuer they heard there were any Moores in armes,
which made many to hasten their reduction. Many souldiers being disbanded did not
forbeate the Moores that had submitted, but did spoile them and make their wiues and
children captiues, to keep them, or sell them, for slaues; to preuent the which, they vsed all
diligence to draw them from their ancient habitations to liue farther off in places assigned
them according to the accord, and certaine diuisions which had beene made. The
more to incite the Moores to submit themselues, the President D. Pedro de Desa wrote a
letter of exhortation to the nation of the Moores, in the Arabian ^ong, as if it had beene
some Morabite or Hermite of the law of Mahomet, who persuaded them to barken to a
peace, and to free themselues of so many miseries, causing many copies thereof to be made,
the which being dispersed among that nation, did hasten the reduction of many. Habaqui
seeing that Aben Aboo wet back, and that the party was much diminished, being diuided
among the^selues, went to D. Iohn, and ^old him with great assurance that if he wold giue him

fiue hundred shot, hee would bring Aben Aboo bound vnto him: D. Iohn would not
giue him any men, but hee caused eight hundred Crownes to bee deliuered him,
to leuie them where hee should thinke good, and to performe what hee had promised.
Habaqui being resolute to imploy himselfe for the performance of the accord, came
to Vercheul where his wife and children were, to haue them prepare themselues,
for hee meant to take them from thence, and to carrie them to Guadix: passing by
Iessen, hee saw certaine Moores walking idlely vpon the place, of whome hee demaunded
proudly why they staied to goe vnto those places which were assigned them,
by the treatie of peace. To whome they answered, that they attended the commaundement
of Aben Aboo. And I tell you (replyed hee) that if Aben Aboo be so tedious and
vnwilling,^oldnes of a Moore. I will lead him to D. Iohn of Austria bound at my horse taile. These words
were told to Aben Aboo, by some one of these Moores, whereat being much incensed,
hee sent one hundred and fiftie Turkes, which he had reserued for his gard,
and two companies of Moores, in whome hee trusted, to goe and take him at Vercheul.
Habaqui hearing a noise in the night, got out of his lodging, and beganne
to flie away, who without doubt had escaped, had not his white Turban discouered
him a farre off, which was the cause that they pursued and tooke him.
Being brought before Aben Aboo, hee reproacht him with his presumption and
proud threats against him that was his king; telling him that hee knew well hee
was a Traitour, and that hee sought to make his peace apart with the Christians
and bring all the rest of Moores to the slaughter, or slauerie: whereupon hee caused
him to bee presently led into a secret place,Habaqui stra^gled. and there to be strangled by his
houshold Seruants, and then hee caused his bodie to bee bound vp in a fagot of
reedes and to bee cast into a precipice, where it remained many daies, and no man
knew what became of him.
Being rid of this man, hee sent into all places where the Moores were not reduced,
to aduertise them that they should not submit, putting them in hope by counterfeit
newes of succours by the Turkish armie, and other such meanes, yet hee did
not leaue to write to D. Alfonso of Granado, and to D. Fernand of Barrades, the
Mediatours, that hee continued still in the same minde; but the effects shewed the
contrarie, for a brother of his called Galipe hauing beene defeated, as hee went towards
Ronde and Bentomis with two hundred Souldiers to maintaine the Moores
of that quarter in rebellion, they vnderstood all his practises, how hee did sollicite
the Turkes and Moores of Affrike: That hee made an accompt to haue twelue thousand
men; that hee made prouision of come; that hee had put eight hundred men
into Pitres, and that hee fortified himselfe and prepared for warre. Finally to free
them from all doubt, being prest by letters from Hernand de Barredes, and by mouth
by Hernand Valles de Palacios, who was sent expresly vnto him, to make declaration
if hee would ratifie the Capitulations; hee answered plainely, and after a proud
and disdainefull maner, that they were deceiued who thought hee would put himselfe
into the power of king Philip, or trust to his promises: for the Moores of those
times had sufficient proofes, besides those which their predecessors had left, in what
maner the kings of Castille were accustomed to keepe their faith. This being reported,
the king commaunded they should continue the warre with all violence, and
not pardon any Moore that was armed, but preserue them that were quiet. The duke
of Arcos had the charge to presse them of Ronde and of Sierra Vermeille.Warre renued* with the Moores. The great
Commander was to enter againe into the Alpuxarres, whereas many defended themselues.
But in the end the Moores finding that their head was destitute of means and
Counsel, most of them submitted themselues, and Aben Aboo found himselfe so abandoned,
as he had no care but how to saue himselfe in Barbary, being resolued neuer to
trie king Philips clemency, flying from caue to caue, and from rock to rock betwixt Vercheul
and Treuelles, which are the roughest parts of those mountaines, hauing scarfe 400 men
which followed him: being notwithsta^ding like a troublesom thorn, whereof the king desired
much to be free. Whe^ as it pleaseth god to take away al difficulties, wherewith men are

troubled, he suddenly raiseth occasions, and can giue vnexpected ends to great affaires,
many times by meane instruments.Practises of a Goldsmith to end the warre with the Moores There was a Goldsmith at Granado, called Barrero,
a pleasant man, and well knowne to the Moores and Christians dwelling in the Alpuxarres,
where, before the warre, hee was woont to goe and sell rings of gold and siluer,
and other toyes of his trade, and tooke in exchange from them silke, pearles, and
other things. Barrero returning to his woonted traffique, vpon the reduction of some
burroughes in those mountaines, hee came to Cadiar and to Vercheul, at such time
as the captaine of the garrison, called Galas Rotulo de Villa-Real, hauing taken certaine
Moores, theeues, of Aben Aboos traine, was readie to haue them shot: One of them
knowing Barrero, came and saluted him, and reported his misfortune vnto him, intreating
him to bee a meanes for his deliuerie. The Goldsmith knew this Moore, and demaunded
newes of Aben Aboo, who were about him, and his chiefe counsellors? The
prisoner told him what he knew, and that his most familiar friends were a Secretarie
of his, called Bernardin Aben Amer, and a captaine whom they called Seniz of Vercheul,
but he gaue most credit to Aben Amer. Barrero, who in former time had beene verie
familiar with Aben Amer, thought it fit to write vnto him touching the reduction of
his master, asking the Moore if hee could find meanes to carrie a letter and not be discouered,
and hee would cause him to bee set at libertie. The Moore did promise and sweare
it: Wherefore Barrero hauing acquainted captaine Rotulo with his enterprise, hee
intreated him to keepe this prisoner vntill his returne from Granado, whither he would
goe and aske leaue to conferre with the Secretarie of Aben Aboo, whom he had knowne
long, hoping to draw him to persuade his master to yeeld. The great Commaunder
gaue him leaue to write and conferre, and being returned to Vercheul, hee dispatcht
this Moore with a persuasiue letter to Aben Amer. This messenger could not so
passe the rockes and caues of Vercheul, but hee fell into the hands of Seniz men, who
led him to their master. Beining examined whence he came, and whither he went, hee
aunswered, That he had escaped the hands of the captaine of the garrison of Vercheul
and Cadiar, who held him prisoner. Seniz not beleeuing him, threatened to racke
him: wherewith being terrified, hee sayed, That in truth hee was a prisoner, and that
to saue his life hee had taken vpon him to carrie a letter to Bernardin Aben Amer, but hee
knew not what it contained; and so hee gaue it him. Seniz hauing read it, was verie
well pleased, saying vnto the Moore, That it was happie for him hee had fallen into
his hands; for if hee had gone to Aben Amer, he would haue hanged him as soone as he
had giuen him this letter: That hee meant to send him backe to him that had written
it, willing him to bee faithfull, for hee should bee well rewarded. This poore Moore
being glad, promised to doe any thing that hee should commaund him.
Seniz and Francis Barrero met at a certaine place appointed, and concluded betwixt
them, That Barrero should returne to Granado, and bring a generall pardon in good
forme, to all those that had beene in armes since the treatie made with Habagui, in the
which Aben Aboo should bee expresly named. These letters were dispatcht with all
fauour, wherein nothing was omitted. Barrero hauing brought them, and deliuered
them to Seniz, it happened that Aben Aboo was aduertised of this conference, wherewith
hee was much discontented, and came in the night with a small traine to the
caue where Seniz retired himselfe, leauing his people a little way off, in a passage
vnder the rocke, keeping two Moores onely with him, whom hee made to stay at
the entrie of that naturall caue, which was in the top of the mountaine of Huzun, aboue
Vercheul and Mecine of Bombaron. Hee demaunded verie disdainfully of Seniz,
Who had giuen him leaue to treat with the enemie? You, aunswered Seniz,
and it is in consequence of former conferences, the which, I tell you, wee must continue
and end; and therefore let vs not loose the opportunitie to recouer king Philips
fauour, and let vs not through had counsell seeke our owne ruines: putting instantly
into his hand these letters of pardon, the which Aben Aboo reiected, crying out,
That it was nothing but villanie and treason, offering to goe forth to call his men. One
of them which hee had left at the entrie of the caue would haue come in, but he was

put backe, and throwne downe a Precipice, the other fled, and hee himselfe was
stayed to reason with him; but he was in such a rage, as hee would not heare any thing:
so as Seniz seeing his obstinacie, resolued to kill him, and lifting vp a long harquebuse
which hee had in his hand, hee gaue him such a blow on the head, as he ouerthrew him,
and then he and his men stabd him with their daggers.Aben Aboo king of the Moores slaine. They which attended him, being
aduertised by the Moore which had fled, That they had slaine his companion, and
that he thought they had done as much vnto the king, retired. This done, Seniz sent
to aduertise Francis Barrero thereof, and that hee should send a moyle to carrie the kings
bodie to Vercheul; the which was done, and Seniz inuited to come with all assurance
to the garrison, where hee was entertained, and much made of by Leonard Rotulo,
brother to captaine Galas, then absent; and then hee and Barrero went vnto the citie,
whither they caused the bodie to be carried, where they had a joyfull entrie made
them.
The head of Aben Aboo was put in a cage of yron, and set ouer the citie gate which
lookes towards the Alpuxarres: The bodie, being quartered, was hung vpon the highwayes.Troubles of the Moors specified
After which there was not any Moore found to make head; all layed aside
armes, and submitted themselues to the kings mercie, according to the generall pardon
which was graunted to Francis Barrero. But they were all drawne out of the mountaines,
and the townes of Granado, and thereabouts, and sent into plaine countries, and
more accessible, to inhabit; as the Emperour Traian did with the auncient Spaniards,
who were accustomed to rebell often, vpon the assurance of their townes and castles
built vpon the edge of the mountaines, the which he caused to be rased, and commanded
by an Edict, that they should not build any more but in the plaines.
Thus ended the warre of the Moores of Granado, in Nouember 1570, hauing continued
neere two yeares, verie daungerous and difficult, being rashly caused by the
ill vsage of them that they call old Christians in Spaine, by the importune pursuits
of the Clergie and Inquisition, and by the bad administration of justice, and insolencie
of the ministers there of; and no lesse inconsiderately entertained by the impatiencie
of the Moores, and augmented by their obstinacie and ignorance, which suggested
wicked and monstrous conceptions. The charge and losse was great, for there was aboue
fiue millions of crownes of the kings treasure spent in this warre. The interest of priuat
men, and the spoyle and vnpeopling of the countrey, was inestimable, in the which
aboue thirtie thousand Christians lost their liues. As for the Moores that were slaine
of all ages and sexes, the number cannot be saied; for a great realme might haue beene
peopled therewith. If they had been intreated with more mildnesse and humanitie,
without doubt they might easily haue kept them in obedience, and by little and little
might haue made them leaue that which was vnpleasing or scandalous in their manner
of liuing: and as for religion, they should bee instructed with more care and charitie,
causing that injurious contempt which is ordinarie in Spaine and other places, of
them that are newly come to the knowledge of Iesus Christ, to cease, being vnpleasing
vnto God.
King Philip being somewhat freed from cares by the end of this warre with the Moores
 of Granado, hee would haue his mariage consummated with Anne of Austira,Mariage of king Philip with his neece. his
neece, daughter to his sister and to the Emperour Maximilian, for the which he obtained
a dispensation from the Pope, according to the vse of that holy Church. She past
through the Low Countries, and was receiued by the duke of Alba at Nymeghen
with great honour, who conducted her to Brussels, and so to Flessingue, where shee imbarked
in October, and within eight dayes arriued happily in Biscaie, being accompanied
by the Archdukes Albert and Wenceslaus, her brethren, being verie young. Shee
was receiued there by the cardinall of Seuille, whom the king had sent thither to doe
that office. The king entertained her at Segouia, with that state that was befitting
the greatnesse; then passing on to Madrid, whereas the widow Queene of Portugall
met them, they were maried with great solemnitie.
The king of Spaine (as wee haue said) was solicited to enter-into league with the

Pope, and the Venetians, against whom Selym the great Turke, picking a quarell, had declared
warre. And for that the danger of this warre required aid, the Pope sent a Nuntio
into Spaine, which was Lewis Torres, clerke of the chamber, with speciall order from
him to draw the king into this league, but aboue all, to craue the assistance of his gallies
for that present yeare, that being ioyned with them of Venice, they might goe and make
head against that mightie fleet which the Turke had sent to sea. The king knowing
how much it did import himselfe and the whole state of Christendome,King of (...) sends his (...) to assist the ^^netions. being moued
with many speciall considerations, hee graunted his gallies, which were then readie in
Italie. Wherefore he sent a speciall commission to Iohn Andrew Doria, That according
to the Popes pleasure he should go, as head of those gallies, to Messina; but he gaue
him no direction, that hee should goe from thence to Corfu, to ioyne with the Venetian
armie, and with the Popes gallies, which were commaunded by Mars Anthonie
Colonna, and that hee should leaue the commaund of all vnto Colonna, being lent by the
king vnto his Holinesse: the which being not well specified, was a great prejudice to the
armie that yeare. But the businesse of the league being treated of in the kings Councell,
with great deliberation, was not so easily concluded, notwithstanding that Torres,
and Leonardo Donata, a Senator of great worth, sent from the State of Venice into
Spaine, did solicite it verie earnestly: but the importance of the businesse, the ordinarie
disagreement which is found in all Councels consisting of men of diuers complexions,
and the naturall slownesse of that nation, made those embassadours to spend many
monethes in vaine, and did somewhat coole the ardent desire the king had to satisfie
the Pope and that Commonweale, as he did afterwards shew ^y the effects.
But to come to the cause of this warre. The Turke had sent a Chaous to the Venetians,
that they should, without delay, deliuer vnto him the island of Cypres, which did
belong vnto him, as hauing succeeded to the rights of the Emperours of Constantinople,
the kings of Ierusalem, and of the auncient kings of Syria and Aegypt, the which
(said hee) they had gotten away.Warre (...) by the (...) against the ^^netians. The which hauing refused, he denounced war against
them, wherein they had great difficulties, being surprised, for that it was before the succours
^ame which they had begged from the king of Spaine, the Pope, and other princes,
who performed not their promises but verie late, after the losse of Nicosia, and all
they had in that island; euerie one selling the succours which hee had promised in balancing
the interest they had to oppose against the Turke, and seeking to contribute
with some aduantage for his owne particular. But the next yeare there was a league
made, as you shall heare, by the which D. Iohn of Austria, the kings brother, was chosen
to be Generall of the confederates armie against the Turke.
The enterprise which the Turke made vpon Cypres, and the battell at sea, which happened
vpon this occasion, is memorable, and merits a particular relation in this historie
of Spaine, for that the power and meanes of king Philip did much auaile, and D. Iohn
of Austira, his brother, had the honour to be Generall of the armie at sea, and woon a
famous victorie.
The island of Cypres was in truth a remainder of the Empire of Constantinople,Cypres an island and a realme. and
of the realme of Ierusalem, erected by the French in their holy warres, and came by the
gift of Richard king of England, who had conquered it from the Emperours of Constantinople,
or rather by purchase or exchange, to the famous house of Lusignan in France,
who enioyed it some generations. Among the kings of this familie, there was one Peter
the first of that name, who was valiant, and went into diuers parts of the world; but for
some tyrannies, and by the conspiracie of his vnchast wife, who was of the house of Arragon,
he was slaine by his subiects: to whom Peter the second succeeded; in whose time
there grew great contention, with notable murthers, betwixt the Consuls of the Venetian
and Genouois, nations traffiking in Cypres; and the Consul of the Genouois was
by his commaundement cast out of the windowes of his palace, in fauour of the Venetian:
wherefore the Genouois being then strong at sea, sent a great armie to Cypres,
sackt the island, and seised vpon Famagosta: falling to an accord, the Genouois carried
Iames the kings vncle with his wife, away in hostage. Peter being dead, Iames was deliuered,
and raigned in Cypres, and vpon some rights, caused himselfe to bee crowned, and

called king of Ierusalem and Armenia,1570 although that he possessed not any thing. His son
named Ia^us, for that he was born a Genoua, which they cal in Latin Ianua, succeeded him,
who was taken by Melech Sala, Sultan of Aegypt, to whom he paid for his ransom 125000
ducats of gold, and a yerely pention by way of tribute. After him Iohn his sonne raigned, a
man of no value, who, among other wiues, had maried one of the bloud royall of the Paleologui,
named Helene, by whom he had a daughter called Charlotte, who was maried to a
prince of Portugal: he tooke the gouernment from his mother in law Helene, and therefore
she caused him to be poisoned.Lewis of Sauoy king of Cypres. Charlotte tooke to her second husband Lewis of Sauoy
earle of Genoua, and seeking to raigne, a bastard brother of hers, called I^^es, opposed
himselfe, saying, the women did not raigne in Cypres.
This quarell being debated before the Sultan of Aegypt, who (as superour of
that realme which payed him tribute made himselfe Iudge) gaue sentence in fauour of
Iames, and put him in possession, chasing Charlotte and her husband out of the island.
This (...) maried with Katherine Cornari, a Venetian, who was adopted by the Seigniorie
of Venice for the daughter of S. Marc, and had an hundred thousand ducats
for her dower. This Iames, being the second of that name, dyed in the yeare 1473, leauing
the queene his wife with child, hauing ordained by his Will, that his after birth,
if it were a sonne, should bee heire to the realme. It was a sonne, and hee was named
Iames the third, being acknowledged and crowned by the nobles and people of Cypres,
for their king, as soone as hee was borne; but hee died at the end of the yeare:
and then there grew a diuision in the realme for the Regencie and gouernment
thereof, the which was ended by a resolution taken by the Estates, That the widow
Queene should raigne and gouerne with the counsell of eight men that should
bee chosen; the which continued fifteene or sixteene yeares. Considering afterwards
with what difficultie they should maintaine themselues against the enterprises
of the Sultans raigning in Aegypt, and in all Syria, the Queene and the Councell hauing
againe assembled the Estates and the feudataries of the countrey, they concluded
make donation of the island to the Seigniorie of Venice, which was rich and
 strong, and had meanes to defend them,Right of the Seigniorie of Venice to Cypres. sending the Queene to Venice, to signifie
the decree, and to carrie this goodly present, in the yeare 1489, where shee remained:
and then they sent onely a Lieutenant, and certaine officers, for the Seigniorie.
Thus this donation is found written in the Annales of the Cypriots: But others say, that
when as king Iames the second was dead, the Venetians being aduertised, that he had appointed
the infant which should be borne, and the mother together, to be heires vnto the
realme, and the one if the other failed, the Venetians sent some of their Senators thither,
as tutors to the king, and at the intreatie of the Venetian queene, who had a desire to quit
her right vnto the Seigniorie: and that this young king being dead within the yeare, she
retired her selfe to Venice. Howsoeuer it were, they enioyed it aboue fourescore yeares.
Although that this commonweale be famous for their wisedome in the gouernement of
their Estates,Tyrannies of the nobilitie ouer the people in Cypres. yet they had in time suffered the nobilitie of the countrey to vsurpe a certaine
authoritie ouer the common people, which exceeded, so as their condition did not
differ much from slaues, for they were beaten, sold, and slaine, at the pleasure of great and
couetous men, without mercie: the which had bred a desire in the people to change their
master. Whereunto they adde another quarell, which was often made vnto the Senat by
the great Master of Malta, That some priuat men among them had appropriated vnto
themselues the Commaunderies of the Order of S. Iohn,Vsurpations vpon the religion of Malta. in that island, and had made them
hereditarie to their houses, whereof they gaue them no satisfaction. Which had made
the great Master, la Valett^, to countenance an enterprise, which was made to take that
island from them, and to make a Maltois borne king there, who had his beginning from
Greece, named Basilic, much fauoured by the great Turke, and who for his valour and
merits had b^ene made by him Vaiuode, or Prince of Transiluania. But the matter being
discouered, it was disappointed, and quenched, by the punishment of some,
and a better gard set; and yet they did not suppresse the tyranuies of the nobilitie ouer
the poore people. Who for that cause did still animate the Turke to send an armie into
Cypres, with assurance of good successe; for he should find the inhabitants of the countrey

(...). This was then the cause which had moued S^ltan (...) to
(...) this yeare, the which hee coloured with his old rights of (...)
and Aegyp^* and other (...) vanities, (...) forth his armie (after the returne of
his Chaous (...) from Venice) to inuade ^his island, where they landed a great number
of Turkes,Armie of Turks in Cypres. horse and foot, in Aprill, (...) called S^lmes, finding no resistance, so
as within few dayes they were aboue foure (...) thousand fighting men^ for the tray^ed
bands, the Tymariots of Syria, Aegypt, and of Natolia, which were neere vnto the sea,
and in like (...) the higher p^^uin^es, euen vnto the ri^er Euphrates, had beene commaunded
to come vnto certaine ports, whereas thirtie gallies which Aly Bassa had left
after his first landing* and some boats to carrie horses, went to receiue them, and to transport
them into the island: The which continued many dayes, and the Venetians could
not hinder it, notwithstanding that they had sent about an hundred and fiftie sayle to
sea, vnder the commaund of (...) Zane, who lay about Corfu and Dalma^ia, which was
opposite, there being an infectious disease fallen among their gallie-slaues and souldiers
that were newly leuied, and not accustomed to the sea, whereof a great number died* Afterwards
Iohn Andrew Dor^a being come with fiftie galli^^ of Spaine and Sicile, and Marc
Anthonie Colonna with the ^opes and others; hauing comm^^ndement to fight with the
Turtes armie before they l^nded in Cypres, they joyned with that intent with those of
V^nide, which were in the stand of Candle: but they vsed such delayes, as the Turkes
had landed in Cypres, and besieged Nicos^^, battered and taken it before they weighed
anker, or had any newes of the taking thereof, and being aduertised, there was then no
question to fight with them at sea but rather to land, and to giue battell to the (...);
but the partie was not equall^* Wherefore Doria, Colon^a, and the other Commanders of
the succours, tooke counsell to returne into Italie, the Commaunders of the Vene^ian
fleet contenting themselues to keepe thir ports and other islands: yet they suffered much
in this retreat by ^empest^, in the which the Venetians lost eleuen gallies, and Marc Antho^i^
Colonns two, whereof the one, being the Admirall, was burnt with lightning. They had
fortified (...) ^easonably ^ell, but it was ill furnished with men of defence, although
it were full of people; for they made an estimate, that there liued in that citie aboue foure-score
thousand persons,Nicosia ill prouided. but there were not fifteene hundred souldiers, and verie few horse
of the nobilitie of the coun^^ey: yet they maintained the siege fiue and fortie dayes as
well as they might, but ^hey ne^er made sallie nor skirmish, as is vsuall when a towne is
inuested by an enemie: so as being ba^tered, and an assault giuen, it was not forced, but in
a manner taken without resistance. There was a great slaughter made of all them that
were found in armes, but there were more made slaues, and the towne was abandoned to
the spoile, whereas the Turkes fou^d an incredible wealth. Aboue all, the Turkes had a
great bootie of (...) women and maids,Resolution of a gentlewoman. among the which there was a gentlewoman, who
for despight to see her selfe reduced into seruitude, had the courage to set fire on the powder
in a ship into which she and many others were put, so as they were all burnt, and two
other vessels that were joyning vnto it.
Mustafa, who was Gene^all of the Turkes armie, hauing taken Nicosia, he left Musafe
Bassa with 4000 men for the ga^d thereof, and then he marcht with his armie towards Famagosta,
the onely place that was forrified in the whole island, the which was held to bee
much richer than Nicosia, and therfore it drew so many Turks thither from all part, as by
the common opinion there were at this siege aboue 200000 men. He made his first lodging
three miles from the towne,Famagosta besieged. on the 18 of September. There was no hope to win this
place by threats or promises, where in they vsed great art. They found greater difficulties
in their approch^^ than they had done at Nico^ia, they of the towne sallying forth and skirmishing
with them continually. But in the meane time they had receiued aduertisement,
that the Christian armie was joyned in Candie, which made the Turkes feare, that they
would soone offer to succour Cypres, and that they would land an armie: so Mustafa going
to counsel with Pialy and Al^ the other co^manders, it was resolued, That Mustafa should
fortifie his lodging at Famagosta, and then passe to Nicosia, to repaire the ruines, and augment
the garrison; and that Pialy shold go to sea with the fleet, maintaining the reputation

of the victorie gotten at Nic^sia, and the honour of the great Turke with a new victorie
at sea; but they were soone after aduertised by two fregats, That the Christian armie being
come to Castelrazo, and hearing of the successe of Ni^osia, were returned to Candie.
Whereupon their fleet also returned, to giue better order for their affaires, both for the
wintering of their men at land, and for the returne of the fleet to Constantinopte, Pialy
desiring to enter triumphantly into that citie with the spoyles gotten in Cypres, where he
arriued the sixteenth day of December.
In this time Vluccialy king (...) Alger had fallen into warre with the king of Tunis,King of Tunis expelled by Vluccialy. who
(as wee haue saied) was ^^udatarie to the king of Spaine, and being come to fight, Vluccialy
was victor, and the other flying away, with great difficultie, recouered Goulette,
with his wife and sonnes: and the enemie, being fauoured by this occasion, and by the
inconstancie of the Moores, made himselfe lord, without any toyle, of the citie of Tunis,
and of Bise^^a; the which did afterwards draw the king of Spaine into a new warre,
to restore him to his realme, flying to his Maiestie for aid, as his father had done to the
Emperour Charles the fift.
The king of Spaine desirous to satisfie the Popes desire,1571 and to auoyd tediousnesse in
 the conclusion of the league, had referred the treatie thereof to Rome,League concluded betwixt the Pope, the king of Spaine, and the Venetians. giuing the
charge in his name to Anthonie Perreno^, cardinall (...), and to Francis of Toledo,
cardinall Paccheco, ioyning with them Iohn de Z^^iga his embassadour at Rome. In the
end, after many difficulties, the league was concluded the twentieth day of May, with
these articles: That the king of Spaine should furnish and hundred gallies, the Venetitians
should arme as many, and the Pope (vnder whom marcht the other princes and potentates
of Italie) should enter for their part, That they should entertaine fiftie thousand
foot, and foure thousand and fiue hundred horse; and with this power they should goe
and assaile the Turke in his owne countrey, but especially in the island of Cypres. That
towards the charge of this armie and the equipage, the king of Spaine should contribute
a moitie, the Venetians a third part, and the Pope a (...): and if the Pope should not be
able to furnish it, whatsoeuer should be wanting the king should beare three fift parts,
and the commonweale of Venice two: and that D. Iohn d' Austria should be Generall
of the whole armie.
After the conclusion here of the Pope sent cardinall Alexandrino, his Legat, into Spain,
to treat with the king as well touching the execution of the league,Cardinall Alexandrino sent Legat into Spaine. and some other priuat
businesse, as to goe into Portugal, to procure aid from that king. The king of Spaine
receiued him with great honour, and treated with him touching the execution of the
league, seeming to bee resolued to bend all his forces against the Turke: and therefore
he commaunded D. Iohn to stay in Italie, after that yeares nauigation, to be more readie
with the armie in the Spring, and that his ministers at Rome should resolue in euerie occasion
concerning the league, as they should thinke best, without expecting any new
order from Spaine. From thence he past into Portugall, to treat in like manner with the
king D. Sebastian concerning the league.Disposition of Sebastian king of Portugall. This young prince was bred vp in generous
thoughts to purchase much glorie by making warre against Infidels, and therein to exceed
his predecessors, hauing in himselfe a naturall disposition to warre, an able bodie,
and practised in those painefull exercises which belong vnto warre, hauing beene alwaies
laid before him, by the Iesuites which instructed him, That all his enterprises should bee
for the sole benefit of Christendome, they had made his mind as religious as his owne
nature and the exhortations of his noblemen had made him warlike, so as hee did not
thinke or reason of any thing but of warre. And for that the example of his predecessors
did represent vnto him in his sleepe the honourable victories and glorious conquests they
had made in Afrike and the East Indies, hee in like manner directed all his thoughts to
that end.
The Legat Alexandrino finding him in this disposition, did easily draw him to enter into
this league against the Turke: who not onely promised to send his gallies well appointed,
to the Christians armie, but he would also annoy Sely^ with another great nauie at
Suez, and other places held by the Turkes in the red sea, and in the gulph of Persia: and

moreouer, the Pope desiring to breake the marriage betwixt Marguerite of Valois, and
the king of Nauarre, he gaue commission vnto the Cardinall to moue this marriage vnto
the King of Portugall, the which would haue beene somewhat difficult, if the king
had not beene much deuoted to the Pope, who at his intreatie layed aside a strange resolution;
which was, that he would not heare speake of a wife, because he would not be
held effeminate, to the great griefe of his grandmother, his vncle, and the wisest of his
Nobilitie, who desired to see some issue of him, and the succession of the realme assured.
In the end he was content to take this French ladie,King of Portugal content to take Marguerit of Valois to wi^e. neither desired he any other dowrie,
but a generous resolution in king Charles to enter in the league. Matters beeing thus setled
in Spaine, the Cardinall, according to his commission, past thorough France, for the
league and marriage, but he found no meanes to effect either: whereupon he returned
into Italy.
Don Iohn of Austria being much pleased with this honorable charge, came from Spaine
to Genoua, where he stayed not long, but arriued on the ninth of August at Naples,
bringing with him from the Court, the great Commander of Castile, with the title of
his Lieutenant,Noblemen with Don Iohn in the army. and chiefe Councellor, Fernando Cariglia, Earle of Pliego, his chiefe Steward,
D. Francisco d' Ibarra, D. Pedro Velasco, D. Michell Moncada, Gil d' Andrada, Carlo
Spinelli, who had followed him as an aduenturer against the Moores, with many others.
With these there ioyned the Dukes of Parma and Vrbin, Don Antonio Carrafa, duke of
Mondragon, the Marquis of Carrara, D. Pompee of Lanoy, Vincentio Carrafa, Prior of
Hongary, the Earle of Sarno, the Marquis of Auila, Paul Iourd^in Vrsin, the Earle of S.
Fleur, Ascanio de la Corne, and Paul Sforza. Beeing in Naples, Cardinall Granuell, the
Viceroy, who in that action had the authoritie of Legat, deliuered vnto D. Iohn the Standard,
as Generall of the Church, the which the Pope had blest, who solicited his departure
towards Messina by many embassages, where the whole fleete should ioyne, and
whether Marc Antonio Colonna was gone long before with twelue gallies of Florence,
armed by the Pope, and three of the Order of S. Iohn.
But to returne to the seege of Famagosta, Mustapha sought by all meanes possible to
get the counterscarpe, the which was valiantly defended by Marc Antonio Bragadino, and
Astor Baglioni, the one hauing charge of the gouernement, the other of the garrison, but
in the end the Turkes wonne it.Batteries of Famagosta. About the midst of May, they planted fiue batteries,
and had made ten forts. They had in the beginning aduertised the Seigneury of Venice
in what state they stood, who sent them a supply of seuenteene hundred men, with victuals
and munition by Marc Antonio Quirini, who past valiantly through the Turkes gards,
and returned: these succors were commanded by Lewis Martinengo. The Turkes continued
their batteries with great obstinacie, and had giuen foure assaults, where the beseeged
repulst them valiantly, but with great losse of either side: the beseeged hauing held
out till the 20 of Iuly, beeing now prest with great hunger and want, the number of
their souldiers beeing diminished to eight hundred, and those much tyred; most of the
Grecians beeing dead, either with fighting, or with the continuall toyle. Beeing terrified
with so great miseries, and out of hope of any more succors, some of the chiefe of the citie
besought Bragadino,Speech to Bragadino at Famagosta. that he would incline to some accord, seeing he had made so
good proofe of their faith and constancie in that seege: No man would euer hold them
vnworthie of commendation, if (after they had endured so many assaults, and suffered so
much penurie, with want of munition, after the losse of so many souldiers and citizens,
and finally, beeing without all hope of succours, they had prouided at the least, for the
liues of their children which remayned, and for the honour of poore miserable women:
that he would not in recompence of their deuotion, which they had alwaies shewed to
the common-weale of Venice, be the cause of the totall ruine of their citie, and suffer
their wiues and children, who had spent so much bloud, and offered their bodies to death
for their seruice, to become a shamefull prey to their Turkish lust, there remaining no
hope of health, but by the meanes of some accord: That it was a thing worthie of a wise
Noblemen (as he was) to choose the least of euils: And last of all to remember, that it was
held a brutish crueltie, and no valour, to runne headlong to a certaine death, where there
is no hope of life.
Bragadino knew that their request was just, and that their extremities were great: yet
forcing his owne nature, and desiring to preserue the realme, which depended wholly vpon
the losse of that place, he did not thinke it possible that the Senat would neglect so
weightie a businesse, and not send the succours which had beene promised. Wherefore
hee would not yeeld to their demaund, but fed them with good words, putting them
in hope of present succours, dispatching a fregat presently into Candie, to aduertise the
Seigniorie of their extremities.
 In the end of Iulie the Turks gaue an assault which continued fiue houres: but the besieged
seeing there was no meanes to endure another,Famagosta yeelded to the Turkes. hauing but seuen barrels of powder
left, they began to treat of an accord, and hauing made a truce the first of August, the
next day they gaue hostages of either side. The conditions were:
That the citie should be yeelded to the Turkes, the persons, armes, and goods of souldiers
and citizens being safe, who might remaine there, and liue in the laws of Christ, and
not be wronged in their honours nor substance.
That such as would depart might haue free passage into Candie, and three yeares respite,
and that the souldiers should be garded by the Turkish gallies, that no outrage
should be done them, and that they might carrie with them fiue peeces of ordnance, and
three of their best horses.
That they should not make any Mosques of their churches, nor charge the citizens with
any carriages or tenthes.
Mustafa signed these conditions, and the souldiers began to imbarke in the gallies and
other vessels which the Turks had sent into the port, and on the fift day at night Bragadino
hauing sent the keyes to Mustafa by cont Nestor Martinengo, he went himselfe in person
with Astor Baglioni, Iohn Antonio Quirini, Andrew Brigadino, cont Lewis Martinengo,
with other Commaunders of great worth. Mustafa receiued them, in shew, with
great honour, and causing them to sit downe, hee discoursed with them of diuers
things, at last he said, That the Christians which had imbarked to goe from Famagosta,
the night before they meant to passe into Candie, and to other places belonging to the
Venetians, had cruelly and treacherously slaine all the Turkish slaues which they had, and
that three had escaped with great difficultie out of the citie, to aduertise the Bassa thereof:
And therefore he had giuen order, that the Turkes should not goe out of the hauen
with their vessels, before they had good caution for their securitie, that they should
not be slaine, or made slaues in Candie, or any other place. Whereunto Bragadino answered,
That it was not in the accord to giue any hostages, and therefore he meant not
to doe it, denying absolutely that there were any Turkes slaine, as he had said. Mustafa
was much altered with this answer, and made a signe with his hand, that he should come
neere him; then he caused his interpreter to speake certaine words vnto him in his eare,
which were not heard, nor yet Brigadinos answer: but he seemed more furious than a Tigre,
and striking Marc Antonio vpon the head, he and all the rest were presently taken, being
all vnarmed: for it is a custome among the Turkes, that no stranger comes vnto them
with his armes.Men of worth treacherously put to death by Mustafa. Then causing them to be led out of the tent, he caused Astor Baglioni,
Andrew Bragadino, Iohn Antonio Quirini, Lewis Martinengo, and the knight del
Haste, to bee cut in peeces in his presence, one after another, Marc Antonio being reserued
for a more horrible death. Cont Hercoles Martinengo being there in hostage, was
saued by one of the Bassaes Eunuches, who tooke him for his slaue. The souldiers
which were in the campe, to the number of three hundred, were all slaine, and those
that were imbarked were made slaues.
Two dayes after Mustafa entred into Famagosta,Death of Marc Antonio Bragadino. and hauing caused Bragadinos
eares to bee cut off, when hee was taken prisoner, hee made him to bee set vpon
the maine yard of the Admirals gallie of Rhodes, to bee a spectacle to the Christians
that were there in captiuitie. In the end hee caused him to bee set vpon the
pillorie in the market place, and there to bee flayed aliue by a Iew; this lord shewing
still a noble resolution, and full of Christian pietie, neither did hee, during
all his torments and disgraces which they did vnto him, shew any signe of feare
or basenesse, still reproaching that treacher with the breach of his faith euen vnto

his death. Then hee caused him to be quartered, and one of them to bee set vpon either
batterie: his skinne was stuft with straw, and hung at the yard of one of his galliots,
being first a miserable spectacle to all the coast of Soria, and then to Selim in Constantinople.
Thus after threescore and fifteene dayes batterie, and many assaults, the
Turkes hauing spent an hundred and fiftie thousand shot of great ordnance, Famagosta
was taken.
D. Iohn of Austria came the foure and twentieth of August to Messina,D. Iohn d' Austria comes to Messina. being receiued
by the two other Generals, Colonna and Veniero, with great honour; where, all the
forces of the league not being yet arriued, he called the two Generals, with some others
of greatest judgement in martiall affaires, to counsell, to resolue what they had to doe:
but for that their opinions were diuers, it was ordered, that they should set them downe
in writing, with their reasons; but the resolution was deferred vntill the arriuall of the
rest of the gallies. On the first of September Iohn Andrew Doria arriued with twelue
gallies, hauing imbarkt Germanes and Lombards at Spetie, after whom came the marquesse
of S. Crux with thirtie gallies from Naples, and the next day Quirini and Canale
with threescore from Candie: soone after there came some ships from Naples laden with
men and munition, and some gallies from Palermo, conducted by Cardona; but some other
vessels could not come so soone, being left to imbarke three thousand Italian foot,
and 1000 Spaniards that were at Otranto.Number of Christians fleet at Messina. There were at Messina the eight of September
twelue gallies of the Popes, 81 of the king of Spaines, with twentie ships of burthen
(some say twentie fiue) one hundred and eight gallies of the Seigniorie of Venice, six galleasses,
and two ships; three gallies of Malta, and three of the Order of S. Lazaro: so as
there were in the whole fleet two hundred and seuen gallies, six gallnasses, and two and
twentie ships, besides foists and other smaller vessels, and in them at the least twentie
thousand fighting men, with victuals and munition sufficient. Those that had chiefe
charge in this armie, besides the Generals, were these, Ascanio de la Corna was Campemaster
generall for the king of Spaine, the earle of S. Fiora was Generall of the Italians,
the Colonels were cont Paulo Sforza, the earle of Sarno, and Gasper Toraldi; the Colonels
of the Dutch were the earle of London, and Vinciguerra of Arco: And of the fleet,
Iohn Andrew Doria was Generall of his owne gallies, which the king paied, D. Aluaro
de Bassan, marquesse of S. Crux, gouerned them of Naples with the like title, D. Iohn of
Cardona them of Sicile, and D. Cesare d' Aualos the ships: Gabrio Serbelloni was Generall
of the ordnance. The names of the rest of the Commaunders I omit to auoid tediousnesse.
The Pope sent Iohn Paulo Odescalco to Messina, to hasten their departure, and to inrich
them with many indulgences, being to fight against the enemies of the holy Church.
Then after a solemne procession they went againe to counsell.Resolutio^ of the Christian armie There were many things
propounded, whereon they discoursed long with great judgement; but in the end the exhortations
of Colonna, and of the Venetian commanders, made D. Iohn resolue, who had a
desire to do something worthie of himselfe, and the expectation which was of that great
fleet, to goe and fight with the enemie. Wherefore they parted from Messina the 16 of
September: at night they came to S. Iohns ditch, where he gaue order how they should
faile, staying there the next day for certaine vessels which had staied behind for some necessaries,
and also for D. Giles d' Andrada, whom D. Iohn had sent some daies before to learne
some newes of the enemie; by whom he vnderstood, that they were gone towards Valona:
but to be duely informed of his course, the same knight was presently sent backe againe.
The Venetians were verie desirous to aduance, fearing that the dangerous time for
failing drawing neere, there would some storme arise, and make all their attempts fruitlesse
for that yeare. After some foule weather and contrarie winds, they came to Cape S. Maria,
hauing first met with a fregat, who brought them newes of the great need they of Famagosta
had of present succours, and withall he did certifie them of the state of Candie,
and that the Turks armie was gone towards the gulph of Lepanto. Being come to Corfu
on the 25 of the moneth, they were troubled to see many of their gallies behind, besides
those that the marquesse of S. Crux had caried to Otranto for 3000 Italian foot, and the regiment
of Spaniards in Naples. They wanted also their ships, who were sent before with

souldiers, and other necessaries, parting from Messina a day before the rest of the armie,
but beeing hindered by foule weather, they could not come in time to the battell: within
two dayes the galleasses and some gallyes arriued, the which had beene separated from
the armie by storme, or by some other accident. And for that some were not of opinion
to fight with the enemie, Veniero feared some accident, which might disturbe all, and
make Don Iohn to alter his resolution, and therefore pressing their departure, he had
caused great store of come to be put into the galeasses, to be sent to the succour of Famagosta,
hauing not heard any thing of the losse thereof. It was bruted, that Caracossa
was gone with 18 gallies to Valona, to fetch Biscuit: wherupon Colonna and Veniero persuaded
Don Iohn, not to lose so goodly an oportunitie; for going to incounter his enemies
diuided, wheresoeuer he hapned, he should obtaine a certaine victorie. Don Iohn
was not auerse to that resolution, but he desired to be better certified than with rumors,
and vncertaine reports; and therefore it was resolued, that Canale should go before with
two good gallies, to learne some certaintie of the enemies Fleet. But he was stayed vpon
the arriuall of foure gallies, which by contrarie winds had beene separated from the rest;
they assured the Generals, that there was not any vessell of the Turkes at Valona: for that
hauing past thereby, they had not seene any. Whereupon some thought, it was but an
artificiall inuention of such, as desired they should fight with the enemie. D. Iohn being
at Gomenizze, a great port of Epirus, they were aduertised by Giles d' Andrada, that he
had heard for certaine at Zante, that the Turkish Fleet was entred into the gulph of Lepanto,
as a place of safetie, that they might supply their wants, and to resolue what they
had to do, sending their sicke and vnprofitable people to Corone, for that Caracossa hearing
of the comming of the Christians into those seas, was gone to aduertise the Generall
Aly. There Doria hauing commandement from the Confederates, tooke muster of
all the vessels, obseruing euery thing carefully, for that their opinions were diuers touching
their fighting with the enemie.
The great Commander of Castile,Commander of Castille dissuades them from fighting with the Turks. who was of great authoritie with the Generall,
gaue aduise, that they should not hazard a battell without some great aduantage, whereof
the hazard and danger was very great, not onely for the losse of so great an armie, but
for the great ruines which would ensue:

for that Sicile, the coasts of Calabria and Apulia,
yea of all Italy and Spaine, would, in this case, be made destitute of all gard and defence:
so as they did not see what assured hope of gaine might ballance the reasonable
feare of so great a losse; protesting, that what he sayd, was no more for the priuat interest
of his King, than of the other Confederates, and especially of the Venetians, who as nearest
to the enemie, might thinke to tast the first fruites of this dangerous counsell. It is
sometimes to be held a great victorie, to hinder a mightie enemie, from doing any thing
of importance, as they should do, in curbing the pride, that yeare of the Turkish armie,
growne bold by so many victories, hauing many gallies, and so well furnished, as it was to
be presumed, both of souldiers and slaues, being in its owne country, where they had
great Garrisons continually in pay, and had of late reduced so many Christians into seruitude
in the Venetians countries.
He added, that by the example of all famous Captaines, both ancient and moderne,
from whom they are accustomed to draw secure instructions in militarie actions,
there was no course held wiser for them, that had the weaker power, and are in
danger of the greater losse, than in delaying an enemie, to attend some aduantage to oppresse
him, and tyring him, to make his attempts vaine.
The condition of things were not equall, neither should they hazard so much vpon
a most doubtfull fortune, onely with a defigne to fight with the Turkes forces
at sea, seeing the gaine would be small which they could promise themselues, by that
hoped-for victorie; beeing as easie for the enemie to returne the next Spring very
strong to sea, although he were vanquished, as it would be hard for the Confederates
to repayre so great losses, if God, for the sins of Christendome, should suffer them to be
ouercome. Wherefore, I beseech you, my most noble Lord, set before your eyes
the inestimable losse which may happen to Christendome, by the ruine of this armie,
if in nothing else, but of so many noble Captaines, and valiant souldiers,

which we may boldly say without blushing, is the flower of all the martiall men of Christendome,
of whose counsell and valour, I may truely say, depends the health of the best
part of Europe; and so by consequence by the losse of them, the means to resist the Turks
power now would faile vs, and all hope to vanquish him hereafter. I will not forget to offer
to your consideration, how dangerous it is for the winds and sea, the time of the yeare
being so far spent, and that to go and spend any time in seeking of the enemie in this dangerous
season of Autumne, were to tempt fortune doubly. There may be infinit examples
produced, but the remembrance of the last yeare is so fresh, as wee need not to seeke
farther: and you must vnderstand, that he which in time recouers a safe port with his shipping,
makes it knowne what counsell is most profitable, if an vnfortunat chance happen.
But who can judge, if going so farre into the enemies countrey, to fight with him, being
much weakned either by our losses in fighting, or by foule weather, whether we can with
safetie recouer our owne ports: without doubt, in this case few would be saued, being
knowne by experience (a dangerous doctrine of rash men) what bad counsell it is, to follow
a mightie enemie, and to fight with him in the midst of his owne strength.

Both the Venetian Generals opposed themselues against the opinion of the great
Commander, so did Ascanio della Cornia, S. Fiora, and Serbelloni, but especially the Generall
Colonna, who sought to infringe with apparent reasons, and with the Popes authoritie,
whose expresse commandement was,Marc Anthonie Colonna persuades them to fight. to find out the Turks armie, and to fight with it.

He
said, That he could in no sort yeeld to the opinion of Requesens, being a new proposition,
and contrarie to the articles of the league, where it was chiefly propounded to make an
offensiue warre, and he taught them how they should still stand vpon their defence; which
was nothing else, but to confirme the enemie in the opinion which he had conceiued of
the small valour of the Christians, whereby he was growne more insolent. The confederat
princes, said he, haue had a speciall care in their conuentions, to doe any thing that might
daunt the pride of this enemie of Christendome, and that he should sensibly feele the valour
of Christians. He will neuer feare any such power, if we, measuring all forces by the
compasse of humane discourses, dare not promise vnto our selues any thing from the help
of heauen: and yet let vs remember that we are the souldiers of Christ, that we fight for
Christ, and that being vnited vnder his banner, we need not feare that he will euer abandon
vs, if we shew not our selues distrustfull. But I will not lay the foundation of all our
hopes vpon the miraculous helps of heauen, whereby I should seeme to confesse, that humane
force were not able to incounter, yea to vanquish this enemie. I should seeme to
want judgement, to counsell a battell without constraint, and with apparent disaduantage,
and to tempt the pleasure of God with the dangerous euent of a battell. Our armie
then, in my opinion, is not so weake, nor the enemie so vigorous, that matters should bee
brought to that despaire, seeing that we haue here aboue 200 good gallies, better appointed
(according to the opinion of men of judgement) than the Turkes, the which
would equall their aduantage of number, if the fame be true, that the Turkes haue three
hundred vessels. For gathering these vessels from diuers parts, they haue, to make a number,
assembled euerie small barke of pyrats, fitter to steale, and run away, than to fight. Wee
must thinke that our souldiers do exceed the Turks in valour, who often with many thousands
could not resist hundreds of our, and now, it may be, are not inferiour vnto them in
number, if we shall wel examine the qualitie of their vessels and ours: and therein also we
wil vse your authority, who maintain, that we haue the flower of all the souldiers of Christendome.
And to what end then serues this multitude of gallies, these numbers of noblemen
and souldiers, and so much treasure wasted, onely to goe neere the enemie? nay,
not to approach neere him, but to terrifie him with the fame of our forces, and seeing that
he doth not flie, we to retire our selues into safetie. But if that be not to be thought on, yet
to keep him from proceeding any farther in Cypres, nor to annoy any more those miserable
coasts, those vnfortunat islands which be subiect to the fire and sword of their barbarous
crueltie. But we are to attempt more, to reuenge so many injuries receiued from them, so
as the religious arms of Christians being as it were awaked from a long sleep, may be imploied
in those actions which shalbe held worthie of their auncient glorie. And contrariwise,
what greater imputation can there bee vnto the name of Christians, than after two

such preparations within few monethes, not to dare to looke the enemie in the face?
What hope will there then remaine to deliuer the realme of Cypres? What will the
world say of vs? Oh let there neuer any thought of such feare come into our hearts:
let vs not shew our selues so weake: let vs not so little esteeme the forts which are held
by the Catholike king, and the Commonweale of Venice: that in case any vnfortunate
successe should befall our fleet, they should be a prey vnto the enemie. Princes
were woont to repose all their safetie in armies by land, or in fleets by sea; but since that
they haue found meanes to secure their countries with ports and frontire places well fortified,
they haue not much esteemed the losse of a battell at land or at sea, touching the
conquest of anothers dominions, for that the defence within walls is so long, as that
prince which was a looser may repaire his forces, and come againe to fight with his aduersaries.
We haue now in hand the example of the realme of Cypres, the which although
it be farre from their lords forces, yet two forts, and those not very wel furnished,
haue made resistance aboue a yere, and there is yet hope to preserue it, sending some smal
succours. And shall we feare, that so many strong places vpon this gulph, and vpon the
coast of Naples and Sicile, shall be in an instant deuoured by the Turkish armie, if any
sinister fortune should befall our fleet, which God forbid. But if we (my Lord Commaunder)
shall runne into such apparent daunger, being at sea in these tempestuous
times of August, why will wee secure our enemies from the like daunger, when as they
after that imagined victorie, will saile ouer (being farre from their ports) the Mediterranean
and Tirrene seas, in that daungerous season? And if you shall say vnto me, That
in the Spring they will attempt some conquest of importance, I will aunswer, That our
forts, and the countrey which lyes most subiect to daunger, shall be the better fortified.
And for proofe hereof, this mightie Turkish fleet, although it hath not beene any
way hindered this yeare by our gallies, what matter of importance hath it attempted?
yea in Candie, and in these seas, they haue receiued great losses, comming neere vnto
fortified places. But let it suffice to haue hitherto discoursed, to shew that the daunger
is not so great, nor so apparent, in case we should loose a battell. Let vs now come to
the consideration of the importance, and necessitie we haue to giue battell, and then of
the certaine hope of the conquest, if we be victors. It is impossible to bridle and tame
the insolencie of the Turke whilest that hee is lord at sea, the which hee will alwayes
hold himselfe to bee, when as our nauie shall not dare to affront him with sufficient
forces, and that it is all one to flie the enemies sight, and to feare to receiue some harme:
but that feare doth not onely leaue him the possession of the sea free, and doth increase
his boldnesse with his force, but doth quite discourage the subiects, and giues them occasion
to attempt things verie prejudiciall to the commonweale. Let vs then goe and seeke
this armie, to daunt the pride of the Turks, and to giue courage to the Christians: hauing
found it, let vs fight with it, hauing a firme confidence both in the helpe of heauen, and in
our owne forces, that we shall vanquish them. Let vs persuade our selues, that the reputation
of the Christian name, and the honour of our princes, cannot be otherwise maintained;
for that being knowne that they haue two yeares together prepared so great a fleet,
with their incredible charge, and giuen it out, That they would fight with the Turkes, if
we should retire with such apparent signes of feare, I doe not see how we can auoid a generall
imputation, either of want of gouernment, or of extraordinarie cowardise. It is requisit
then by all the reasons of warre, that for the importance of this action, and to auoyd
shame and dishonour, we should trie a battel, for that the losse thereof cannot be so preiudiciall
as the Commaunder saith, and by a victorie we are to expect a great conquest, if
we will presently imbrace the occasion, and reape the honorable fruits of so great an aduenture.
For it is apparent, that all the Turkes dominion is gouerned by most cruell tyrannie,
and that his subiects (whether you wil make an attempt vpon Albania, Morea, or Soria, yea
and in Thrace it selfe) as soone as they shal heare that his forces (who oppresseth them vnder
the heauie yoke of barbarous seruitude) are ouerthrown at sea, wil attempt some innouation,
if they shal but see the Christians ensignes: so as the Turks seeing the enemie not
only round about them, but euen in their houses, they will find themselues in a verie hard
condition, and what remedy shal they find to escape, but they must endure themselues to be

triumphed ouer by many Noble victories? It is not any vaine hope grounded vpon
desire, that makes mee to speake thus, seeing it is certaine that the Christians
in those Countries which I haue mentioned are more in number than the Turkes,
and although they bee vnarmed, yet are they not without courage, so as being armed by
vs, they will doe great seruice in any thing that shall bee attempted.
Besides, those coasts hauing not of many yeares seene a Christian Nauie, and not sufficiently
fortified for such dangers, what resistance can they make against our victorious
armie? If these great hopes should make vs resolue otherwise than the Commaunder
hath propounded, should we not doe it the rather, for that it is the chiefe intent of
your king and my Lord to free Christendome from the oppression of the Barbarians, and
then to assure the Spanish Seas from the continuall spoiles, of Pyrats, Turkes, and Africans?
But his Maiestie shall neuer attaine to either of them, if their forces at Sea
bee not first subdued: neither can they bee subdued, if wee doe not hazard a battell:
wee haue no hope to bee stronger at Sea the next yeare than this, but rather to
decrease both in number and courage, hauing twise performed so little, if wee shall
resolue as you aduise vs: what then remaines to bee done, but that being forced wee
proceed with an assured hope, not of one, but of many worthy victories, and finding
out the enemy, fight with him, like the souldiers of Christ? So may it please his diuine
bountie, to abate their arrogancie, and to confound this their mightie fleet, the which I
assure my selfe cannot bee soone repaired, if there bee the flower of the Turkes
forces, as well of Captaines, as of priuate men, as wee suppose. But if our Princes,
as hee pretends, loosing the battell, should with all lose the best of their forces:
why shall not wee with the same argument augment our hopes, our enmies
being so much afflicted, for that our Princes exceed them much in men of
commaund; and for Sea-causes, I dare affirme that the State of Venice hath more valiant
Captaines than the Turke. Let vs not for Gods sake so much distrust our owne forces,
as our hearts should bee surprised with amazement, and that depriued of all generositie,
yea, of pietie and Religion, wee should hold the enemie in that degree, and so
basely esteeme of our selues, and of the dignitie of the confederate princes, hauing in a
maner no faith, that the supreme power which hath giuen them these forces, will also
preserue and increase them; with their ruine that are his cruell enemies, for the propagation
of which faith we haue put on these armes, the which being guided by his
victorious hand, must needs yeeld glorious trophees, both in life and death, if wee will
not defaud our selues of this certaine hope.

D. Iohn was in the flower of his age, and retaining that generous and warlike minde
of his father, hee inclined to his Councell, who with so many reasons propounded,
so honourable a party, and worthie of such a prince, notwithstanding that the command
had beene giuen him by his brother as a Schoolemaster or guide: and with
this resolution hee caused the Nauy to bee diligently viewed and furnished, and gaue
order how they should goe forth in battell.Veniero incensed against the Spanish S^uldiers. But, there fell out an accident which had almost
ouerthrowne the whole action, and depriued them of immortall glorie. Some of the
kings Souldiers being placed in a Venetian Galley, they fell to quarrell with others that
were in the same gallie, so as there were some hurt and slain. Veniero the general sent some
officers with his admirall to bring the offenders vnto him, but they being distempered
receiued the admirall with iniuries, wherewith Veniero being much incensed, hee caused
the offe^ders to be appehended, and wold haue two of the^ with their captain Anticatro ha^ged
at the main yard.D. Iohn disconted with the Generall Veniero. After which Paulo Sforza their Colonel, going to speake with Veniero,
he wold not hear him, threatning him that if he did not depart, he wold turn his ordina^ce
vpon him and sink his boat. D. Iohn was wonderfully disconte^ted with the generall Venieros
actio^, holding himself much wro^ged; for that he had not referred the iudgement to him,
as it was fit, but had chased away Colonell Sforza, whome hee had sent, with threates and
disgrace The whole armie was suddenly in a mutinie, the Spaniards seemed to prepare
themselues to reuenge, and the Venetians stood vpon their gard. But Colonna with great
dexteritie (although hee held himselfe wronged therein by Veniero) sought to preuent
this growing mischiefe. Barbarigo laboured in like manner, who with great eloquence

and iudgement,1569 so pacified Colonna first, and then D. Iohn as they were content to
preferre the generall good of Christendome, before their owne priuate respects;
yet they would not that Veniero should treat any more with them concerning any
businesse, neither as a publike person, nor as a priuate, but that Barbarigo should
supplie his place vntill they had further order from Venice. The third of October
they went forth in the same order that they should fight, and bent their course towards
Cephalonia, where they had newes that did much trouble them, for that by a fregate
dispacht from Candie, they had letters brought them from Marino Caualli, wherein
was related the losse of the Realme of Cypres, by letters intercepted in a Galeot
the which were sent after the taking of Famagosta from the generall Mustafa to Aly.
whereof they presently sent aduice to Venice. Comming to Val d' Alexandria, which
was the ancient Samos, they returned againe to Councell, where hearing for certaine
that the Turkes were in the gulphe of Lepanto, they resolued after much
disputation, to goe to the mouth of it, and not meeting first with the Turkes,
to set vpon two forts called Dardanelli, to force the enemie to fight, or with the
losse of their gallies to runne to land: with this resolution they parted the sixt of October,
and came to the Ilands called Curzolares, where earely in the morning they had view
of the Turkish armie, which came out of the mouth of the gulfe in good order. The generall
Aly had beene informed by Caracossa, who had gone to discouer the Christians, with
what intent they sailed that way, in what order, and how many vessels they were: so as
opening at that instant the great Turkes letter, which by his order should be red as soone
as the enemies fleet approacht, they saw it was his mind they should fight, and ruin the
Christians forces. The Commanders of the Turkish Nauy being very resolute to incounter
the Christians, and to shut them vp in the chanell of Cephalonia, being small, wheras
Caracossa had viewed them, had newly fortified their army with tenne thousand Ianisaries
Spahies, and voluntaries, which Mehemet Bet had broght, with great store of victuals and
munition, and 100 Sangiacs and Alobei, which are men of title, a degree vnder a Sa^giac. But
the Christians parted from Cephalonia, and Val d' Alexandria, towards the Curzolares,
where the sea is verie streit, and ful of shelfs, and rocks, which the Turks took for an adua^tage.
Thus both armies were resolued to fight, and were put in batel inform of a Croisant. In the
right wing of the Christians armie where fiftie and three gallies,Order of the Christian armie. whereof Iohn Andrew Doria
had charge, hauing before him two Venetian galleasses, and at his backe the admirall
galley of Sauoy, in the which was the duke of Vrbin. On the left wing were the like nu^ber
of gallies and galleasses, commanded by Augustin Barbarigo Proueditor general for the Venetians,
being assisted by the admirall galley of Genoua, in the which was the prince of
Parma. Betwixt these two wings was the bodie of the battell, consisting of 70 gallies and
two galleasses, and in the middest or center thereof, the three generalls with their royall
gallies, D. Iohn in the middest, Sebastian Veniero generall for the Venetians on the left ha^d,
and Marc Antonio Colonna general of the Popes gallies on the right: behind the^, as it were
in the reereward, where D. Aluaro Bassan Marquesse of Saint Cruz with thirty gallies: and
in the front of them was D. Iohn of Cardona with eight gallies as a forlorne hope. On the
other side Aly opposed against Iohn Andrew Doria 96 gallies commanded by Vluccialy,Order of the Turkes army. against
the Proueditor Barbarigo, he set 55 gallies vnder the charge of Mehemet Bei and Sirocco,
and Aly himselfe with Portau Bassan (who was general of the land forces) were in the
middest against D. Iohn with 96 gallies, and the rest of the gallies were appointed in the
reere to succour them, with many foistes and brigandins, to passe from place to place
with the Generals commandements. D. Iohn went in person to view the armie, being accompanied
by Lewis de Cardona and Iohn Soto: hee was in white armour, hauing in his
hand a Crucifix,D. Iohns speech to the armie. going from place to place in a most swift fregat animating the
souldiers, and telling them, that they had not him for their Captaine and leader, but
that great God alone, whose humane shape, being dead vpon the crosse, to saue the
whole world, they saw in his hands. Hee put them in minde that they did fight for the
the great God of victories, to whome all humane powers yeeld obedience: that hee was
their Generall and their guide, and the gouernour of euerie mans actions; promising
to euerie man that day an honourable and glorious victorie, whereof nothing could

depriue them, vnlesse they distrusted to obtaine it.1571 His words were short, but deliuered
with such efficacie, as it made all them that heard him weepe for ioy, who with a
presage of their future successe, beganne to crie victorie, wherewith hee was much
contented; and so hauing saluted the Generall Veniero verie courteously, reioycing to
see that reuerent old man of seuenty and fiue yeares old, in an action where hee must
fight as well as command,The battell of Lepanto. hee retyred to his galley: and then hee set vp the standard of
the league, which was a Crucifix in a red field, in signe of battell. Whereupon
Aly did presently discharge a canon, and D. Iohn answered him in like manner. Iohn
Andrew Doria did an act of iudgement, stretching forth his right wing into the sea, and giuing
meanes to the rest to doe the like, to the end they should not be compassed in by the
Turkes gallies, who were in all places more in number, the which did auaile them much.
Barbarigo, Anthonie Canale, Marc Anthonie Quirin, and others which did assist him, kept
as neere the land as they could, so as they could not bee charged in flanke but onely
in front, the which Sirocco and Aly a renegado of Genoua sought to doe; and when
they were put to rout (which began among the enemies which Barbarigo had in front)
hee kept them that they could not escape, and made a wonderfull spoile of them.
The fight grew hot, and the Canon of either side plaied furiously, wherein the
Christians were somewhat fauoured by the wind, the which in the beginning being
in their faces,Aly Bassa slaine changed instantly as the battell begunne, and carried the smoake into
their enemies eies. In the beginning the two Generals Gallies, of D. Iohn and Aly
Bassa affronted one another, about the which the combat was very hot. In D. Iohns
gallies there were foure hundred Harquebuziers and Musketiers, vnder D. Lope de
Figueroa their Commander;Victory of the Christians. in the prow were D. Michel de Moncado, D. Bernardin de
Cardines, and Salazar, Captaine of the Citadell of Palermo; in the middest were D. Francis
Zapate and Lewis Carrillo; and in the poupe D. Iohn, with the great Commaunder
of Castille, the Earle of Plego, D. Lewis de Cordoua, Roderigo de Benauides, D.
Iohn de Guzman, D. Philip de Heredia, Ruy Dias de Mendosa, and others. In Aly Bassas
galley were foure hundred Ianisaries, shot, and some Archers tryed men, who fought
verie valiantly against D. Iohns Spaniards, who entred twice into the Turkes Admirall,
and were valiantly repulst by them, Aly being succoured by diuers others gallies which
were about him; but such was the resolution of the Christians, as they became masters
thereof, Marc Antonio Colonna arriuing, in whose galley was the Commander
Romeias, who wanted neither iudgement nor courage. Aly Bassa was slaine, and in a
maner all that were in his galley; his head was cut from his bodie, and presented
vnto D. Iohn, who caused it to bee set vpon the end of a pike for a spectacle to encourage
the Christians to pursue the victorie, and to daunt the Turkes, who began
then to faint. Iohn Andrew Doria was also Victor on his part, but some said that
hee might haue done better if hee had list, for hee suffered Vluccialy to escape. In
these actions there is no man troubled but such as are in them, the rest speake at pleasure.
The most furious combat was in the left wing of the armie, whereas the Proueditor
Barbarigo commaunded, who left scarce any one of the enemies gallies, but
was broken, sunk, or taken. This wise and valiant Captaine was shot into the eye with an
arrow, whereof hee dyed. Portau Bassa fled away in a boat seeing Aly slaine and the
battell lost. Caracossa Gouernour of Valona a famous Pyrat, was slaine by Honorat
Gaietan, Captaine of one of the Popes Gallies. The valour of Martin de Padille was
great, who with his onely galley tooke three of the enemies. It was an horrible spectacle
to see the Sea dyed with bloud, full of dead Carkasses and peeces of gallies.
Many sought to runne themselues on gronnd, but they were preuented by the Venetian
gallies: many Turkes cast themselues into the Sea, thinking to saue their liues by
swimming, but they fainted and perished before they got to land. It was the greatest
victorie that had beene at Sea in many ages.Number of the dead. The battell continued eighteene
houres, wherein they spent some part of the night: there died about fiue and twentie
thousand Turkes, and almost all the Commaunders: others write that there were
fifteene thousand Turkes slaine, and seuen thousand Christian; and some write thirteene
thousand. There were taken and carried away one hundred and seuenteene

gallies, and thirteene Galleots, and many were sunke, the number whereof was vnknowne;
there were some thirtie and nine gallies, galleots, and foists which escaped
and came to Lepanto, which relikes Vluccialy had charge to conduct to Constantinople,
yet they were so ill handled, as hee was faine to leaue sixe of them behind.
They tooke one hundred and seuenteene Canons, and two hundred fiftie and eight
small peeces of Ordnance: some number three thousand eight hundred fortie and sixe
prisoners, and some 5000, among which were the two Sons of Aly Bassa. Sirocco gouernor
of Negropont was taken, but he was so wounded, as he died soone after: his wife, who
was exceeding faire, was also taken prisoner. There were 15000 Christian slaues set at libertie.
The Christians, besides priuat men, lost 14 Captaines of gallies, and sixty knights
of Malta, and aboue eight thousand that were hurt: of men of name, there were slaine Augustin
Barbarigo the Prouiditor, with fifteene other gentlemen of Venice: D. Bernardin de
Cardine a Spaniard, Horatio and Virginio Vrsini, with diuers others: and of wounded D.
Iohn himselfe, the Generall Veniero, Paul Iourdain Vrsini, the earle of Sancta Fiora, Troilo
Sa^elli, and Thomas de Medicis. They found in Alys galley two and twentie thousand peeces
of gold, called Soldamini, and in that of Caracossa forty thousand. The whole prey was
diuided at Port Caligiero, some write at Corfu, to euerie one of the confederates according
to the rate: the king of Spaine had of six parts three, the state of Venice two, and the
Pope one; and all the captaines and souldiers were commended and rewarded for their
good seruice. After which D. Iohn, Marc Antonio Colonna, and D. Iohn Andrew Doria, retyred
to Messina, whereas they found that the Marquesse of Pescara the Viceroy was newly
dead, hauing frequented women too much. Marc Antonio Colonna went to Rome, and the
great Commaunder of Castille with him, to treat with the Pope touching the next yeres
seruice for the league, and to goe to his gouernment of the duchie of Milan, which the
king had giuen him after the death of the duke of Albuquerque. This victorie was wonne
the seuenth of October 1571 without any further poursuit, for the opinions of the commanders
depending of sundrie masters were diuers, and also for that the season of the
yeare was too farre spent.
The duke of Alba being incensed against the Queene of England,Duke of Alba sends to treat with the queene of England. for that she had staied
his money, and as hee thought fauoured the Rebels of the Netherlands vnder hand,
he studied how to crosse her, and to cause some troubles in her Countrie, and to giue
the better forme to that which had been begun by his practises, hee sent Chiapin Vitelli
vnder colour to treat with her of the composition of reprisals, and restitution of that
which had beene taken from king Philips subiects, but hee gaue him secret instructions
against that state, if hee might conueniently effect them. There was no meanes to
come to any accompt for the spoiles which were taken by the English from any of the
king of Spaines subiects or adherents, for that they were either wasted by priuat
men, or else the truth could not be verified. Wherefore Vitelli was sent backe with good
words, and could doe nothing in that respect. And as for the enterprises whereof hee
had charge to conferre with certaine Noble men discontented with the present gouernment,
hee could not worke any thing; for during his aboad in England, hee was carefully
obserued, yet the Pope had his Spies and Negotiators in the countrie, and did solicite
king Philip to help to depriue the queen both of her crowne and life, and that the Roman
Catholikes, and such as vnder that pretext desired innouations, might be the Masters. To
effect this, they had need both of men and money, but especially of a stranger to bee their
leader, such a one as the duke of Alba, whome they held to be fitter than any other. The
king whither through importunitie or willingly, being full of other affaires yeelded, and
it happened that Chiapin Vitelli after his returne from England, comming into Spaine to
craue leaue of the king, for that he was called into Italie, by some princes, vnto whome
hee was bound, was stayed, and sent backe into Flanders with instructions to the duke
 of Alba, to entertaine the practises of the malecontents of England: but this froward
and disdainfull man,Duke of Medina Cel^ sent to succeede the Duke of Alba in the lowe Contries. being incensed for that they had refused him the gouernment
of the Netherlands for D. Frederic his sonne, and that the duke of Medina Celi was
sent to succeed him, he contemned and ouer-threw all that practise, where without
doubt he might haue done much harme.

Newes being come to Flesingue that the duke of Medina Cell,1572 was arriued neere
vnto Ostend with forty vessels, they sent forth twelue Ships of warre, who tooke
diuers of them,Duke of Medina refuseth the gouernment of Flanders. and the duke was forced with twelue more to fly to land in a cocke
boat. Hee thought at his comming thither that all troubles had beene pacified: but
seeing that there was more confusion than euer, and greater ruines than hee could
repaire, he excused himselfe for not accepting the gouernment, and demanded leaue to
returne; the which was some dishonour to the duke of Alba.
This yeare the king of Spaine being iealous of the French king, least hee should
aid his subiects of the Netherlands was verie irresolute in giuing aid vnto the league,Difficulties in pursuing the victorie against the Turke.
his Ministers in Italie propounding new enterprises in Afrike, as well for the hope
which the king of Tunis gaue them, as to free the coast of Spaine from that neast
of Pyrats. The which did much distast the Pope, hee beeing verie desirous to see
some better fruits of their victorie, and that the league might continue inuiolably,
with the like conditions that it was made. Whereupon the kings Ministers were
forced to discouer vnto his Holinesse the feare they had of the French, least they
should countenance his subiects in the Low Countries: but the Pope being assured of
the contrarie by the French king, hee grew discontented against the Spaniards, as if
they had inuented it, to reape all the benefit they could of that warre, transporting
it into Afrike, notwithstanding the iealousie increased; and although they made
prouision of all sides, to send forth a mighty armie, yet they proceeded coldly and
found many delaies.
Pope Pius being newly dead, although the Pope did shew himselfe very desirous to
maintaine the league, and did solicit it earnestly, yet it required much time; and the
Spaniards being discontented that they could not draw the armie against some places
in Afrike, from whence they receiued great annoyance, were slowe in execution this
yere. Yet after many delaies, D. Iohn general of the league could not auoid it, but granted
two and twenty gallies to the confederats, and sixe thousand foot to be distributed among
their gallies, himselfe remaining at Messina, with the rest of the armie, to succour where
his Majesties occasions should require, if the French should shew themselues enemies.
There parted then from Messina Marc Antonio Colonna, with the gallies of the Church,
and the knight Gil d' Andrada,F^scarin Generall for the Venetiens. whome D. Iohn had made Commaunder of the king of
Spaines two and twenty gallies, and being ioyned at Corfu with Iames Foscarin, who
was newly made general for the State of Venice, Veniero being dismist, in fauor of D. Iohn
they thoght to haue some certain intelligence of the enemies fleet, being come forth vnder
the co^mand of Vluccialy, who was much made of and esteemed by Selim for those poore
spoiles which he got of the knights of Malta, being a signe that hee had fought and vanquished,
although his companions in the battel had bin defeated, and forced to flie: who
like a politik and couragious Captaine, did so solicit new prouisions of an armie, shewing
that the losse was not so great as the amazed multitude did esteeme it, as hee put his Lord
in better hope.Number of the Turkes Armie. Hauing drawne all his forces together, he had a fleet of two hundred gallies,
galleots and foists, with fiue galleasses, with the which they sailed towards Maluagia.
The general Colonna, who in the absence of D. Iohn held the first place, and Foscarin, hearing
where the enemy was, after consultation, they went to fight with him, hauing 140 gallies
23 ships, six galleasses, and thirty smaller barkes descouering them as they parted from
Dragoniere; but for that the wind was contrarie, they could make no vse of their galleasses,
which kept them from fighting. But Vluccialys fleet being more in number than in
force, he thought it sufficient to keep the enemie that yeare from attempting any matter
of importance, and not to hazard a battell: and therefore still in his retreat he made a shew
as if he wold fight, with which art he fled from them with reputation. At that time D. Iohn
had a resolute answere from the Catholike king, that he might ioine with the army of the
league with all his forces, and attempt some thing against the Turke, what they should
thinke most fit: whereof hee had aduertised the Generals at Corfu, at such time as
they had resolued to goe and affront the enemie, so as they thought it not fit to
stay and attend him, as hee desired. But Vluccialy beeing retyred, and the Generalls
being come to Capsali vnder Cerigo, there they had letters from D. Iohn,

who called them backe to Zante, and then to Corfu, whether after many difficulties
they brought the armie: but D. Iohn would not willingly free the generals,
especially Colonna, for that they had not attended him, whereupon their resolutions
against the enemie fell out crosly; but Foscarin and others laboured by all
meanes to pacifie that disdaine: and they made a new resolution to goe against the
enemies fleet, which they vnderstood lay in the port of Nauarino, and some vnder
Modone.
The Christians had sayled as farre as Striuali, when as D. Iohn de Cardone, being
sent to discouer the enemie, gaue them that aduice, which made them resolue
to hasten their voyage that night, so as they might bee vpon the enemie before day;
the which was better deuised than executed, for they arriued so late, as being first
discouered by the Turkes, they might retire with all their fleet, vnder the fort of
Modone, and defend themselues long from the Christians armie, who sought by
diuers meanes, but alwaies in vaine to draw them out of the fort to fight. They
resolued, for that they would not remaine there in vaine, to beseege the Castle of
Nauarino, a place of fame, hauing giuen the charge thereof to the prince of Parma,
but with weake prouisions, where hee preuailed nothing, they beeing soone
relieued by land with many horse and foot, by the garrisons thereabouts.
Hauing staied in those seas some daies, being in October, and fearing an Autumne
storme, and the kings Gallies beginning to want biscuit, they were constrained to
depart: the which did much discontent the Ministers of the State of Venice, for that
they had spent that time,Christian army retires so Corfu. wherein they had designed great enterprises, without any
fruit, but with incredible charge. The Nauy then returned towards Corfu, leauing
the passage free for Vluccialy to retire to Constantinople, at such time as hee
beganne to feare the euent. D. Iohn hauing retyred to Sicile, and from thence to
Naples, Marc Antonio Colonna, and Doria went into Spaine to relate vnto the king
what had beene done that yeare; and Colonna to free himselfe of some imputations
laied vpon him by such as did malice his greatnesse, wherein hee did preserue his
honour, and returned into Italie with great reputation.
After the arrest of the English Merchants,Sir Francis Drakes first voyage to the Indies. and their goods both in Spaine and the
Low-Countries as you haue heard, the English sought all meanes to bee reuenged
of the Spaniards. Some vpon their owne coast, and others went vnto the Indies:
Among which Master Francis Drake, who was then a man of no great note,
with the helpe of other aduenturers manned forth two ships and a Pynnace, and went to
Nombre de Dios in Noua Hispania, where hearing that the Towne was not very
well peopled, hee landed in the night with one hundred and fiftie men, whereof he
put seuenty into a fort, and the rest seazed vpon the market place, the inhabitants in
this amazement flying to the Mountaines, but soone after they within the fort apprehending
that their companions in the Towne had been all slaine, for that they
had heard some shot, and their trumpet did not answere them. They retyred inconsiderately
to their Pinnace, which they of the Towne finding, made all the hast
they could to get to their ships. Thus Master Drake without any losse but a Trumpeter,
and hauing slaine but one man within the towne, retyred much discontented
from Nombre de Dios. After which hee came to the sound of Darien, where hauing
conference with certaine Negros which had fled from their Master of Panama
and Nombre de Dios, they did aduertise them of certaine Mules which were to
passe from Panama to Nombre de Dios laden with gold and siluer, whereupon hee
landed a hundred shot, and went to attend them with these Negros, where hee
tooke two troupes of them, hauing none but their driuers, being without any feare:
hee vnladed the Mules and tooke the gold onely, being vnable (as some of them
write) to carrie the siluer through the Mountaines. Within two daies after he came
to a place called the house of Crosses, where he slue fiue or six Merchants: he found
not any gold nor siluer there, but much merchandize, and fired the house with the goods
being valued at aboue two hundred thousand ducats, and thence his went to his ships: presently
after there came downe three hundred shot, Spaniards, but it was too late.

The Venetians seeing that there was no likeliehood to make their profite by the support
of this league,1573 and that in this warre they had lost the realme of Cypres, spent foure
millions of ducats, and recouered not any one place of importance; finding also, that the
Spaniards after all their delayes, would still be masters, commaund in all their councels,
and haue the honour of all executions; they resolued to make a peace with the Turke,
by the mediation of the French King, and the diligence of Marc Anthonie Barbaro their
Consull, who had beene staied at Constantinople, the which was concluded vpon restitution
of certaine small places in Dalmatia,Peace betwixt the Turke (...) the (...). and 300000 crownes which the Venetians
should pay vnto the Turke at three payments. The Senate being certified of the conclusion,
they sent their embassadours to the Pope and catholike King to iustifie their actions:
Pope Gregorie the thirteenth was discontented, but there was no remedie, for hee
must allow of their reasons, which seemed pertinent.
The King of Spaine seemed no wayes distasted with this peace of the Venetians,(...) but
would shew by the effects, that hee was able of himselfe, without the help of anie other,
to maintaine continuall warre against the Turke, for the defence of Christendome, and
not onely defend himselfe from him, but make warre against him at his doore. He therefore
commaunded that the fleet which was prepared at Naples and Sicile, should go and
attempt some thing in the Leuant Seas, or be imploied to annoy Vluccialy vpon the coast
of Afrike, where he had expelled Amida out of the realme of Tunes, for that hee had
performed all dueties to the King of Spaine, and paied the tribute which his father had
promised to the Emperour Charles: the which did much displease the Turks holding Alger
and other places in Afrike, who procured S^lims approbation to haue him dispossessed,
and an other set in his place, who should be more at his deuotion, the which was executed
by Vluccialy: wherefore King Philippe thinking that he had an interest therein, and
that it was necessarie to weaken the Turke forces in those partes, being greatly suspected
to Sicile, and other parts of Italie, which Countries the Turkes desired much to ioyne
vnto his empire, hee sent commaundement to D. Iohn by Soto his Secretarie, whom hee
had sent into Spaine to that end, that hee should imploy the gallies hee had readie in this
expedition which would be verie profitable for Christendome, whilest that the Turkes
forces were but weake at sea, to attempt a succour so farre off.
In the meane season there was great means made for the deliuerie of Aly Bassas sons,
which had beene taken at the battell, whom D. Iohn had obtained from the Confederates
with great instance, but one of them was dead before, to his great griefe, that hee could
not wholie gratifie the mother: wherefore he sent him home that was liuing, called Moamed,Sonne of Aly Bassa (...) at liberty by D. Iohn*
accompanying him with a dwarfe of his owne, and foure Turkes that had beene taken
with him, and many presents which the mother had sent vnto his Highnesse, in signe
of honour, but he refused to accept them, and wrote the reason thereof vnto her, wherein
he shewed the greatnesse of his mind. I haue forborne, said hee, to accept the present
which you sent me, and Moamed hath it, not for that I doe not esteeme it, as come from
your hands, but for that the greatnesse of my ancestors is not accustomed to receiue gifts
from such as are forced to flie vnto them for fauour.
The armie beeing ready for the enterprise of Tunis D. Iohn parted with the Duke of
Sessa,Enterprise of Tunis. Anthonio Doria, Iohn Andrew, and other noblemen, on the eight day of September
1573 from the port which in old time was called Lilybee, and had beene long neglected,
(notwithstanding that it be one of the best ports in the Iland, and had beene much vsed
by the Romans in the Carthaginian warres) others write that they went from Palermo.
There was in the fleet one hundred and sixteene gallies, foure and thirtie shippes, and other
vessells of burthen. The Duke of Florence did send six gallies to this enterprise, vnder
the commaund of Simon de Rossermini. They landed at Goulette, whereas they found
not any difficulty, to keep them from entring into Tunis, for it had beene abandoned vpon
the bruite of their comming, and all the Moores and Turkes were fled to the mountaines
and desarts, carrying away all their goods, yea their victualls: yet the King that
was aduaunced by Vluccialy was taken prisoner: Biserta a city some forty miles from Tunis
was recouered with the like facility, yielding by the persuasion of Amida, who thought
by this conquest to recouer his estate.

The matter being called in question, there were many of the Kings councel in Spaine,
and of D. Iohns, of opinion that Tunis should be demandeled, and Goulette rased, for that
those places brought nothing but charge vnto the King, but they were not beleeued:
yea it was concluded to fortifie the City better, and to make a new fort betwixt it and
Goulette,Fort built at Tunis. and to ioyne the fort vnto the towne by two long curtines; to beate downe
the old wall of the towne, and to lay it open towards the fort. For the effecting whereof
Gabriel Serbelloni had the charge, and was made Colonell generall of the garrison that
should bee left there, which should consist of sixe thousand men, three thousand
Spaniards vnder the commaund of Salezar, and three thousand Italians vnder Pagan Doria:
afterwards they said that D. Iohn left eight thousand men there, with labourers sufficient
for the fortification, and a troupe of horse. D. Iohn hauing thus ordered all things,
hee returned happily to Messina, and then to Naples, where he was receiued with much
ioy in Nouember, being assured that the Turke could not send a fleete from Constantinople
to Barbarie, vntill the next yeere, and that in the meane time Serbelloni should haue
leisure to fortifie. D. Pedro Porto ^arrer^ was gouernor in Goulette, a man more respected
for his birth, than for his iudgement and knowledge in martiall affaires: he was preferred
vnto it (no man knowes the reason) in the place of D. Alphonso Pimentell, an industrious
and a valiant captaine. In Tunis there was left more like a gouernour than King) Mahomet
brother to Amida, who was alwayes opposite vnto him: some write hee was but his
cousin,) and as for Amida, he was carried backe into Sicile, whereas in former time they
had seene his father Muley Hascen, dispossessed and made blind by him, and with him
was the King whom Vluccialy had aduaunced in his place: for that Amida had giuen D.
Iohn some cause to suspect him; yet some write it was for that the Moores did hate him
deadly for his crueltie.D. Iohn affects to be king of Tunis. This happie exploit of D. Iohns, made him to discouer his intentions
more plainely vnto the Pope, which was, to remaine King of Tunis, with the good
liking of King Philip his brother: continuing in this opinion, he intreated the Pope to be
Intercessour for him; taking councell both in this and all other affaires of his Secretarie
Iohn de Soto, whom hee fauoured so much, as he caused him to marrie (about that time)
with the baronesse of Saint Philadelphus at Palermo: the which did nothing please the
King,D. Diego prince of Spaine borne as we will shew hereafter. But the Sultan Selim did soone make him loose that desire.
D. Iohn being come to Naples from the taking of Tunis, their ioy and feasts were
doubled: hauing receiued newes, that King Philip had another sonne, the which being
christned was called D. Diego. He staied there some moneths much honoured: then hee
passed into Lombardie, being called into Spaine by his brother; but he went not by reason
of the Turkes successe at the enterprise of Goulette.
The great Turke being much incensed for the taking of Tunis,1574 by a young man, who
had so much preuailed ouer his forces, as after that he had in a maner disarmed him at sea,
he had dispossessed a King which had beene placed by him at Tunis, and set an other in his
place, which was contrarie vnto him: hee sent in the yeere one thousand fiue hundred
seuenty and foure Sinan Bassa into Barbarie,(...) and Goulette recou^red by the Turkes. with a nauie of one hundred and threescore
gallies, thirty shippes, with many galco^s, foists and other small vessells, carrying twenty
thousand harquebuziers, and almost as many archers, with great store of ordnance, and at
land they had fifteene thousand Moores and Arabians on horse backe. At the newes of
this great fleete, the viceroys of Naples and Sicile made preparation to defend their gouernement,
if the Turke should make any attempt vpon them. D. Iohn had commaundement
to furnish Goulette, (where as we haue said Porto Carrero was gouernour) who required
certaine mony of cardinall Granuelle then viceroy of Naples, for the leuying of certaine
men to send thither, the which he refused, saying that he had no other charge, but
to preserue the countrey which he had in gouernement. So as Tunis and Goulette were
left to their defenee that were in them: where the Commaunders did not agree amongst
themselues;Porto Ca^^er^ an indiscreet gouernour of Goulette. for Porto Carrero could not endure that any man should thinke hee wanted
councell, or that he was not verie sufficient to defend Goulette, taking it in ill part, that
Gabriel Serbelloni should presume to send him fiue ensignes of Italians, to fortifie his garrison,
saying that he would not impart the honour of the gard, and defence thereof to any
but to his owne nation: but it was not long before he changed his opinion; for whenas

he saw the fields couered with Moores and Alarabes, which they of Alger and Caruan
had sent about Tunis, as fore runners to Sinan Bassas army, which arriued soone after, he
then demanded men of Serbelloni importunately, protesting that if he sent him not some,
he should be the cause of the losse of Goulette. King Mahomet thought to haue sallied
forth with nine hundred horse,Skirmish among the Moores. and foure thousand foote of his owne nation, against these
troupes of ^oores; but he was suddenly abandoned by his trecherous and disloyall subiects,
so as with three score horse onely, being supported by the regiment of (...), and
some Spanish horse, he escaped. Serbelloni being troubled with these accidents, thought
that it was no time now to regard the vanities of Porto Carrero, but went himselfe to view
the estate of the garrison of Goulette, when hauing caused some faults in the ^ortification
to be amended, he returned to his fort, where hee made them to labour with all diligence
to put it in defence, vnd the citie also, but they gaue him no great respite: for the
Turkes army being landed, and meaning at the first to assaile Goulette, Sinan sent Aydar
king of Caruan to besiege Tunis, the which he did, and battered it furiously with a great
quantitie of ordnance, so as Serbelloni resolued to leaue it, and to defend his fort betwixt
the citie and Goulette, the which was presently inuested by the Moors towards the town,
but he scattered them often by his continuall sallies, and ^lew great numbers. Goulette
being besieged, Porto Carrero did importune Serbelloni to send him men, the which he did
by the lake: but the Turkes did soone take that passage from them, making a long bridge
of barques bound together, and thereon as it were a causey of earth, whereon they placed
many musketiers. The batterie planted against the bastion which looked towards the
sea, made a great breach, where the Turkes gaue a terrible assault, with bridges made of
maine yards, according to their custome, the which notwithstanding was defended by
the valour of the Christians:Ignorance of Porto Carrer^. but Porto Carrero did either forget the dueties whereunto
men besieged are bound, or hee did not know them: Hee neuer would suffer his men to
make a sallie, it seemes hee feared to wast poulder and shot, so as the Turkes had good
meanes to view the fort, to lodge, and to plant their ordnance at their pleasures: And to
shew the great arrogancie of this gouernor, whereas Anthonie Carrafe a gentleman of Naples
sought to giue him good aduice, he caused him to be strangled and to be cast in a sacke
into the sea. Serbelloni, although he had need of all his strength within the fort, yet knowing
the importaunce of Goulette, he weakened himselfe to fortifie it, being continually
called on by D. Pedro, and sent him men as he could; yet could he not preuent it, but that
Goulette was taken by force, Sinan hauing caused a general assault to be giuen, the which
was continued with such fresh supplies one after an other without intermission, as they
within it were no longer able to make any more resistance, but were forced, and all (or
the greatest part) put to the sword:Goulette taken by (...). some write that Porto Carrero with three hundred souldiers
were made slaues, and that the sonne of King Amida was taken in that place. Goulette
being taken, the Turkes went and besieged the fort both by sea and land, hauing filled
certaine great barques with packes of wooll wet, to choake their cannon shot, and
planted many harquebuziers in them, with long fowling peeces, which carried very great
bullets, to keepe the besieged from their defences. Sinan made batteries, and cast vp
trenches to approach vnto the fort, as he was accustomed, to batter, sappe, and mine at
one instant in diuers places; where hauing made great breaches, hee caused three seuerall
assaults to be giuen, but they were all resolutely defended; and hee caused fire to be
set to a mine, the which did more harme vnto the Turkes than vnto the besieged. The assaults
were continued vnto the fourth time, and still they were repulsed with great slaughter:
but this valor decreasing by litle and litle through their ordinary assaults, they were
so weake at the fift, which was generall and more obstinate than any of the rest, as the
place was forced, and all within cut in peeces, excepted Serbelloni, who was taken being
wounded, and drawne by the beard before the Bassa, who caused him to bee kept. Pagan
Doria flying the Turkes, and thinking to find more mercie with the Moores, was slaine by
them,Fort at Tunis taken by assault. and his head set vpon a pike. Porto Carrero being a prisoner, died within few dayes
after, (as some say) of poison. D. Iohn de Sinoghera after these two losses, was left alone
with three hundred and fiftie men to defend the tower vpon the lake, standing betwixt
Tunis and Goulette, the which (although it were very strong, yet considering his owne

strength, and the enemies, he could not hope to make any long defence) he yielded vpon
certaine conditions, and passed afterwards into Sicile, to carrie newes of this great losse.
This Goulette (the honour of the Emperours conquests, the which kept Afrike in awe)
was lost through carelesnesse: Sinan caused it to be rased to the ground, and then returned
triumphantly to Constantinople.
17 This yere the Christians reaped both losse and dishonour in Afrike,D. Seb^stian King of Portugall goes into Afrike. for D. Sebastian
the yong King of Portugall, of too warre like a disposition, as we haue shewed, and desirous
of glorie, seeking to aduaunce himselfe by some enterprises against the Moores, hauing
not imparted any thing vnto the Queene his grandmother, nor vnto the Cardinall
his vncle, by whose care his actions should haue beene gouerned, by reason of his age,
which was voyd of experience: He sent D. Antonio Prior of Crato his cosin, but base, to
Tanger in Afrike, which did belong vnto the Crowne of Portugall, and made him his
lieutenant generall there, deliuering him the Standard with great solemnitie. He would
haue him accompanied with some numbers of soldiers, but specially with many knights:
and within few dayes after the King himselfe, taking many of the chiefe noble men with
him, imbarked at Cascais, whenas no man suspected it, and went in like maner into Afrike,
leauing order in Portugall, that some knights should follow him, and therefore hee did
write many priuat letters vnto them. Being come to Tanger, and hauing tried the Moors
forces in the neighbour garrisons, and seeing his men in all their skirmishes to be ouerlayed
with multitudes, and the nimblenesse of the enemies horse, he beganne to consider
better of the daunger whereinto he had runne, of whom depended the peace and quiet
of his whole Realme; and so being better aduised by some noble men of authoritie that
were with him, but especially being moued by a letter written by father Lewis Gonzales a
Iesuite, who had beene his Scholemaster, and was then in great credit with him, he resolued
to returne presently.




@THE 30 BOOKE OF THE
Historie of Spaine.

The Contents.
1 D. Lewis de Requesens* great Commaunder of Castille, sent gouernour into the Low Countries
for King Philip.
2 D. Iohn of Austria sent Gouernour into the Low Countries.
3 Death of D. Iohn of Austria.
4 Xerifes Kings of Maroc and Fez, their beginning and proceeding.
5 D. Sebastian first of that name King of Portugall.
6 He led an armie into Afrike.
7 Battell in Afrike, and death of D. Sebastian.
8 D. Henry 17 King of Portugall, a Cardinall.
9 Pretendants to the Crowne of Portugall.
10 D. Anthonie Prior of Crato a bastard, made legitimate, disanulled by King Henrie.
11 Fiue gouernours in Portugall during the inter-reigne.
12 Death of the King D. Henrie.
13 Confusions in Portugall all during the inter-reigne.
14 The king D. Philip meanes to debate his right by armes.
15 Aduice and Councell of the Doctors in Spaine touching the Kings title.
16 D. Antonio is declared Defender of the Realme against King Philips forces, and then is saluted
King.
17 Duke of Alba generall of the King of Spaines armie in Portugall, and his exploits.
18 Defeat and flight of D. Antonio, and the taking of Lisbone.
19 Death of D. Anna Queene of Spaine.
20 D. Antonio layes aside armes and retires himselfe.
21 Articles graunted by the King D. Philip to the Estates and realme of Portugall.
22 D. Philip receiued and acknowledged for King at Lisbone.
23 Terceres Ilands, their conquest, and the rout of the French armie.
24 D. Philips sonne Prince of Spaine acknowledged and sworne at Lisbone.
25 Absolute conquest of the Terceres, by the defeat of Emanuel de Silua, and of Monsieur de
Chattes.



All the Realmes of Spaine vnited to the Crowne
of Castille vnder D. Philip
the second.1575
DOn Lewis de Requesens great Commander of Castille was sent to succeed
the D. of Alba in the gouernment of the Low Countries after
that the duke of Medina Celi had refused it. He was a man approching
somewhat in disposition to his predecessor.Great Commander of Castille sent gouernour into the Law Countries. He had accompanied
D. Iohn of Austria in his sea-army, whenas he fought with the
Turke at Lepanto, as his chiefe Councellor, and after his returne
into Sicile, the King D. Philip had made him gouernour of Milan,
where hee remained not long, the King thinking him fit to calme that which the Duke
of Alba had left in trouble in Holland and Zeland, into which prouinces it seemed that
the whole warre was reduced. Among other disorders, he found the Spanish souldiers
discontented, and cursing the Duke, who owed them foure and thirtie moneths pay:
whom he was forced (for the first triall of his wisedome) to seeke meanes to pacifie, the
which he did in some sort: but when he beganne to enter into the managing of affaires,
he fell grossely into an inconuenience which did preiudice the rest of his gouernement.
What his actions were during his charge there, you may reade at large in that Country
historie. He liued not long there, but died of a pestilent feuer in the yere one thousand
fiue hundred seuentie and sixe, leauing those Countries in greater confusion than the
Duke of Alba his predecessor had done.
In the yeare 1574 it was found that king Philip was indebted to the merchants of Genoua
and Spaine in 37 millions of ducats;King of Spaine reuokes his ^ssignations and b^eakes with the Gen^uois. for the which hee gaue them assignements out
of his royall reuenues: whereupon for the relieuing of his necessities, and to free the king
from the Genouois, the Deputies of the chiefe Cities and Townes were called to Madrid,
to consult how to relieue the king in these great wants. Among other, there was
one in Court, whose name was Francisco Brauo, who told the king, that the contractions
which he had made with the merchants, were in respect of them, against all law and equitie;
the which, if he did not remedie within a yeare, hee would not haue any meanes to
free himselfe: telling him moreouer, that he had beene fraudulently circumuented by
them, in very great summes, contrarie to all diuine and humane lawe. Whereupon in the
yeare 1575 the king of Spaine made a decree touching the losse and preiudice which his
royall reuenues had receiued by the co^trectations which he had made with the Genouois
and others, making a staie of all the said contrectations and assignements, the which did
much trouble the Genouois and others, to whom the king was indebted, for by reason
of this suspension they could not giue satisfaction vnto their creditours, which
made them to present an answer to this decree vnto the King, shewing that it would bee
a blemish to his honour, and verie preiudiciall to his seruice; yet could they not get it
reuoked, but were forced to make a new composition.
The citie of Genoua was diuided into two factions,Genoua diuided into factio^s the old (which were the noble
men and gentlemen) and the new (who were some gentlemen, supported by the common
people.) D. Iohn Idiaques as embassadour for the Catholike King, had labored much
to quench this fire which beganne to kindle, and had persuaded them to lay aside armes:
but this yeere the furious multitude little respecting the promise of the wiser citizens to

disarme, and to treate an accord with the liking and authoritie of the Catholike King, for
whom Idiaques was imployed in that action, matters were brought to despaire, the faction
of the new offering by force to reforme the publique gouernement after their owne
manner, and to abate the power of the nobles, who were called the old; who not suffering
so great an indignitie, went most of them out of Genoua, Iohn Andrew Doria beeing
as it were their head. The Pope sent Cardinall Morone thither, but the Genouois would
not treat with him alone, vnlesse the Catholike kings Embassadour were called, he being
the chiefe protector of that common weale. The matter was found so difficult, as the faction
of the old despayring, were come with good forces, some to Final, and some to Aqui,
resoluing to recouer their countrie and dignitie by armes, choosing Iohn Andrew
Doria for their Generall in that warre, who refused that charge, vntill he had leaue from
the king of Spaine, whom he serued. In the meane time, they had newes that the king
was ready to send another Embassadour, to adde authority and counsell to the other two,
which was the Duke of Gandie: but D. Iohn d' Austria came first with a nauie vpon that
coast, to see that no Prince, by means of this tumult, should enter into Genoua; and make
himselfe master thereof: and therefore they made prouision of souldiers, drawing into
the duchie of Milan two regiments of Germans, and leuying some Italians. The people
of Genoua grewe iealous that D. Iohn meant to seize vpon their citie; but he, according
to the order he had from his brother, hauing conferred with Prince Doria and the gouernour
of Milan at Spetie, they concluded onely, that there should be all meanes attempted
to quiet that citie, and if the people should continue in their obstinacie, the faction of
the Old should haue leaue to recouer their countrie, with their auncient rights and dignities:
and the rather, for that they offered to make warre at their owne charge, requiring
nothing of his Maiestie, but Dorias person, and the gallies wherewith hee serued the
king. The Emperour and the French king sent their Embassadours to pacifie this tumult,
but they could not effect any thing, especially he of France, whom for that they
would not breed a iealousie in the king of Spaine, they dismist with good words. They
without the citie finding by the treatie that there was no hope of any pacification, were
readie to goe to armes, when as Charles Borgia Duke of Gandie arriued; but hoping that
his authority, and the priuat instructions of the catholike king, would preuaile much, they
staied: but yet the mischiefe could not be thus cured. Soone after, the Secretarie Escouedo
hauing beene sent by D. Iohn, returned from Spaine, who brought order from the
king, that all the resolution of that businesse, for that which concerned his Maiestie, was
referred to D. Iohn, who was then at Naples, whither Iohn Andrew Doria was gone to that
end, the nobilitie hauing prouided money to make warre: when D. Iohn hearing that
they to whom it was compromitted in the name of those great princes, could not pacifie
them, he sent order to the Gouernour of Milan to dismisse his Germans and Italians,
that the faction of the Nobles might imploy them, to reduce them to their duties that
had no will of an accord. With which troupes, the faction of the Old went to field, and
tooke diuers places. In the end, after many letters written from the Pope, Emperour,
and King of Spaine, it was wholly compromitted to their agents, who caused a suspension
of armes, and there were hostages giuen by both factions to stand to their arbitrement,
but the accord was not fully concluded vntill the yeare following.
This yeare there grewe seeds of warre in Afrike, which past into Europe, to the great
preiudice of Christendome; for that Muley Mahomet king of Marocco, beeing loath to
leaue the gouernment of that realme to Muley Moluc his vncle, according to the will of
his grandfather dying, Moluc fled de vnto the Turkes for aid, and obtained it; with the
which,Muley Mahomet expelled out of his realm. and with the Moores which fauoured him, he made warre against his nephew, and
defeated him thrice in battell, so as he remained absolute Lord of the realmes of Fez and
Marocco, his nephew beeing fled vnto the mountaines, where, with some that followed
him, he ranne vp and downe, not as a king, but like a thiefe; beeing by nature both couetous
and cruell, vntill that in the end he persuaded the ill aduised king of Portugal, not
onely to giue him succours to recouer his realme, but to passe thither in person, with the
ruine of that royall house, as you shall hereafter heare.

2 After the death of Lewis de Requesens,1576 great Commaunder of Castille, D. Iohn d' Austria
was appointed to succeed him in the gouernment of the Netherlands;D. Iohn of Austria gouernour of the Netherlands. to which end
he came into Luxembourg, but he would not aduance, vntill that the Estates had accepted
him for gouernour, and Lieutenant generall to the king his brother. This prince
was once in an humour (as wee haue said) to obtaine the crowne of Tunis, by the bountie
of the king D. Philip, whom hee had caused to bee often importuned by the Pope,
wherein the king tooke no delight, but the taking of that citie by the Turkes, and the razing
of those forts which the Spaniards had built to keepe it in awe, made him to forget
that humour: but it did not quench his desire to raigne in some other countrie, in the
which a Secretarie of his called Iohn de Soto entertained him. Which the king vnderstanding,
hee tooke him from him, and commaunded him to vse the seruice of Iohn d' Escouedo;Iohn de Escouedo Secretarie to Don Iohn.
by which change he got little, he animating him more to greatnesse: wherefore
he thought it expedient (to diuert him somewhat from these ambitious desires) to drawe
him out of Italie, and from those honourable imployments which presented themselues,
and to send him into Flanders, to contend against his rebellious subiects: the which D.
Iohn hearing, hee bare it with great impatiencie, to see himselfe so much deiected, as to
become (as a man would say) an Algouzil, or Prouost Marshall, to punish common people,
whereas he had been Generall of armies to the greatest Potentates in Christendom,
against the incomparable forces of the great Turke.
Hauing failed of Tunis, he conuerted his thoughts vpon England, and caused the king
to be solicited to make warre vpon that realme;D. Iohn a-spires to the crowne of England. for that (said he) Queene Elizabeth had alwaies
fauoured the Estates and townes of the Lowe countries, in their contumacie and
rebellion, and to make him Generall, hoping to make himselfe king, thinking that the
affaires of the Lowe countries were too little to keepe him occupied. The king D.
Philip, for that hee would not flatly refuse him, seemed to yeeld to it, but hee said,
they must first subdue the Flemings, commaunding him to goe directly out of Italie
thither, and not to passe by Spaine: but he obaied him not, for he went out of Italie into
Spaine, and all by the counsell of Escouedo; which made the king to bee ill conceited
of him: but in the end hee was forced to goe, and arriued as you haue heard.
Beeing accepted for their gouernour, hee ratified the treatie of Gand, made by the
Deputies of the Prouinces, for the expelling of all strange souldiers, and other things; the
which was confirmed by the king of Spaine,1577 in April, 1577, and his Letters of approbation
sent to D. Iohn.
Then the poore Netherlanders beganne to hope for better vsage, thinking that they
were at an end of all their miseries, but the effects which followed did soone shew that
this hope had beene conceiued vpon apparances. For in all D. Iohns gouernement there
was nothing but dissimulations,D. Iohns carriage in his gouernment. secret enterprises, accusations, false imputations, surprises,
and apparent designes to heap vpon this people all the miseries of the precedent gouernements;
although the effects did not follow according to the Spaniards desires.
The which they imputed to D. Iohn, who was not come into the Low Countries to liue
there in a quiet estate, or to walke in his night gowne, but with an intent that the enterprise
of England should proceed, and that the King would make him Generall: but seeing
that (notwithstanding all troubles in his gouernement were in a maner pacified) they
made no preparation tending to inuade that Iland, and that there came no aduice out of
Spaine conformable to his desire, yet would hee commaund an armie, and breed occasions
to imploy it where he was. What his particular actions were you may read in that
countrie historie.
Sir Francis Drake beeing incouraged by the good successe of his first voyage to the
Indies,Voyage of Sir Francis Drake into the South sea, and about the world. resolued to make a new attempt, and to passe into the South, thinking thereby
to doe his Prince and Countrey great seruice, to winne himselfe immortall fame,
and to annoy the King of Spaine and his subiects: wherefore in Nouember in the yere
one thousand fiue hundred seuentie and seuen, he went forth of Plimmouth with fiue
English shippes and barques, bending his course towards the Indies (my meaning is nto
to report the particularities of this voyage, but onelie to touch the action summarily,

for that it concernes Spaine) in August after his departure he past the Strait of Magellan,
and came into the South sea, whereas the Spaniards liued secure from all feare, hauing
neuer seene any Englishman there before. Beeing in this sea, hee tooke many ships and
barkes, with great store of treasure: but there was one shippe which exceeded all the
rest in wealth; he tooke it at a place called Cape S. Francisco, 150 leagues from Panama:
the shippe was called by the Spaniards Cacafuego, which name (after the taking thereof
by Sir Francis) was wittily changed by a Spanish ship-boy, and tearmed Cacaplata,
for that it yeelded him so much siluer. They found in her (besides great store of iewels,
and pretious stones) thirteene chests full of ryals of siluer, foure score pound weight of
gold, and 26 tunne of siluer. Hauing done diuers exploits, and sackt some townes vpon
the coast of Peru, and Noua Hispania, being now full fraught with treasure, and sufficiently
reuenged (as he thought) of the Spaniard, hee resolued to goe to the Islands of the
Molucos,1588 and so returne to England by Cape Bona Esperance; the which he performed
happily in Nouember, beeing the third yeare of his voyage. By the report of Nugno de
Silua a pylot (whom he had taken in the beginning of his voyage at the Islands of Cape-Verd)
and others,Treasure Sir Fr. Drake brought out of the South sea. Sir F. Drake carried fro^ the coast of Peru, 866 kintals of siluer, euer kintal
being worth 1200 ducats of Spain: all which amounteth to a million thirtie nine thousand
and two hundred ducats. He had besides, tenne kintals of gold, euery kintall beeing
valued at ten thousand and fiue hundred Spanish ducats: which last some amounteth to
a hundred and fiftie thousand ducats; besides other treasure in that shippe which had not
beene customed (the value whereof was vnknowne) as pearles, pretious stones, ryals of
plsate, and other rich commodities.
These exploits of his in the South sea, (where they had neuer seene any enemie) did
much trouble the Viceroy of Peru, who sent forth Pedro Sarmiento, a good nauigator,
with two shippes, to meet with Captaine Drake if hee could, or to fortifie in the
Strait of Magellan, against such as should hereafter seeke to passe it. D. Pedro passed
through the Straite with one of his shippes, and so went into Spaine, where he informed
the king of the nature of the Strait, and of the meanes to buid a fort there, the countrey
beeing rich, and abounding with all necessaries. Whereupon the king (beeing
aduertised that there were more shippes making ready in England) sent Diego Flores de
Baldes with twentie three shippes, and three thousand and fiue hundred men, and a new
gouernour to Chili, with fiue hundred old souldiers come out of Flaunders; but before
they were free from the coast of Spaine,Ships of Spaine cast away. they were surprized with a storme,
and eight of the Fleet cast away, with aboue eight hundred men, the rest put into
Cadiz.
D. Iohn d' Austria hauing drawne a world of miseries vpon those Prouinces which
which were vnder his gouernment,1578 died in the Campe,Death of D. Iohn of Austria. neere vnto Nemours this
yeare 1578, of a pestilent feuer; a prince who conceiued high and great enterprises in his
mind, but aboue all, hee was much incensed against the Lowe Countries, and their generall
Estates: his death was happie for them, hauing thereby some ease of their miseries
and calamities. Men made diuers censures of his death, and of Escouedo his Secretaries,
who in a manner at the same time was slaine in Spaine (as some said by the kings
commandement) for the which Antonio de Peres was afterwards called in question, as
you shall heare.
Alexander Farneze prince of Parma, who was D. Iohns lieutenant, had commaundement
of the armie, and was afterwards gouernour in his place: hee was more temperate
and modest in his gouernment than the Spaniards that went before him. This prince
was allied to the king of Spain, he hauing maried in the yere 1565 D. Maria of Bragance,
daughter to D. Edward of Portugal, who was brother to the Empresse D. Isabella, so as
they were cousin germans: which mariage might purchase to the house of Farnezes
some right to the crowne of Portugal: where, soone after there happened a lamentable
change; for that this realme which had maintained it selfe with honour and reputation,
in all the parts of the habitable earth, for so many ages, was reduced vnto a Prouince, vnder
him Castille, as you shall heare.

4 We must now enter into the mournfull Tragedie of the death of D. Sebastian king
of Portugal,1577 who thrust on by his ambitious desire of glorie,Moores. gouerned by ill counsell,
and among other affections, by zeale of religion, wherein the Iesuits had instructed him,
would (contrary to the graue aduice of the Catholike king) and without any reason,Xeriffes kings of Marocco their beginning bee
an actor in the quarrels of the Xeriffes, princes of Afrike, contending for the empire of
Marocco and Fez, from whence the race of the kings, Merins, (of whom wee haue often
made mention in this worke) had beene expelled by their fathers. It will be fit, to giue
more light vnto our historie, and more tast of the fruit which may be reapt, to relate briefly
the beginning of these Xeriffes, and the policie of their suddaine and admirable aduancement
to the large dominions, so neere vnto Spaine, there beeing but a small cut of
sea betwixt them, or (as a man would say) a puffe of wind.
Mahomet Ben Hamet called Xeriffe,Mahomet Ben Hamet Xeriffes the (...) which signifies famous and sacred, the which among
the Mahometans they giue vnto them that are of the line of their Prophet Mahomet
(from whom he said hee was descended) liued in the times of our fathers, in the
towne of Tigumede^, in the countrie of Dara in Numidia. He was a politicke man, and
a great hypocrite, who had by a fained sanctitie purchased the reputation of very religious
and wise. He was learned in their law, in Astrologie, and in art Magike. He had three
sonnes, whom hee instructed in the same manners, arts, and disciplines, and were esteemed
as the father; especially after that they had beene at Mecque, and at Medina Tal
Nabi in Arabia, which is a voyage held among them of great merit: for at Medina is
the supulchre of their prophet Mahomet.Three brethren Xeriffes. Their names were Abdelquibir, Hamet, and Mahomet
the youngest, who past the rest in policie and valour.
Hamet and Mahomet beeing come to Fez, a great and well peopled citie in Afrike, and
the chiefe of the reale of Mauritania Tingitana, to make themselues knowne there, they
were much made of by men that were curious of Sciences, and in a short time one of
them obtained a publike Lecture in the Colledge of Modarasa, and the other had the
charge to instruct and bring vp the children of Muley Mahomet, and Oataz, who was the
last king of Fez saue one, of the race of Benimerins. The Xeriffe their father hearing that
his sonnes prospered,^arning and Armes vnited makes a man compleat. hee aduised them to ioyne the art of warre with knowledge and
learning; for those two faculties vnited, make a ready way to greatnesse: the which they
could practise in such sort, that as they had beene esteemed for their learning, so they got
a reputation to be valiant, among the Xeques and Alcaides of the realme; and vpon this
opinion they had charge giuen them of some troupe or cornet of horse, at their instance,
vnder colour of religion, saying that it was to make warre against certaine Moores and
Africans which went to serue the king of Portugal, and did annoy the other Mahometanes
of their sect: Muley Nacer brother to the king of Fez, was very vnwilling they
should haue this Commission giuen them; saying, that by the like practises, and vnder a
cloake of holinesse, the families of Isdris, Magaracs, Almoranides, and Almohades had raigned
in Afrike, and ruined the auncient royall houses. Yet they had commission to leuie
men, and proued famous captaines in a short time; for hauing for a time ouerrunne the
prouinces of Duquele and others, where the Portugals had some forts, and done many
gallant exploits, they past into that of Sus, which depends vpon Marroc, whither their
fame was spred; and beeing there visited by many Moores and Africans of those marches,
liuing then in libertie, without any king, and who beleeued that their designe was
to make warre against the Christians which did hold the coasts of Afrike vnder the kings
D. Iohn the second, and D. Emanuel of Portugal, and the townes of Ceuta, Tangir, Arzille,
Alcasar, Ceguer, Azamor, Mazagon, Saphi, and Cap d' Aguer, and farther off, the castle
of Arquin, they had presently a great troupe; especially for that king Emanuel entertained
many Moores and naturall Africans:Emanuel king of Portugal fortified by Moores. so as that Christian king might at sometimes
haue drawne into armes of those nations aboue fiftie thousand horse, and twice as
many foot. Vnder the name of this religious warre, the Xeriffes became strong
and fearefull in the field: and in fauour thereof, they did obtaine of the inhabitants
of the prouince of Dara in Numidia, where they were borne, the tenthes
of their reuenues: for vnto God, said they, the tenths of the fruits of the earth are due by

auncient constitutions. The citie of Turedant, which is a seat royall, and in olde time
was the third member of the Miralmumins estate, did not onely receiue this impost willingly;
but they also persuaded the other Westerne Prouinces to doe the like, and to
choose for their gouernour the old Mahomet, Ben Hamet, the father of these two Xeriffes,
Hamet and Mahomet:Xeriffe makes himselfe master of Turedant. by reason whereof, he made himselfe master of Turedant, and made
sharpe warres against the Moores which held the partie of the Portugals, in the prouince
of Dara and others. A certaine Xec of the towne of Tiguint, in the mountaines of Atlas
the greater, towards the prouince of Sus, drew vnto the Xeriffes the people of Hea,
lying neere vnto him, who did contribute the tenthes of their fruits, and of the feeding
of their cattell, and in the end hee put them in possession of the towne of Tenest, which is
the chiefe of that prouince of Hea, one of the best of Afrike: and then they called themselues
princes, by the practises of this Xec, who was a Genouois renegado. But they
were expelled by Nugno Fernandes of Atayde a Portugal, who forced them to retire to
Tazarot, a towne of the iurisdiction of Marroc, and in the meane time old Mahomet Ben
Hamet the Xeriffe died. His three sonnes continuing their enterprises, besieged the
towne of Alquel, and tooke it from a Xec, called Cidi Bugima Africain, vassall to the king
of Portugal: and then they seized vpon the castle of the mountaine of Xanxaua, the
which they fortified, and were continually assisted by the Lords, townes, and comminalties
of that Westerne quarter of Afrike, in regard of this holy warre. After which, they
got more reputation, hauing incountred and taken D. Lope de Barriga, gouernour of Asafi,
who was the most redoubted captaine king Emanuel had in Afrike. Notwithstanding
Abdelquibir the eldest of the Xeriffes was slaine in this conflict. The two others
continuing their designes made themselues masters of Marroc, a goodly great citie,
and chiefe of the realme, by a notable treason practised against Nacer Buxentuf of the
race of the Hententats, who was king, but hee held nothing, in a manner, but the very
towne, for all the dependancies were at that time held by pettie tyrans, and the champane
countrie by the Alarabes, who in that countrie doe commonly hold Lords, towns,
yea and kings in subiection. This Nacer hauing often receiued the Xeriffes very kindly
into Marroc,Xeriffes seize vpon Marroc by treason. and vsed them with all honour and courtesie, hee was one a time poysoned
by their fraud, going forth to flie at the Heron with him. They had suborned a certaine
Moore, who crossed these noble men in their way as they returned from hawking, hauing
a cake in his basket made of flower and sugar that was poysoned, who seeming to go
on his way like a traueller, he was staid by the Xeriffes, who demaunded of him what hee
carried in his basket, and if he had not something good to eate, or to mingle with water
to disalter the king, who was there present; whereupon this Moore drewe out his cake,
and presented it vnto the king, who did eate thereof, and dranke the water, into the which
he had steept it; whereof he did not presently complaine: but beeing come to Marroc,
he fell sicke and died within 6 daies. In the meane time Mahomet knowing what would
happen, went to Xanxaua to fetch his forces, to second his brother Hamet, as they had agreed,
who by the meanes of some confederates, which vnder other pretexts were then
at Marroc, seized vpon the castle, euen as his brother arriued with his troupes, and made
himselfe to be acknowledged for king of the Marroquins, and seeming with a counterfeit
modestie to be very much grieued for the accident which had befallen king Nacet, as a
thing (said he) practised by some of his enemies vnknowne to him, he said that his election
was a blessing of heauen, the which must follow: seeking to pacifie the children of the
deceased, promising them honours and estates at their desires. Then he sent to aduertise
the King of Fez, that hee had beene created King of Marroc, and that hee
would hold the citie of him; and sending him certaine presents, accompanied with submissions
and promises, he rested satisfied. Thus he got the possession of Marroc, and of
the rights of that realme, the iurisdictions whereof extend farre towards the South;
which (as wee haue said) were distracted by the vsurpations of pettie Lords: and many
townes also had infranchised themselues, gouerning themselues like common weales,
but they reduced them to their old obedience. The warres against the Christians
and Moores which did adhere vnto them, beeing the chiefe support of their authoritie
and credit with the people, they continued it, and had diuers incounters with the

Portugals; but that wherein they did labour more curiously, and wherein they were most
fortunate, for the setling of their greatnesse, was to practise the Moores which followed
the king of Portugals partie, to drawe them vnto themselues, wherein finding some difficulties,
they sought to set a diuision among them, and they faining to be partakers in their
quarrels, did so bandie them one against another, as the Moores and Alarabes of the
countrie of Duquele and they of Xarquie of the one part, and they of Garbia of the other,
by mutuall incounters and bloodie battels made themselues so weake, as the Xeriffes
did easily subiect them one after another, and inrich themselues with their spoyles:
which was so great, as afterwards they had not any need of armes, horses, not followers:Hamet and Mahomet diuide their estates.
and then the two brethren diuided their estates, so as Hamet was king of Marroc,
and Mahomet king of Sus, or of Tarudant, which towne he did beautifie with buildings,
and fortifie very much: but, as the prosperities of this world are neuer absolute, going to
besiege the towne of Cap d' Aguer in Sus, hee was roughly repulst, with the losse of a
great number of men; the which did but quicken his spirits and courage to find meanes
to recouer this losse, and to maintaine his reputation: wherein both hee and his brother
Hamet were much assisted by the approbation they had of the king of Fez, who was content
when they had any losse, that they should repaire their forces by new leuies made in
his countries, and by his subiects which did voluntarily follow them: and therefore for
some yeares they entertained friendship with this king, who was the cause of their aduancement,
by all duties and good offices, paying him the like tribute that Nacer king of
Marroc was accustomed to paie, and moreouer, the fift penie of their spoiles taken in
warre. But finding themselues once strong, they began to neglect it, wherewith the king
was discontented, commanding one of his captaines of let them vnderstand, that if they
sent him not this tribute, he would make warre against them as enemies. The death of
king Mahomet Oataz ensuing, pacified this quarrell, for that the children of the deceased
who had beene scholers to one of the Xeriffes, would not molest them, but confirmed
them easily in their conquests* making a new promise of a light tribute; of the which they
neuer paied any thing, beeing glad to haue such an occasion to breake with them of Fez,
whom they knew to be men of little valour, liuing in delights and pleasures: Ambition
which hath no bounds, prouoking them to passe all the bonds, respects, and considerations
of the fauours which they had receiued from the house of these Oataz Merines,
whom in the end they did ruine: and the better to attaine to that which they pretended,
they made an alliance with Aben Hadu, and Muley Ferez, brethren, and Muley Drys,
with other Lords of the mountaines, enemies to the familie of the Oataz; so as when
Muley Hamet, who had succeeded Mahomet his father in the realme of Fez, thought (after
that the tribute had beene discontinued some yeares) to force the Xeriffes: they gaue
him plainly to vnderstand that they owed him not any thing, and that they had more
right to raigne, and to demand tribute of the kings and people of Afrike, than any other;
for that they were descended from the Prophet Mahomet, and his lawfull successours:
wherefore, if he thought it good to bee their friend, they would bee his: and if hee attempted
to crosse them in the warres which they made against Christians, that both God
and Mahomet would punish him, neither should they want power to defend themselues.
And soone after, the Xeriffe of Marroc, who confined vpon the country of Fez, made triall
if this king had the courage to enter into warre; for he began to force the inhabitants
of some places of his iurisdiction which lay neerest vnto him, to paie him the tenthes of
their fruits,Tenths of fruits the reuenewes of Kings. which was the chiefe article at that time of the receipt of their treasure: yea,
they did not eact any other thing, but certaine customes or tolles. Whereupon the king
of Fez resolued to proclaime war against them, and came in person to besiege Marroc, being
vnprouided of Ordnance: for hee had but two peeces, with the which hee made a
batterie neere vnto the port of Ciet Belabez Cebti. The other hearing of this siege at
Sus, came speedily and put himselfe into Marroc, with three thousand horse, the which
the king of Fez with his armie could not preuent: then instantly, with his and his brothers
forces, they made a furious fallie, and put the assaylants to rout, pursuing them vnto
the Prouince of Escura, doing infinit harme euen in the taile of their army. King Hamet
Oataz making hast, with the first to come to Fez, where he had news the same night, that

Muley Musand her brother, had raysed a tumult in the cittie, and that he wold make himself
King: which rebellion he supprest by his comming. By this bad triall which the King of
Fez had made, he was so incensed, as he would returne againe to the seege of Marroc,
whereas the two brethren, did not attend him, but came foorth to meete him, and charging
him at the passage of the riuer of los Negros,King of Fez defeated by the Xeriffes. at a place called Buacuba, they defeated
his foreward: in which conflict Muley Mahomet his son was slaine, and with him King
Aben Abdalla, he who had lost Granado in Spaine, and the King of Fez was forced to returne
in disorder, with great losse of his men, baggage, and women, and to leaue the field
to the Xeriffes, who by fauour of this victorie, made all them of the iurisdiction of Fez,
which confined vpon Marroc, to contribute the tenths, without any resistance: and when
as afterwards the King of Fez sought to be reuenged, they made head against him and his
Captaines, and put them to many routes, so as that wrong remayned vnreuenged.
The Xeriffes hauing handled the King of Fez thus roughly, he of Sus led an armie beyond
the mountaine Atlas, he tooke Tafilet, a towne of Numidia, and carried away the
Lord thereof called Amar. He also took some other places, some by force, some by composition:
so as these two brethren extended their dominions towards Numidia and Lybia,
and subdued the Arabians and Affricans which liued in those drie countries. But that
which gaue more fame to Mahomet, was the taking of Cape d' Aguer, which he had alreadie
attempted, and was then ill defended by D. Guttiere of Montroy a Portugois, who
was forced and taken there with a good spoile, especially of armes and ordinance, whereof
the Xeriffes could make great vse. This conquest setled them in their Estates, and made
all the people of the mountaines and valleys, friends, yea obedient vnto them, and some
thought that they had made Emanuel King of Portugal giue ouer the warres of Affrick,
and demantle the townes of Azamor, Safi, Arzille and Alcacar Ceguer, the which hapned
soone after.
But as all equalitie is odious in great men,Xeriffes in quaerell betwixt themselues. and their societie nothing firme: these two
brethren fell in the end to quarrell, and to open war. The cause was the hatred which Hamet
bare to his younger brother Mahomet, for that hee was more esteemed and respected
then he, he was indeed more valiant, more iust, and more loyall in that which hee promised:
he was discontented also, that of all the bootie which Mahomet his brother had taken
at Cap d' Aguer, of the which he should giue him the fift part, hee had not sent him any
thing but D. Guttiere prisoner, and some few slaues: Wherefore he sent him an imperious
message, that he would haue all the Ordinance, the harguebuzies, and the munition,
which he had wonne and 400. slaues more, and then the fifth peny of all the rest of the
bootie: whereupon there were diuers answers and replies. Hamet seeing that hee did not
performe what he desired, sent certaine troupes to leauie tribute of the land, which his
brother enioyed; the which he did for that time endure. After which Hamet desired that
they might haue an enterview in Marroc, but Mahomet knowing his brother well, excused
himselfe, and seeing they were vpon complaints, Mahomet sayd, that he had depriued
him of the lawfull succession of their father, who had left him great treasure in Tazarot,
demanding a moity both of the mooueables and conquests, where he had alwaies bene in
the greatest dangers. He sayd moreouer, that Mahomet Harran his son hauing bin borne
before that Hamet had any children, he ought to be sworne King and successor to all the
Realmes, according to a certaine ordonance of their father. From these words they fell
to armes, and without the meditation of Cidi Arrahal (who was an Alfagui of great authoritie
among the Moores and Alarabes) the warre had then growne furious and bloudy,
but he pacified them, and procured an enterview vppon the bankes of the riuer Hued
Issen, whether either of them came with 500. horse, and lighted in the field, where there
were two tents pitched, betwixt the which they parleyed, without any other companie,
but the aboue-named Alfagui, their troupes being far from them. At their coming together,
Mahomet humbling himselfe something, Hamet presently laied hold of him, shaking
him after a rough maner, and seeking to ouerthrow him: but Mahomet, who was strong
and actiue, kept himselfe vp, and in the end in wrastling, got his brother vnder him, doing
him no harme, but reproched him with his disloyalty, the other powring forth many iniuries,
vntil the Alfagui parted them, and then they both retired, so as this vnkind meeting

did breed nothing else but an increase of hatred, which continued vnto their deaths.
Hamet was no sooner at Marroc, but hee sent Mueley Cidan his eldest sonne to ouerrunne
the land of Dara, which did belong to the King of Sus his brother, who sent against
him Mumen Belelche, a Geneuois renegado with some horsemen, who was defeated
and forced to retire into a Castle, where he was beseeged, taken, and carried to Marroc,
and there remayned a Captiue in chaines for a time. On the other side, Muley Said
another of Hamets sonnes, defeated and slue Hascen Gelbi whome Mahomet had sent into
the Prouince of Hea to leauie contributions: by which two routes Hamet thinking
that his brothers forces were much weakened, he gathered the greatest power hee could
together, with an intent to chase him out of his Realme of Sus, but Mahomet was not
faint-hearted: for acquainting all his friends with the motiues of this warre, he could so
perswade them, as they were more affected than euer to support and defend him, so as
he was prepared to stoppe the passage of the mountaines called Mascarotan, which are
betwixt Marroc and Tarudant, where hauing seized vppon the streights, when as the
King of Marocs armie was ingaged in the mountaines, and his foreward led by Muley
Nacer his third sonne, readie to enter into the open fields, it was charged by Muley Harran,
eldest sonne to the King of Sus, with such furie, as Nacer hauing lost his best men,
was forced to retire into the mountaines,Mohomet defeates his elder brother which caused a great disorder: for Nacer hauing
incountred the battell, and the squadron which his father led, there was so strange a confusion
betwixt them, that did descend, and the others which would haue ascended flying
the enemie, who poursued them, as one hindering another, and intangled in their baggage,
we may say, that they gaue themselues a second route, greater then the first, casting
one another downe the precepices vppon sharpe rockes, both men and horses: after
a miserable manner: whereuppon the enemie comming, and the barbarous people of the
mountaines desirous of spoyle, falling vppon this amazed multitude, they made a terrible
slaughter, yet many quitting their horses, escaped on foote, by those difficult waies
into the reereward, which was free from this defeat. But Hamet King of Marroc, and Muley
Buacon another of his sonnes were taken, and led to Tarudant: Muley Cidan his eldest
sonne retired with the remaynder of this defeated armie to Marroc, in such despaire, as he
would haue sent Ambassadours into Spaine to the Emperour Charles the fifth, to craue
an armie of him, and to offer him homage, but hee was disswaded by the Alfaguis, and
Captaines that were with him, who thought it fit to send Mariana the wife of Muley Cidan,
and daughter to the Xeriffe Mahomet, whom hee loued much, to Tarudant to procure
the deliuerie of her father-in-law, and to mediate a peace: the which shee handled so
discreetly, as the two kings were reconciled vpon these conditions.
That there should be a new diuision made,Xeriffes breethren reconciled. and that to Mahomet should be left all the
Prouince of Sus, from Mount Atlas towards the South, vnto the bounds of Lybia and
Numidia, where it confines to Sus, the which they call Remoto, and to Hamet that which
is towards the North, and to the fronters of the Realme of Fez: That the treasures left by
their father should be equally diuided. That young Mahomet Harran should bee sworne
Prince successor to both their Estates, and after him Muley Cidan: That the prisoners of
either side should be set free without ransome: That Hamet King of Marroc, his children
and the Captaines that were taken, should sweare neuer to carrie armes against Mahomet
nor his children: That Hamet should haue the fift part of all that should bee gotten by
their common armes, by way of acknowledgement, as being his elder, and his part of the
ouerplus, and being in person in the armie, he should haue the honour to bee the Soueraigne
head, and Mahomet should be as Vrsi, or Lieutenant general vnder him. This peace
was concluded in the yeare 1543. but it held not;Hamet breakes the peace made with his brother. for Hamet being come to Marroc, sayd,
that whatsoeuer he had promised, was by force, beeing a prisoner, and that it was not fit
he should so wrong his son: wherefore hauing taken armes againe, the two brethren came
to battel, at a place called Quehera, 7. leagues from Marroc, the 29. of August 1544.
whereas Hamet was vanquished, and his army so disperst, as Mahomet being at the cittie
gates, chasing them that fled, he was receiued, partly by loue, and partly by feare, the Gouernor
and citizens thinking that all had beene lost: where hauing deliuered him the castle,
he was saluted and held for King of Marroc. Hee did not touch his brothers wiues

nor children, nor their Iewels, not treasure, but preserued them, assuring them that they
should haue good vsage. A day or two after Hamet came to the gates of Marroc, but he
found the place taken: wherefore beeing opprest with sorrow, hee retired to the Hermitage
of Cidi Abdalla ben Cesi, a man greatly honoured among that nation, not farre from
the cittie, and from thence he sent his sonnes Muley Cidan, and Muley Nacer vnto the
King of Fez, to recommend them and their affaires vnto him. It was Muley Hamet Oataz,
aboue-mentioned, a generous Prince, who notwithstanding the wrongs hee had receyued
from their father and vncle, entertained these two Xeriffes very courteously, and promised
them all assistance. The Xeriffe Mahomet, new King of Marroc, knowing that his
Nephewes were retired to Fez, sent them word, that they should not estrange themselues,
and that he had no will but to do them good, whereupon they obeyed him, and
he also drew vnto him by rewards and good entertaynments, all the Captaines and souldiers
which had serued his brother. The Alfaguis grieuing at Hamets disgrace, did mediat
an enterview of the two breethren neere vnto the riuer of Luyden, two leagues from
Marroc in the yeare 1545, but it was to Mahomets aduantage: for this victorious King
caused a great and rich pauilion to be set vp all open, in the middest of his troupes, where
he was set low vppon a royall seate, hauing barres round about, so as no man could come
neere him but before, he being armed. About him were his gards set, and other troupes
of souldiers, who left an entrie to go vnto the King. There first presented themselues vnto
him Hamets smaller children, then they that were bigger, and so according to their ages,
who came and kissed his knee one after another, and then retired to one side of the pauilion,
whereas the Kings children and his chiefe Officers were: last of all came Hamet
the Xeriffe, before whom the King arose, and receyued him at the entrie of his pauillion,
where as they embraced one another with teares in their eyes, and then sitting downe
vppon one seate, after they had viewed one another a long space, sighing but not speaking.Mahomets speech to his brother Hamet.
Mahomet began to tell him mildly of the breach of his faith, and of the peace of Tarudant,
that God had punished him by the victory which he had giuen him miraculously,
being very apparent that his forces were not sufficient to seize vpon the Realme of Marroc,
and that he must confesse, that for his disloyaltie he was fallen into the hatred of his
subiects and vassals. That he should remember how much he had loued him, serued and
obeyed him, as being his elder, and that he might assure himselfe he would beare him the
like loue hereafter, notwithstanding all that was past, so as he would acknowledge him to
be his king, and be content to be his Vizir, and Captaine generall: but he must forbeare to
enter into Marroc: for he had promised the Inhabitants, who feared to be ill intreated by
him, not to suffer him to enter: Wherefore hee should retire himselfe with his wife and
children to the towne of Tafilet, where he should receiue all brotherly loue from him,
and that he hoped the conquests they had hitherto made, were of small esteeme, in regard
of those that were to come, by the which hee should haue meanes to giue vnto his children
Realmes and Seigneuries to his and their content. Hamet made some excuses for
that which he had done, and thanked him humbly in words for the promises and offers
he made him, although the sentence seemed hard, yet he must vndergo it: wherefore he
retired to Tafila in Numidia with his wiues, children, and such friends as wold follow him.
If the Xeriffe Mahomet had dispossest his brother, whereof the chiefe motiue had beene
ambition and then distrust, the King of Fez might well attend as much, for they had beene
already in armes, and the Xeriffe knew wel that he had wronged him of Fez, which in reason
required reparation: but the Xeriffes greatnes would not permit it: one distrusting another,
they fell easily to quarrell. The Xeriffe complained, that after the battell of Quehera,
the king of Fez had giuen refuge to Muley Cidan, and Muley Nacer his nephewes, and
then he pretended that the Prouince of Tedle, did belong to the Realme of Marroc, and
at the same time that he demanded it, he sent Muley Abdel Cader, one of his sons, to field,
with an army,Kings of Fez and Marroc at warre. to exact the contributions, giuing him for an assistant Mumen Belelche aboue-named,
by race a Geneuois, to whom he gaue charge to beseege the strong castle
of Fixtelle, and to take it: which they could not do, for the place was well defended by
Ben-Ouzar, captaine to the king of Fez, who also went to field to succor him. The Xeriffe
desiring to incounter him, went also to field. In the armie of Fez were 30000. horse,

as well of Fez, Velez, Dubuda, as Arabians Hololes, and of Beni Melic Sofian, and eight
hundred harquebuziers, Turkes, or Christian renegado's, led by Marian a Persian born.
The warres of Barbarie and Mauritania are for the most part on horse-backe, and they do
little esteeme foot-men: besides all this, he had a thousand harguebuziers on horse-back,
and foure and twenty peeces of Ordinance. The Xeriffe had eighteene peeces of Ordinance,
eighteene thousand horse, three hundred Turkes harguebuiers, and a thousand
Christians renegado's carrying Cros-bowes. These armies being neere together, spent
many dayes to spie out some aduantage: when as the Xeriffe perceyued that the hors-men
of Fez, and the Alarabes which were with them, beganne to disband according to their
custome, which is to grow wearie to be in field, and to returne to see their families, hee
offered battell so fitly,King of Fez de seated and taken (for hee was a great souldier) as they were forced to fight, where
the Xeriffe got the victorie, and the King of Fez was taken, beeing hurt in two places,
and his sonne Muley Bucar, with many other Commaunders and Captaines, and a great
spoyle.
Muley Buacon Lord of Velez de la Gomera of the race of Merins, alone, shewed himselfe
a valiant Captaine, and saued his Squadron, all the rest beeing scattered and put to
route. Fixtelle was then yeelded, and all other places of the Prouince of Tedle. The Xeriffe
causing the King of Fez to come before him, vsed no rough speech, but did rather
comfort him in his misfortune, and as he seemed alwaies very religious, he told him only
that he should acknowledge,Speech of the Xeriffe to the King of Fez. that this miserie had fallen vppon him, for that hee did
not raigne according vnto God, neither had any care of his people: For (sayd he) thou
which art a King, and shouldst instruct thy subiects in vertue and good manners, why
ghast thou suffered such abhominable vices to be ordinarily practised in that great Citty
of Fez, where as euery man is giuen to fraude, violence, dissolutenesse, and drunkennes,
where as wine is openly sold in Tauernes, contrarie to the law of Mahomet the Prophet?
Why hast thou not caused iustice to be administred, and these excesses punished? wherunto
Hamet answered nothing, but that Princes which dislike of vices, and would correct
them, could not do it, when as they meete with subiects bred vp in vice, and accustomed
to liue ill; but hee layed before him the good which the Xeriffs had receyued in Fez,
and that if they were growne great, it was by the assistance and meanes of Oataz Benemerines,
intreating him to remember it. The Xeriffe put him in good hope, but hee made
him promise to perswade the Inhabitants of Fez to open him the gates, and receiue him
into the towne: and with this intent he marched towards the great Cittie, which be rather
three citties one ioyning vnto another, contayning (as some report) eightie thousand
families, full of rich men, liuing voluptuously, and beautified with rich and stately
buildings, both publike and priuate, more than any other citie among the Mahumetists:
but whatsoeuer Hamets will was in this poynt, they would not suffer the Xeriffe to enter,
for that Buacon Lord of Velez, the Kings kins-man, beeing entred into it with the remainder
of the defeated armie, had caused Cazen, sonne to the king of Fez to be proclaymed
king, vppon condition, that if his father, being set at libertie, should returne, he should
yeeld vp the Realme vnto him. The Xeriffe Mahomet seeing there was no meanes to force
that great city, and wanting victuals, he returned in a rage, and caused the heads of aboue
two hundred of the citizens, that were his prisoners, to be cut off, leading away king Hamet,
Muley Bacar, with other prisoners of name, in chains. This was an admirable exploit,
for (they say) that the Xeriffe lost but one man in his whole armie, but many were hurt,
and the number of the dead were small of the king of Fez his part: this was in the yeare
1547. The dissention among the Princes which remayned in Fez, gaue the xeriffe occasion
to rayse a new army, in the yeare following, vnder the conduct of Mahomet Haran,
and Abdel el Cader, his sons, but this warre was soone ended: for the Alfaguis, who are esteemed
wise men among the Moores, did mediate a peace, by the which king Hamet Oataz,King of Fez set at libertie.
and his followers were set at liberty, and there was giuen to the xeriffe Mahomet for
the charge of the war, the towne of Mequineuz, which was great and well peopled, containing
about 8000. families, being 12. leagues distant from Fez. And it was agreed, that
whensoeuer the xeriffe would enter into Fez, he should haue the keies deliuered to him.
About 2. moneths after the kings deliuery, the xeriffe meaning to make trial of the effect

of his promise, came neere vnto the Cittie with some small forces, and sent to demaund
the keyes. The king of Fez knowing that he had no great troupe with him, entertayned
him some dayes in hope, pretending that there was some dissention in the towne, which
hindred his entrie. In the meane time he gathered his forces together, and fell out vpon
him, forcing him to retire with the losse of some of his Knights: whereat the Xeriffe beeing
wonderfully mooued, hee sent for his forces, and came and lodged at Arras Elma,
two leagues from Fez, where there is a great spring which makes the riuer that runs into
the towne, the which he blockt vp with forts well manned, to cut off their victuals, and to
cause a mutinie. Yet they endured this discommoditie almost two yeares. In the end not
able any longer to beare the want of many things which they needed, they let the Xeriffe
by night into the old towne, by a breach which they suffered him to make, the which Hamet
Oataz, (who was in the new towne, where the Kings pallace is) did not perceiue, vntill
the next day morning, and then hee came with a great troupe, and charged them of
Marroc furiously to expell them, but he could not: for the people did no way assist him,
but kept themselues close in their houses during the fight, which was very cruell in all
parts of the townes, the one crying for the Xeriffe, and the other for the Merins, and the
Cittizens with their wiues and children cryed out, God saue him that shall giue vs peace
and bread,
casting stones, logges, tyles, and whatsoeuer they could get, out at the windowes,
wherewith many were slaine, or sore wounded, and more of the Kings men, then
of others. So as Muley Hamet and his men were forced to retire into new Fez, and to abandon
the old towne to the Xeriffe. The next night Buacon perswaded Muley Hamet
to flie with him to Velez, and to passe from thence into Spaine, to craue ayde from the
Emperour Charles, but he would not beleeue him: Wherefore Buacon retired himselfe,
and the same night Muley Hamet sent foorth his mother, (whose name was Lela Mahabilo)
to the Xeriffe, to craue a peace of him vppon what tearmes soeuer: who casting her
selfe prostrate before him,Fez won by the Xeriffe Mahomet. besought him to receiue the Realme, and to giue him some
corner of ground to entertaine him and his family: wherewith the Xeriffe was very well
satisfied, commanding that Hamet should depart the same day, and retire to Marroc, carying
with him his wiues, children, Iewels, treasure, mooueables, and whatsoeuer hee
would, and that Cazer^ and Aben Nacer his sonnes should go to Tarudant with their families
and goods, promising to giue them good entertaynment. The Xeriffe hauing
seene among the Kings daughters, one that pleased him, hee married her: thus the Xeriffe
thought that he had conquered the Cittie and Realme of Fez; but he could not yet
enioy it quietly. Hee was much incensed to heare, that during the warre, Muley Zidan
his Nephew, and his sonne-in-law had come to Fez, and borne armes for his enemie.
This made him dislodge the Xeriffe Hamet from Tafilet, and to confine him to Xiguret in
Zahara in Lybia, with Zidan and Nacer his sonnes, retayning Buacon and Mancor who
were younger, with him, whom he afterwards married with two of his daughters. The
Lord of Dabuda, called Muley Amar, a Prince of the bloud of the Merins, beeing summoned
by the Xeriffe to come and do him homage, hee durst not, but leauing his house
he retired with his family to Melille in Gared vpon the sea.
Buacon Lord of Velez beeing fled from Fez, as we haue sayd, had an intent to flie vnto
the Christians, and treated with Don Aluar de Bacan to yeeld himselfe vassall to the
Emperour Charles, and to put Pignon de Velez into his hands. But staying long for an answer
from D. Aluar, the xeriffe, (it may be aduertized of that which he pretended to do)
sent for him to come to Fez with assurance. The which hee promised to do, and put him
selfe vppon the way, but he turned on the left hand, and retired to Melille, where he continued
his practises with the Prince Maximillian, who gouerned Spaine for the Emperour.
He was to deliuer Pignon de Velez to D. Bernardin of Mendoza, who was sent expresly
to receiue it: but the Captaine that was in it, would not deliuer it, wherefore hee
past with D. Bernardin to Malaga, and from thence to Maximilian, who hauing referred
him vnto the Emperour, hee went to him into Germany, but to no purpose: for they
did not trust him. In the end he addressed himselfe to D. Iohn king of Portugall, who gaue
him mony and fiue Carauels, in which he embarked 1500. souldiers Portugals, meaning
to land in Affricke, at a place called las Aluzemas: but hee was surprized by Salharais,

Gouernour of Alger, who had some intelligence of these Carauels, who assayled them
with fourescore Galleots, tooke them, and carried them to Alger, with all the Christian
souldiers, notwithstanding any thing that Buacon could pleade, who sayd, that hee had
brought them for his seruice, that by their ayde hee might enter into the Estate of Fez,
from whence the Xeriffe, their common enemie, had chased all their house and family
by force: but hee could get nothing from Salharrais at that time but reproches, that hee
should bee ashamed, beeing a Mahometane, to haue recourse vnto Christians in his affaires,
rather then vnto Turkes: yet notwithstanding afterwards, hee not onely deliuered
these Portugall souldiers, but came himselfe with the forces of his Gouernement to ayde
Buacon to recouer the Realme of Fez: for it happened, that the Xeriffe hauing greater
desseignes, and aspiring to the Empire of all Affricke, made an enterprize vppon the
Towne of Tremessen, which was store-house for the Turkes, where they had a Gouernour
and a Garrison, sending his three eldest sonnes Harran, Cader, and Abdalla, to
whome it was yeelded without resistance. Abdalla remayned there with a good Garrison,
but hee stayed not long till hee was inuested by Salharrais with a mightie armie, by
whome hee was vanquished going foorth to fight with them, notwithstanding that the
father had sent him a supply of eight thousand horse, vnder the commaund of Cader and
Abderramen his Brethren, who were the cause of his losse, by their accustomed iarres
and dissentions: for beeing breethren by diuers mothers, they had alwaies some quarrell
a foote, and could not agree in this important action. Cader was slayne in this conflict,
beeing not succoured by Abderramen, and Abdalla (sore wounded) was forced to retire
in disorder.
Bahami an old Captaine, and Cousin to these young Xeriffes, thinking to reprehend
Abderramen for the fault which hee had committed, vsing some sharp and manly words
vnto him, hee wounded him in the arme with his sword; whereof hauing afterwards
complayned vnto the Xeriffe Mahomet, hee was so incensed against his sonne, as some
thought hee was poysoned within a moneth after, with the fathers consent: so in a short
time three of the Xeriffes sons dyed: for Mahomet Harran the eldest, who was appoynted
Successour to the Realmes of Marroc and Fez, and had assisted him in the Conquest
of Tremessen, returning afterwards to Fez, he dyed of sicknesse. In the meane time the
Xeriffe had newes that the Inhabitants of the Mountaine Nefuca, called otherwise Derenderen,
a people subiect to rebellion, were reuolted. They had mutined before, by the
perswasion of a Preacher of the sect of Mohaydin, called Cidi Abdalla: but now the Xeriffe
imputed this tumult to the practises of Muley Hamet the dispossessed king of Fez and
his children: but more vppon a conceipt, then any wel-grounded reason: so as incensed
with a violent passion,Crueltie of the Xeriffe Mahomet. hee sent his sonne Abdalla to Marro^, where this poore King was,
with charge to cut off his head, and there was commaundement sent to Habis, Gouernour
of Sus, to do the like to his two sonnes Cazeri and Nacer, who liued at Tarudant,
the which was executed.
The Rebels of Derenderen had annoyed the Xeriffe, beeing animated by their Preacher
Cidi Abdalla, and now they shewed themselues no lesse obstinate. It is a mightie
people, but barbarous, superstitious, and disloyall, inhabiting^ this long mountaine,
which was strong and of hard accesse, hauing with in it spatious valleys well tilled, carrying
grayne, oyle, and other fruites, which is a branch of the great Atlas, in the territory
of Marroc: who made such resistance against the Xeriffe, who came against them in person,
as after that he had lost a great number of his men, he resolued to leaue them vntill
another time.
The towne of Tremessen beeing recouered by the Turkes, Buacon Lord of Velez, who
was at Melille, came againe to intreate Salharrais, that he would not ruine his good fortune,
but deliuer the Christian souldiers which hee detayned, paying him some reasonable
ransome. Salharrais being incensed against the Xeriffe, and thinking that if hee
should assayle him after the route of his sonnes, hee would bee so amazed, as hee might
dispossesse him of Fez, requiring him with the like as he had attempted to do against him
at Tremessen, he granted Buacon his request, and moreouer offered to furnish him with
a good number of Turkes, hauing agreed vppon some pay, and he himselfe went with

him in person. Buacon promised to pay him a thousand doublons of gold daily, for forty
daies together, and gaue him caution in the towne of Alger: Hee agreed also that Salharrais
should carry away all the mouables, iewels and treasor which should bee found
in Fez, belonging to the Xeriffe.
This accord being made,Turkes goe to beseege Fez. the Turke went to field with foure thousand men of his nation,
and twelue peeces of ordinance, giuing order to other troupes to come and ioyne
with him at Tremessen; the Lord of Dubude of the bloud of the Merins, came also with
some souldiars. It may be the newes hereof made the Xeriffe retire from pursuing the
Montaynards of Derenderen, sooner then he would haue done, and to put himselfe into
Fez, whether all his forces being come, hee went to incounter the Turkes vpon the Marches
of Tezar, whereas the Realme of Fez confines with that of Tremessen, and there attended
his comming many daies: but seeing his long stay, and his victuals being cut off
by Buacons children, who held the passages, and had their retreats into the mountaines of
Matagara, hee was forced to retire. Xeriffe was no sooner parted from Tezar, but Salharrais
arriued, to whom the Inhabitants opened their gate, and receiued a garrison of
Turkes: then causing his army to march against Fez, hee went along the foote of the
mountaines, being coasted by the Xeriffs army which held the plaines, and was much
stronger then he in horse. Salharrais was a captaine, and could imbrace all occasions,
so as one day hee surprized the Xeriffs reereward,Xeriffe Mahomet forced to flie. led by Abdalla, his sonne, and put it
to route, and made him to abandon his munition and baggage, so as the Xeriffe was forced
to goe hastily to Fez, marching all that day and the night following without any
stay, and then Salharrais lodged presently vpon the bankes of the riuer Sebu.
The Inhabitants of Fez haue a preuiledge,Preuiledge of the Inhabitants of Fez. that if their King suffers the enemy to
approach within halfe a league of the city, as being to weake and wanting meanes to
resist him, they may open him the gates, and not bee taxed with treachery, and so they
cause their Kings to sweare at their comming to the crowne: For it is a great folly, say
they, by a vaine, weake and vnseasonable loyaltie, to expose such a city to the spoile, in supporting
a Prince obstinately, who is vnprouided of force and meanes to defend them.
This priuiledge forced the Xeriffe to goe forth againe to fight with the Turkes army, and
with his enemy Buacon, and fearing that the captaine of the, Turkes which hee had for his
gard, would abandon him, and retire to Salharra, he caused his head to bee cut off.
All the captaines and gouernors of Sus, Da^a, Marroc, and the Prouinces of Fez,
were in his army with their people, which shewed to bee foure score thousand horse, of
the which he sent eight thousand good horse of Sus against the enemy, to fight with him
at the passage of a riuer, and hee with the rest of the army followed after, stretching it
out vpon the riuer side, so as there was nothing but the riuer betwixt the two armies.
Salharrais finding great difficulty in his passage, planted his ordinance, vpon the riuers
side where there was a ford, and caused euery horseman to take a Harguebuzier behind
him, and the ordinance to play continually vpon the Xeriffs squadrons, so as hee past a
great number of his shot in despight of them, who with admirable celerity cast vp a
kinde of rampar to defend them from the horse, and shooting incessantly gaue meanes
to the rest of the Turkes horse and foote to passe, neither could they bee forced to quit
the place, which they had taken, notwithstanding the many charges of the Xeriffs
horsemen.
The Turkes army being past, they lodged that night as strongly as they could. The
next day they marched towards the city, whereas the Xeriffs army made great resistance,
the which was diuided into three battaillons, and hauing made a trench vpon the great
high way, planted with ordinance, they could not passe; but Salharrais making a shew as
if he would goe and beseege the bourrough of Zefere with part of his army, whereas the
Xeriffs victuals and munition lay, hee caused his sonne Abdalla to leaue a little hill called
Dardubag, which hee had in gard, of the which hee himselfe, with the other part of the
Turkish army, seized instantly, and then hee feared not the enemies horse; the which
could not then anoy him, the way being rough and full of stones. Notwithstanding
the Xeriffe charged the Turkes, but they of that nation and the renegados which were
in his army, and of his gard betraied him; so as Salharrai: Turkes got the aduantage,

and with their shot disperced their first squadrons:Turkes make the Xeriffe retire. and put them to flight, wherefore
the Xeriffe seeing that they of Fez that were with him began to wauer, and that most of
them retired towards the old city, hee resolued also to retire himselfe into new Fez, with
his souldiars of Marroc and Sus, in whom he did most relie, and the Turkes marching on
in good order, came and camped neere vnto the port called Bebelfetoh, whereas many
of the Inhabitants came vnto them, and Arabians that were friends to Buacon, with
an intent to haue it opened vnto him. Muley Abdalla the Xeriffs sonne, who had entred
the city by an other port, caused two peeces of ordinance to bee planted vpon the portall
of Bebelfetoh, which made many shot into the Turkes campe, and did them much
harme, but Buacon and his friends brake open the gate, and made way for the army to
enter.
Then there beganne a furious and bloudy conflict in the streets, where there died
many good men of either side, in the end Abdalla, who had no confidence in them of
Fez, abandoned it, and retired himselfe into the castle of new Fez, passing by the suburbes
of Merz, where he reported vnto his father how all things had past in the great towne,
who holding himselfe not safe in new Fez,Fez abandoned by the Xeriffe to the Turkes. went to field, in a manner flying towards
Marroc, hauing aduised his wiues, his daughters and houshold traine, to saue themselues
as they could: abandoning his treasors, iewels, and mouables (whereof hee
went alwaies well furnished) to them that could lay hold of it. Some escaped, others
were staied and taken, and amongst them two of the Xeriffs daughters, who had that day
a notable losse. Aliben Bubcar, who was captaine of the fort of new Fez, held it, vntill
he thought that the Xeriffe was in safety, and then hee yeelded it to Salharrais by composition,
his men going forth with their armes and horses, and what goods they could
carry with them.
The city of Fez being thus wonne,Fez taken by the Turkes. some captaines of the Turkes army, who hated
Buacon, gaue Salharrais to vnderstand that the Inhabitants of Fez did detest him, for that
hee was affected to the Christians, and was proud, and of an ill disposition. That they
murmured already against him, and gaue it out that they would neuer receiue him willingly
for their King; and therefore hee should binde them much vnto him, if hee gaue
them Muley Bubcar, one of the sonnes of Muley Hamet Oataz, to whom by right the
Realme did belong, and that it was their desire. Vpon these reports and perswasions
Salharrais caused Muley Bubcar to bee proclaimed King of Fez, retayning Muley Buacon
in the fort of new Fez well garded, which made the people to mutine: for whereas the
Turkes had said that Buacon was hated and reiected by the Inhabitants of Fez, it was a
meere slander, and the contrary did soone appeare, for they tooke armes for his sake against
the Turkes, so as Salharrais was forced (to pacefie this tumult) to send him vnto
them with an Alcaide, he promising to returne againe to accomplish their conuentions.
Buacon being brought into the city, cast himselfe into the Mesquite of Caruin, and
would not come forth, saying, that he had beene ill intreated by the Turkes, and in danger
to be slaine by them, and therefore he would not fall againe into their hands. But
the Alcaide, which did accompany him, gaue him so many reasons, as hee returned with
him to Salharrais, who pacified him with good words and made him King of Fez: but
he condemned the Citizens to pay an ounce of gold for euery house, because they had
seditiously taken armes against the Turkes: whatsoeuer past betwixt them afterwards,
it is certaine, that Salharrais departed very ill satisfied of King Buacon, and returned from
this enterprise (where hee had gotten much honour and proffit) in such a rage against
him, as he aduertised the Xeriffe, that he might boldly make warre against Fez when hee
pleased, assuring him that hee would neuer giue aide to Buacon: It may bee hee was the
more incensed, for that hauing sent Ya Hay^ a Turke to Veles, to receiue the fort of Pipnon,
which it may be was an Article of their Conuentions, the captaine that was in it,
would not yeeld it, but deliuered it vnto Muley Mahomet sonne of Buacon, and when the
Pirat demanded it of Mahomet, hee refused him, but it happened on a time that the Pirat
tooke Mahomet out of his fort, and intreated him so roughly, as hee yeelded vp
the place.
The Xeriffe Mahomet being chased from Fez, thinking that the towne of Meguineus,

would be of great expence hee commanded his sonne Abdalla who was in it, to abandon
it, for the which hee repented himselfe, hearing how much Salharrais was discontented
with Buacon: for this place was very commodious to make an enterprise vpon Fez,
which hee presently resolued. But hee had reason to thinke how to keepe it from the
Xeriffe Hamet his brother, who vpon the newes of this losse was returned to Tafilet,
and had made himselfe Master thereof, with an intent to attempt some great matter.
He therefore resolued to punish him in such sort, as hee should neuer haue more cause
to feare him, going himselfe in person to beseege him in Tafilet; and in the meane time
he sent an army against Buacon the new King of Fez; giuing the charge thereof to his
sonne Abdalla; Buacon for his part sent his army to field, being led by Muley Nacer and
Muley Mahomet his sonnes: but these two brethren (the one beeing base) disagreeing,
they diuided their forces, and gaue Abdalla meanes to defeat Mahomet, and to make the
other retire:Abdalla defeated by Buason. which made Buacon goe out of Fez with a great army, who charged Abdalla
so furiously, as hee put his army to rout with great slaughter. In this battaile there
was a race of Arabians cut in peeces, called Arrahamenes, whom the Xeriffe drew out
of the country of Sus, and had placed them in the Prouince of Temecene, of the which
there escaped not one.
The defeat of Abdalla was held secret by the Xeriffe,Mahomet the Xeriffe beseegeth his brother Mahomet. who did beseege Hamet his brother
in Tafilet, so as the beseeged knew not any thing: but contrariwise they found
meanes to haue it bruted in the towne, that Abdalla was a conqueror in Fez. Wherefore
Hamet who had put himselfe into that place, in hope to bee releeued by Buacon, beleeuing
that he had beene wholy defeated, and without hope of that which hee expected,
he sent Zidan and Nacer his sonnes vnto their vncle, and yeelded himselfe vnto his mercy:
Who confined him at that time into an hermitage, but hee caused the heads of his
Nephewes, to bee cut off, to free himselfe of all feare; and hauing left a good garrison
in Tafilet, he tooke the way to Garciluin, and by that way entred into the Realme of Fez.
Buacon seeing himselfe thus obstinatly pursued,Buason King of Fez defeated and slaine. went forth against the Xeriffe, where
there was a bloudy battaile, in the which Buacon was slaine vpon the place, and his
army put to flight. Nacer his sonne fled to Mesquineuz, to recouer the mountaines,
his other sonne Mahomet, entred into Fez, with fifty horse onely, but the Citizens, who
alwaies held with the stronger, let him know that he was not welcome: wherefore hee
went also to Mesquineuz, where he found his brother Nacer, and so they past to Sala or
Rabat vpon the Ocean sea, where they imbarked to passe into Spaine, but they were
taken at sea by certaine Pirats Brittons. Muley Buscar, sonne to the deceased King Hamet
Oataz, being in this battaile with Buacon, fled to Tremessen, and from thence to Algier,
where he died of the plague.
Thus by this victory the Xeriffe was peaceable King of Fez,Fez wholy subdued the Xeriffe. and all the Xecques of the
people, and Gouernors of the Realm, came and yeelded themselues vnto him. Being vnable
to force them of the mountaines, or beeing loath to blemish the glory of so great a
conquest by some sinister accident, in seeking to subdue those base desperate people, he
made an accord with them, that they should yeeld him a certaine homage. Being then
come to Marroc, he caused his brother Hamet to bee brought thether, with the children
that he had remayning, giuing them in gard, to Ali Ben Bucar, and then he went towards
Tarudant to make a marriage (for hee was accustomed euery yeere to marry some faire
gentlewoman) and therefore hee carried two of his daughters with him, with a great
traine of women, some troupes of horse, and twelue hundred Turkes of his gard; but
he came not thether, being slaine by the way, by treason, vpon this occasion. Hee had
a priuate hatred with Hassen Basha, sonne to Haradin Barbarousse (but the cause is not
well knowne) so as Hassen sought all meanes to bee reuenged. Being at Algiet there
came a Turke vnto him, who had heard speake of their quarrell, his name was also Hassen,
a wicked and a murtherous man, who made offer to kill the Xeriffe, and hauing receiued
money, and great promises from the Basha, he came to Fez, whereas Abdalla was viceroy
for his father; whom hee gaue to vnderstand that hee had fled from Algier, for that
Hassen Basha would haue put him to death vpon certaine false reports, beseeching him
to receiue him into his seruice. Abdalla who did not much loue the Turkish nation,

would not entertaine him, but willed him to goe to Marroc to his father the which hee
did, where he was receiued, and soone after made captaine of the Turkes of his gard,
who were all discontented, and ready to mutine, for that they had beene aboue a yeere
without their pay, the which they had often demanded of the treasorers, and were disdainefully
reiected, with iniuries, as it it is the custome of that kinde of people: so as
when the Xeriffe beganne his voyage to Tarudant, they were much incensed. The
Turke Hassen taking this fit occasion to execute his deseigne, increased their discontents
all he could, so as he grew confident to treat with some of the most mutinous of his
garde, to kill the Xeriffe, and to spoile his treasure, shewing them how easily the might
escape by Numidia, and get to Tremessen, before they should haue meanes to pursue
them.
This practise succeeded for the execution of the murther, but they could not escape
as they expected. The Xeriffe being at the passage of Mont Atlas, which is called Bibone,
at a place named Algier, he would take a view of his gards, who for this cause were
armed on horsebacke, and in battaile, Hascen who was their captaine, lighting from his
horse, drew neere vnto the Xeriffe, who was at the entry of his tent, as if hee had some
thing to say vnto him, being followed by foure other his confederats; being neere, and
seeing him attentiue to some other thing, the Treasorer who was not farre off, seeing
Hascen lay his hand vpon his Cymitere, he cried out to Xeriffe that he should beware of
himselfe: the Xeriffe thinking to flie into his tent, was intangled among the cords and
fel,Xeriffe Mahomet murthered. then the traitor cut one of his hamstrings, and the rest made an end of murthering him,
killing his chiefe Treasoter (whom they hated) with him. This murther beeing done,
it was published by the Turkes themselues, with curses against the dead. Many of the
troupes which followed in this voyage, ioyned with them, so as Hascen was presently
strong and so feared, as marching towards the Prouince of Sus, wheresoeuer hee past,
they did him honour and seruice, and being come to Tarudant they easily made themselues
Master of the towne, finding it abandoned by Muley Odman, one of the Xeriffes
children, and there they gathered together the treasure that was found in his, and his
two daughters traines, with that which they found in the castle of Tarudant. Thus
perished the Xeriffe Mahomet,Disposition of the Xeriffe Mahomet. who from little was aduanced to one of the greatest
principalities in the world, built vpon the rapine of three mighty and ancient realmes,
wherevnto hee had annexed many other Prouinces, by notable murthers, and incredible
effusion of bloud, with an intent to make himselfe Monarke of all Afrike, high-minded,
proude, a dissembler, a parricide to reigne alone, couetous, without loue, iniurious
and contemning all other men: against whom God raised a petty enemy, when as hee
thought to enioy all his conquests, and that he glorified himselfe, who slue him in
the midist of his guards, yea and by them; so variable and inconstant is worldly greatnesse.
The murtherers liued not long vnpunished. They found amongst the prisoners
whom they deliuered at Tarudant, a Moore issued from the race of the Iewes, who was
called Gasi Musa, and had beene superintendant of the Engins of sugar which the Xeriffe
held in that Prouince, and was then restrained vpon his accounts.
He was knowne by the Turkes to be a man of great iudgement and vnderstanding, and
that might giue them good aduice, wherefore they honoured him with the Office
of Iustice Major of the towne and country of Sus. Being doubtfull what to doe, hee
aduised them to fortifie themselues in that great and rich city, where they might
well defend themselues for a time, vntill that succors came vnto them from Algier
by Numidia, but Hascen who was rich, could not see the happinesse to returne vnto
the Basha, whom he had serued so wishfully, and therefore he resolued to depart with
his booty, and seeke to get through the desarts to Tremessen, the which they might haue
easily done, if they had taken this resolution sooner: for hauing spent about 3. weekes in
Tarudant, they might wel thinke they should find incounters, hauing so long a iorney to
goe, which they should not be able to resist: Gazi Musa seeing that the Turke should bee
no longer his Lord, he secretly gaue intelligence to Muley Odman (who was in the
Prouince of Dara, and leauied men, both Africains and Arrabians his friends) of the departure
and voiage which Hascen and his coufederats made, who carried away his sisters

and the treasor of the Realme, thinking by this aduice to bee freed from the remainder of
his accompts. These theeues were not two iourney from Tarudant, but they found
themselues charged, and so prest as they were forced to loose both prey and life, for they
were all slaine. So the virgins and the treasor was recouered, and Tarudant also. This
happened in the yeere 1557.
At Marroc the Alcaide Ali Aben Bubear remained Gouernor, who had beene a good
seruant to the Xeriffe that was dead, and was much affected to Abdalla his sonne. Hee
vsing wordly wisdome,Seruice rashly performed. hearing how his Master had beene slaine, not attending any order
or commandement from the new King Abdalla, slue the old Xeriffe Hamet, who had
beene giuen in gard, least the people should force him to deliuer this Hamet, to seat him
in the royall Throne, where they had seene him some yeeres before, the which might hinder
Abdalla who was then at Fez,Abdalla King of Marroc, Fez and Tarudant. desyring to settle him quietly in the realme as he did.
Among the Princes which this Gouernor slue, there were two sonnes of Muley Zidan
and of Mariana daughter to the deceased Xeriffe Mahomet, who found an easie meanes to
be reuenged, for after the death of Muley Zidan her husband, she had retired to Abdalla
her brother, whom she gouerned whilest he liued with great fauour, so as Ali Ben Bubcar
had a most dangerous enemy of her about the King. Abdalla succeeded in the realmes
of Marroc, Fez and Tarudant, with their appurtenances, without any contradiction: The
father had ordained by a sollemne will, made in a Parliament or Conuocation held expresly,
that the eldest of his sonnes should succeed in all his Estates, Lands, and Siegneuries,
as King,Testament of the Xeriffe Mahomet. and after him his other brethren vnto the last that should be lyuing, according
vnto the prerogatiue of their ages, and that not any one of their children should
come vnto the crowne, during the life of any one of the vncles, which Order Abdalla in
the course of his reigne thought to breake, in fauour of his sonne Mahomet, and therevpon
Mariana tooke occasion to be reuenged of Ali who had slaine her children, and
procured his ruine by this meanes. This woman who was of a great spirit, gouerned the
King absolutly, yea she presumed to meddle in his greatest and most secret affaires, and
to giue him counsell, which he tooke not ill, but did conferre willingly with her. Hauing
then a desseigne to breake this testamentary Ordonance made by his father,Vizir a dignity at Marroc. and to leaue
the realme to his eldest sonne called Mahomet. She tould him that she found he should
haue some contradiction, if he should die during the life of Ali Ben Bubcar, who was vizir
of the realme, a cheefe dignity next vnto the King, yea of so great authority, as in the
election of Kings,Kings of the Moores electiue. the voice and approbation of the vizir was very necessary; for according
to the custome of the Moores, all their Kings were chosen after this manner, notwithstanding
any Ordonances and dispositions which Kings in their life time may make
to the contrary; and she told him that this vizir would seeke to maintaine his fathers wil,
for she saw him much affected to one of his brethren, she speake it not by surmise: for
dissembling the hatred she bare vnto Ali (as shee was very cunning) and diuising often
with him of diuers affaires, and euen of this, as if it had beene a desire of her owne onely,
and no intent of the Kings, she discouered his heart sufficiently, by his discourse and answers,
being to open and free for a Moore. Moreouer he was rich and mighty of himselfe,
for he was Xecq or Lord of a great people called Zaragana, and for his wisdome
and valour, which were great, he was held so necessary for the realme, as the King ought
to respect him, and gouerne his affections according to his counsels. The King in truth
did much esteeme him, and knowing that the election of his successor depended of the
vizirs voice and nomination, he did entertaine and gratifie Ali, thinking in time to bind
him by his bounty to second his intentions. Conferring after with his sister of this
desire which he had to leaue his realmes to Mahomet his sonne, she still obiected vnto
him the sincerity or rather seuerity of his vizir Ali (...) Bubcar, seeking to incense the
King against him: So as on a time seeing the King discontented at some thing that Ali
had done, according to the duty of his charge, but against the Kings will, this cunning
woman fell in speech of the succession saying, that hee assured himselfe more of Ali then
he ought, and namely in this businesse concerning his sonne Mahomet, perswading him
to certifie himselfe by some tryall* and therefore she aduised him to counterfit himselfe
sicke for some daies, and not to suffer any one to enter into his Chamber, if he were not

called the which is not strang among those nations, whereas their Kings being out of war
remaine whole monthes shut with their women, and no man sees them, but such as are
called. During this fiction, the Vizir Ali, who loued the King and the Estate, came
daylie to the pallace, morning and euening, inquiring of his health, yet could not bee
admitted into his Chamber. Mariane talked often with him, and made him beleeue
that the Kings sicknesse was very dangerous: who obseruing her words and countenance,
perswaded himselfe that he was dead, and that she sought to conceale it, so as one
morning he intreated her to tell him the truth, which should not be hidden from him;
for if he were dead it were needfull to prouide an other King speedily for the Estate,
and that such affaires could not admit delaies. Then Mariane seeing how this businesse
wrought, brought him into the Chamber, where he saw the Kings bed couered, and he
stretched out and couered with a cloath, as if hee had beene dead, and so hee held him:
Then she said vnto him, consider Ali I pray you, seeing the King my Lord is dead, to
worke so as his sonne may be chosen King, as you know he much desired. It is very fit
answered Ali, that you women should meddle with such matters, what reason were it
to choose a young man for King? It must not be, the Xeriffe Mahomet hath wisely ordained,
that the brethren should succeed one an other, knowing that Kingdomes must
be gouerned by men that are ripe of yeeres and Iudgement, and being ready to goe out
of the Chamber to assemble the counsell, hee was amazed when he saw the King vp,
who called him, and said vnto him, that he thanked him much, for the good office he intented
to his sonne. Ali was so daunted, as not able to answere, nor to excuse himselfe
with any reason, hee fled home to his lodging, where hauing taken the habit of a woman,
he commanded a seruant of his to bring him two horses to a certaine place where
he would attend them, and sodainely departed, with an intent to goe out of the realme.
Being in that place, set at the foote of an oliue tree, attending his seruant, there past by
two young Knights, which came from hunting, who seeing that Ali hid his face, thinking
it had beene some leud woman, they came neere to see, and made him to vncouer
himselfe; knowing him, they doubted some mischiefe, so as they carried him backe vnto
the King, who caused his head to be presently cut off. And thus was Mariane reuenged
for the death of her children.
This matter being knowne, the Kings brethren and all they of the bloud disperced
themselues, yea after that hee had caused Muley Mahomet Aben Abdelcader his Nephew,
sonne to his elder brother deceased, to be slaine at Mesquinez, whom he had married
with Lela Sophia his sisters daughter, onely for iealousie, for that hee was a wise and
a valiant Knight, and much beloued of his subiects. His brethren and other kinsmen
being gone out of the country, he did not care much to persecute them. This Abdalla
Xeriffe was the mightiest King of Affrike,Dominions of Abdalla King of Fez and Marroc. the most peaceable, and the most happy, if
he had abstayned for the bloud of his owne house. His dominions extended from Benais
in the Negros country, whether the Prouince of Sus doth bound, which they call
Remoto towards the South, vnto the North sea, and from the Westerne sea, vnto the
limits of Tremessen towards the East, in the which are comprehended foureteene great
Prouinces. Hee did commonly entertaine three score thousand horse, well paied, the
which were thus diuided 15000. in the realme of Sus 25000. at Marroc, and 20000. at
Fez: and out of these hee drew fiue thousand horse, which were his battaillon or Cornet:
And moreouer hee had two thousand Harguebuziers on foote, Christians renegados,
and fiue hundred on horse-backe; with a thousand Harguebuziers of Sus for the gard
of the towne of new Fez, which is the Kings pallace, and as bigge as a good towne. Hee
gaue pay to all these souldiers as well in peace as warre, beeing paied euery foure
monthes: when he had any enterprise, if need were, he assembled all his trained bands,
and moreouer did entertaine what Arabians and Africans he pleased, lyuing in his countries,
vnder a certaine vessellage, and paied them for the time they serued. He reigned
seuenteene yeeres, and ordained Mahomet his sonne to be heire to those their realmes,
and to all his treasure, who beganne to persecute his vncles, hauing three yet lyuing:
that is, Abdelmumen, Abdelmelech, whom the Spaniards call Muley Moluc, and a bastard
called Hamet.
Abdelmumen was slaine at Tremessen, by a murtherer who shot at him being at his praiers
in a Mosquee; Hamet liued among the Alarabes, but Muley Moluc had first retired to
Alger, from whence hee did for a time sollicit the King of Spaine, by the meanes of D.
Rodrigo Alonso Pimentel, viceroy of Valencia, to assist him to anoy Abdalla his brother,
who sought to depriue him of his right, but seeing it was in vaine, he past to Constantinople,
where hauing complained of the iniustice was done him by his brother, hee
continued in Selims seruice, seeking all occasions to giue a testimony of his valour,
and to make him willing to aide him to recouer the realmes of Fez, Marroc, and Tarudant,
which did belong vnto him, and were vsurped by Mahomet the sonne of Abdalla,
his Nephew. He had beene in the warres which the Turkes had against the Venetians
and the confederats, and at the recouery of Tunes, and the fort Goulette, where hee had
carried himselfe so valiantly, as by the report of Sinan Basha, the Sultan Selim held him
worthy to be assisted and fauoured, sending him backe into Afrike, with letters of fauor
and commandement to his Lieutenants, to giue him what ayde they could; so as hauing
by this meanes gathered together a good army of Turkes and Moores his friends, and
some Arabians which his brother Hamet brought vnto him, he came vpon his Nephew
Mahomet, and gaue him three defeats, the last whereof was admirable; for Mahomet had
three score thousand horse, and tenne thousand foote, and 36. peeces of ordinance, yet
he dispossest him quite,Mahomet expelled by Molue. and chased him out of the realmes of Fez and Marroc, and their
dependances. It is this Mahomet, which did incite D. Sebastian King of Portugal to passe
into Affrike, whose misfortunes we must now relate.


D. Sebastian the sixteenth King of Portugal,
alone of that name.
DOn Sebastian King of Portugal had beene bred vp since the death of King Iohn the
third (being but three yeeres old) vnder the gouernment of Queene Catherine his 
grandmother,Portugal. and of his vncle D. Henry the Cardinal, who were his tutors,D. Sebastian first of that name King of Portugal. and Gouernors
of the realme, who bred him vp in delights and superfluous pompe, in steed of that
commendable simplicity of his predecessors: wherefore being twenty yeeres old, puft
vp with those vanities, being strong of body, of a couragious minde, full of ouerwening,
(a natural vice in Portugals) and not content with his owne Dominions, he resolued (as
it were by force) to alter the quiet of his realme, and to make triall of his valour, to his
owne ruine, and of the crowne of Portugal: for not measuring his owne forces, hee
would needs (without any constraint, and contrary to the aduice of Princes, which were
allied vnto him, and his most faithful friends) meddle in the warres and quarrels of the
Xeriffes of Afrike:D. Sebastian bred vp by the lesuits. the chiefe blame whereof was imputed to the Iesuits, to whom
Queene Catherine had giuen him in charge to frame his affections and Iudgement.
These fathers who were in great credit, and well prouided for in Portugal, beeing tired
with their long peregrinations to the East Indies, where they are bound to procure the
soules health of the Barbarians, with whom the Portugals doe trade; desired much
that there might bee some occasion offred to set footing into Afrike, which was neere,
by some enterprise of warre: entertayning this young King in this humor, who to bee
ready when time should require, made certaine legions or trained bands on foote,
in Lisbone and other townes, causing them to bee inrowled, and armed with pikes,
and harguebuzes, and some of them to bee drawne once a weeke out of Lisbone to bee
trained.
In the yeere 1574. he had an ytching desire (as I haue said) to see the skirmishes which
were daily made betwixt the garrisons of Ceuta and Tanger, and the bordring Moores, he
past the straight with some companies of soldiers, saying that he went only to visit those
places:Youth of D. Sebastian. Being arriued in those countries hee discouered his lowne weakenesse, hauing a
desire to do more then he spake, and being yong and without experience thought to effect
more then hee did. Being returned to Lisbone, he did still meditate vpon some warre,

especially in those parts, and in this desire hee did things nothing befitting a King;
practising amongst the common people, to the end, said he, to bee better accustomed to
the toyles of warre. He thought that a happy occasion was offred, hearing that Muley
Moluc, or Abdelmelech was come with Turkes to assaile Muley Mahomet his Nephew,
to whom he presently sent to make offer of his forces if he had need, but the Moore (who
was no discreeter then hee) thanked him, saying that he was strong enough to repulse
Muley Moluc, and to ruine him, whereof hee repented himselfe afterwards; for hauing
beene vanquished and dispossest, he was forced to come to intreaties. This Moore after
his defeats, fled with such as would follow him, hauing some iewels and other wealth,
vnto certaine places called Montes Claros, which is, a sauage country, but finding
himselfe neither safe there,Mahomet flies to King Philip for refuge. nor in a place fit to negotiat, hee went to Pegnon de Veles,
casting himselfe into King Philips armes, for hee was ashamed to haue recourse to him
of Portugal, whose offers hee had refused. Yet hee was forced to come vnto him, for
he found not King Philip disposed to deale in that businesse. King Sebastian who desired
nothing more then to goe to the warre in Afrike, granted him whatsoeuer hee
could demaund, and did easily credit the promises and bragges of this Moore, who
saied, that as soone as euer they should shew themselues in field on the other side of
the streight, the whole country would turne vnto him; for Abdelmelech, saied he, had no
friends, and was in a manner vnknowne: the which was found false, for after the victory
he had beene receiued and aknowledged with great ioy and contentment, by them of
Fez and Marroc, as their lawfull King, as well in fauour of the testamentary decree of the
old Xeriffe Mahomet his father, as for that he was held amongst the Xeriffes to bee most
valiant, and much regarded for his mildnesse and humanity, beeing alouer of Iustice,
and temperate, and modest in his behauiour, vertues which grace a Prince, and which
wanted in Mahomet, the effects whereof Moluc had made his subiects to tast: for he presently
ordred the affaires of the Realme to their content; and for that the Turkes which
he had brought with him, committed many insolencies (as men accustomed to all excesse,
lying in the garrisons of Barbary, farre from their Sultan) hee freed himselfe, and
sent them away well satisfied. So as being respected and beloued of euery man, they
came and offred their seruices voluntarily vnto him; and sent him rich presents from all
parts of his dominions; yet some Christian Princes were glad to haue his friendship,
and among others King Philip,Muley Moluc a friend to Christians. whom he did also honour, so as many Christians began
to frequent his Court and countries, to whom he shewed both fauor and bounty. One
of his chiefest cares was to prouide for the succession of the realme, wherefore he caused
the Noblemen, townes and states, to sweare fealty and homage vnto Muley Hamet his
base brother, according to their fathers testament, notwithstanding that he had a sonne:
the which was held by them to be a generous act, for the which there were great feasts
of ioy made at Fez, Marroc, Tarudant and other townes. Whilest that Mahomet begged
succors of the King of Portugal by his Deputies;Mahomet Xeriffe craues aide from Portugal. hee liued at Ceuta, a fort belonging
vnto Portugal, beeing in Afrike; the Gouernor whereof beeing aduertised of his
Masters disposition, did him honour, attending an answere, the which he had soone, and
according to his desire.
But the King D. Sebastian beeing aduertised by some that were about him, that hee
might finde himselfe too weake for so great an enterprise, hee tooke counsell to sollicit
King Philip his vncle to bee of the partie, and to the end they might negotiat
such an action with more efficacy, hee sent Peter d' Alcassoua a fauorite of his, to craue
an enterview at Guadalupe vpon the confines of the realmes of Castile and Portugal,
who returned with a good answere: whereas these two Kings met to their great
contents,King Philip diswads D. Sebastian from the voiage of Afrike. namely of Don Philip; there was some treaty of a future marriage betwixt
Don Sebastian, and one of the daughters of Castile; but comming to confer of the
warre of Afrike, which was the chiefe subiect of their meeting, King Philip diswaded him
from it, as well for that he had a peceable treaty with Muley Moluc, as also for that he saw
such a war had need of a more experienced commander then D. Sebastian was, and better
soldiers then the Portugals of those times: for since the time of King Emanuel, that nation
had not done any thing memorable in warre, at the least in Europe, or the countries

confyning vpon Europe, yet hauing well defended their forts at the East Indies. The
conclusion was that King Phillip aduised him not to meddle in the quarrels of those Princes
Moores, but whatsoeuer hee did not to goe in person to those warres. Being importuned
by D. Sebastian to contribute men and shipping to this enterprise, hee excused
himselfe vpon the great affaires he had in the Low countries, and the iealousie he had
continually of the French, but especially of the Turke, who threatned Sicile and Italy,
and had already taken Goulette and Tunes, being ignorant, what this new Sultan might
practise against him; yet being intreated and coniured by D. Sebastian not to abandon
him in his first enterprise, he would not leaue him discontented, but promised in case the
Turke did not arme against him, to furnish him with fifty Gallies and fiue thousand souldiars,
so as he for his part should entertaine tenne thousand, and aduising him, what
warre soeuer he made in Afrike,Aduice of king Philip to D. Sebastian. not to abandon the sea shore, and that he should attempt
the recouery of Alarache, and so proceed by degrees along the Ocean, and then
they parted. King Philips aduise was very good, and the Portugals haue not yet any
cause to complaine.
After that he had heard his Nephew speake, and discouered his heat and obstinacy, he
fell to discourse of the inconueniences that might fall vpon him, and began to thinke of
his affaires, as if the royall line of Portugall failed, and to seeke out what pretensions he
might haue, were they cleere or doubtfull, and from that time he resolued, that if Don
Sebastian should chance to die in this warre, not to suffer any other to seize vpon the
Realme. The young King of Portugal being returned to Lisbone, full of hope and ioy,
he still pressed King Philip to grant him a free promise of his succors, without that reseruation,
if the Turke should send an army against him, the which he granted, and therevpon
he thought it was but a leape to passe into Afrike with great troupes, which hee
imagined to haue ready;D. Sebastian vnfurnished of all things for the warre. but when they came to examine euery thing in particular, they
neither found men, money, shipping, nor horses of seruice, nor any thing that might
serue to good vse, so as to prouide all these things, which giue motion vnto armies, they
were forced to spend all the yeere 1577. And without doubt if D. Sebastian had had his
men and prouisions ready, as it was concluded, King Philip would haue furnished the
gallies and men which he had promised. D. Sebastian beganne then to tast the difficulties
which are found in making warre, especially for Estates which haue enioyed a long
peace, and whereas both Nobility and people, haue neglected armes (the which is an
inexcusable fault in them that gouerne common-weals, who should know that it is one
of the maine pillers of an Estate, especially in this age full of iniustice.) Seeing then that
Portugal at that time had neither captaines, souldiers, treasure, victuals, armes, nor horses,
which are the essentiall parts to make a warre, into the which D. Sebastian would enter,
he was forced to prouide all these things extraordinarily and in hast, seeing that in
time of peace they had not thought of it. Hee was therefore forced to write into Italy
and Flanders, for some Regiments of old souldiars, the Prince of Orange (who was then
in armes against the Prince of Parma Lieutenant to King Philip) sent three thousand
Lansquenets into Portugall, vnder the command of Martin of Burgongne, Lord of
Tamberg. And it happened that the King of Spaine being perswaded by Pope Gregory
the thirteenth, to succor the rebels of Ireland against the Queene of England, there
was a leauy of Italians made in the territories of the Church, the action went in the
Popes name, but the King bare the charge, sixe hundred of these vnder the command
of a Licentious English man called Thomas Stukeley (who not long before had gotten
from the Pope the title of Marquis of Ireland) being shipped at Ciuita-uecha, came
into the riuer of Lisbone when they were preparing for this warre of Afrike. The King
being desirous to see them, staied them, and intreated them to goe with him to this war.
He was forced to seeke money by meanes that were vnpleasing to the whole realme. The
king tooke the portions of Widowes and Orfans, he made forced borrowings of the Clergy,
Nobility, townes and commonalties, he laied an imposition vpon salt: he made the
new Christians (as they call them) to buy the exemption of the confiscation of their
goods in case they should fall into the Inquisition, and hee vsed other exactions, which
made all men complaine.

He staied marchants ships. He enioyned some of the Nobility, to mount themselues
like men at armes, and many gentlemen to march with the foote, beeing so aduised, to
better his new leauied Portugal footmen; of the which hee made foure regiments; In
these preparations he spent the time vntill Sommer, being in the yeere 1578. And when
as he thought to take shipping, hoping that King Philip would haue sent him the gallies
and men which he had promised, he found himselfe deceiued, for that the Castillan
(hauing changed his minde) excused himselfe vpon new accidents which had happened
that yeere, which would not suffer him to doe then, as he might haue done the yeere before:
wherefore he had no aide from thence, but some voluntary aduenturers, and one
very expert captaine in matters of Affrike, called Francis of Aldana. There was no
man of any iudgement and experience in worldly affaires, but saw that this preparation
was weake, and vnfitting for such an enterprise, but there was no counsell, no perswasion,
no difficulties, nor any other consideration, could stay or diuert him. Hauing intreated
the Cardinall his vncle to gouerne the realme in his absence; he excused himselfe
vpon his age; wherevpon he made foure Gouernors, that is, George of Almeida
Archbishop of Lisbon,Gouernors made by D. Sebastian going into Affrike. Peter de Alcassoua superintendant of the treasure, Peter de Sada
and Iohn Mascaregnas. They that did accompany him into Afrike were Diego de
Sosa, Generall of the fleet at sea, Christopher Tauora Master of his horse and captaine of
the volontaries of Portugal, Don George d' Alencastro Duke of Auero, Don Alphonso
of Portugal Earle of Vimioso, Don Lewis Cotigno Earle of Rodondo, Don Alphonso de
Norogna Earle of Myra, Don Iames brother to the Duke of Braganca, and his Nephew
the Duke of Barcellos, Vasco de Gama, and many others of the Nobility, but most of
them in steed of good armes,Superfluity of the Portogalls going to the warre. were appareled in satten, inricht with imbroyderies, as if
they had gone to some feast or marriage; yea there were some which had lined their
tents and pauilions with satten.
 In this equipage D. Sebastian parted from Lisbon, being about foure and twenty
yeeres old,D. Sebastians Armie going into Affrike* the day after Saint Iohn Baptist, being the fiue and twentith of Iune, hauing aboue
two thousand sailes in his fleet, but there were scarce 60. ships of warre, nor of defence,
the best were fiue gallies and foure galleasses; he came to Cadiz, where he staied
fifteene daies, attending the Castillan souldiars of Andalusia, which should follow him
by the suffrance of King Philip, which some said were two thousand; others, fifteene hundred
or lesse. He had a Legat from the Pope in his army, with ample power to giue pardons
to all such as went this voyage; then sayling towards the coast of Afrike, they cast
anchor right against a place called the Almadraues, betwixt Tanger and Arzille. This
place of Arzille was held by a Moore called Albacarin, who by the perswasion of Muley
Mahomet, had consigned it some few daies before vnto the Gouernor of Tanger. The
King landed at Tanger, and there Muley Xecq, the sonne of Mahomet, came vnto him, and
soone after the father presented himselfe, and made a goodly oration of his rights and
pretensions, and of his friends and confederats which he had in the country, promising to
giue the King three ports of the sea, and other places in Barbary; and for a pawne hee
gaue him his sonne in hostage. King Sebastian being fed with these fictions, past with
his army towards Arzille, hauing drawne all the old souldiars out of Tanger and Ceuta,
and put new in their places, hauing first caused Muley Xecq to runne towards Mazagon,
to see if any Moores would ioyne with him, but there was not any one that offred himselfe,
but to skirmish.
King Abdelmelech or Muley Moluc had beene aduertised of this preparation from Cadiz
and Castile, and also from Portugal, and was much greeued at the enterprise of this
young Prince, not that he feared him, or his forces, but for that he saw him abused, and
also in regard he bare some affection vnto Christians.Muley Molucs speech of D Sebastian. What mooued him (said hee)
to be mine enemy, and to trouble himselfe to take from me a realme which doth belong
vnto me, yea by hereditary right, confirmed and allowed, to giue it to an other, and
thereby not to benifit himselfe nor any Estate in Christendome? Doth hee thinke
we are so vnprouided of souldiers, so faint hearted, so poore and needie, as wee cannot
resist him. I foresee to my great griefe that the country of Barbary shalbe a tombe
for the King of Portugal and his army, for God who is iust will neuer suffer that so

vniust an enterprise shall succeed. This Moorish King did often vse these or such like
speeches, as it hath beene since reported. But because he would not bee found vnprouided,
hee gathered together a mighty army, and went timely to field, vpon the Marches
of the realme of Marroc, and hearing that the Portugal army had landed at Arzille
with an intent to goe to Alarache, hee aduanced into the country of Temisan
tending to the Portugals fronter, and then beeing aduertised that the enemy hauing left
the sea shore, approched neere vnto Alcacaquibir, and had already waded through a
little riuer called Macazen, which falles into that of Luco, whereat hee wondred, knowing
well that there was ignorance and confusion in the conduct of the King of Portugals
army,Error of D. Sebastian. and that it was not strong ynough to leaue the sea shore, and to march into
the country.
In truth this was one of Don Sebastians chiefe errors, who (meaning to goe to Alarache
which stands vpon the sea, and hauing his vessels already at Arzille to carry him
in an instant) would rather trie to lead his army by land, and enter farre into a country,
which was vnknowne both to him and his, to finde a bridge which is vpon the riuer
of Luco, the which is not to bee waded through in those parts, and beeing betwixt his
army and Alarache, stopped his passage. He marched vp the riuer of Luco, and made
fiue lodgings, before he had any newes of Muley Molucs army, but such as vncertaine:
yet hee was so neere it, as he was ready to fall into it before he saw it, doing all things after
his owne fantasie, not suffring any one to contradict him: Hee had commanded
Diego de Sosa, Generall of the fleet, to goe and attend him neere to Alarache, marshalling
his army to lead it by land, as wee haue said; against the opinion of all men, yea of
Muley Mahomet, who beganne now to despaire of his restitution. Some said that hee
had a great desire to see his army in battaile, and to play the Sargent, and to trie if hee
could order his squadrons, who like a young man and without experience, did not
consider that the conduct of armies is no childrens play, growing into choller when
any one tould him, that a good captaine must haue a good foote, a good eye, and good
eares, and that hee should alwaies take the surest way, how strong soeuer his army
were, so as no man durst speake vnto him. Muley Moluc came to Alcasaquibir, and
hauing there ioyned with his brother Hamet, hee made hast to get the bridge, which
the Portugalls sought after, and there past his army, so as the two armies were so
neere in a plaine champian field called Tamita, as if night had not approched, they
might haue seene one an other that day. Then were they to resolue what to doe;
for they must of necessity fight or retire in disorder to recouer the sea, the one or
the other was very dangerous, but a battaile most; for there was no comparison betwixt
their forces. King Mahomet made the greatest instance to haue Don Sebastian
retire with his army, although it were with some losse. Most of the captaines were
of that aduice, especially of strangers, but howsoeuer, either in a picht field, or in a retreat,Resolution of D. Sebastian.
hauing so many horses to pursue them, this army must of force be defeated, wherefore
let vs leaue this testimony to posterity of Don Sebastian, that hee made choise of
the most honourable manner of dying. Hauing therefore put his army in battaile
by the breake of day, hee beganne to march couragiously against his enemies. Hee
had about 14000. foote, two thousand horse and three thousand pioners; and there
was double the number of boyes, whores, victuallers, carters and other vnproffitable
people. But to describe the King of Portugals army more particularly, it did consist
of three thousand Lansquenets vnder the Siegneur of Tamberg their Collonel,
sixe hundred Italians, vnder Stukeley an English man, two thousand Spaniards vnder D.
Alphonso d' Aguilar, sixe hundred souldiars drawne out of Tanger, 2050. aduenturers
on foote, the rest were peasants of Portugall. Amongst which footmen there were
eight thousand pikes. Moreouer fiue hundred horse of Tanger, and 1500. as well
of the gentlemen of Portugal, as of the Kings attendants. The souldiers were ill paied,
the campe ill furnished, and all things managed with small order. In Muley Molucs army
there were 42000 horse, Moores and Alarabes, carrying lances and targets after their
manner, and aboue 15000. harguebuziers, whereof two thousand were on horsebacke,
sixe and twenty peeces of ordinance well mounted, and expert gunners.

Moreouer there was great store of victuals, his men well paied, and all orderly gouerned:
All the discommodity thereof (the which in deed was very great) was the indisposition
of King Moluc, who hauing drunke milke to greedily, it quailed in his stomake,
wherevpon he fell extremely sicke and died in the heat of the battaile,Moluc falls very sicke. the which did not
hinder their victory. The armies approching neere together, Moluc made hast to
ioyne, for he feared that some of his troupes would disband, and goe vnto the enemy,
and in truth there were some which left him, but not many, nor they whom he most distrusted.
Hamet his base brother was Generall of the horse, Doali and Mahomet Faba
captaines of the Andaluses and Christians renigados:Captaines in Molucs army. Ozarin of Ragousa led the harguebuziers
on horsebacke, and Musa was captaine of his gard, with other good captaines
 Turkes. These two armies ioyned on a Monday the fourth of August, it being past
noone,Battaile in Affrike and death of D. Sebastian. the canon hauing plaied a little, the Portugal army was presently enuironed by
great numbers of the enemies horse, but Molucs left point was furiously charged by
fiue hundred men at armes, led by the Duke of Auero, the which was put to route; there
were aboue ten thousand Alarabes which fled aboue twenty leagues, to carry newes
that the Christians were victors, which disorder made Muley Moluc to get to horsebacke,
so full of griefe, as he would haue gone thether to fight notwithstanding his sicknesse:
But the souldiers of his gard staied him, and put him into his Litter, where within
halfe an houre after hee died, but they concealed his death. The Duke of Auero fearing
to ingage himselfe to much,Death of Muley Moluc. being not followed, ment to retire, after that he had
broken that part of Molucs army: but the Moores being ashamed that so few horse
had thus shaken them, they sent a great number of harguebuziers, both of foote and
horse-backe thether, who charged the Dukes troupe in flanke and behinde, and an other
troupe of Arabian horse, came vpon them in front, so as they chased these men at armes
vpon their battalion of foote, and disordred them very much: But they were presently
repulst by the King, Don Sebastian, who was mounted vpon a strong horse, and in greene
armor, being followed by the Duke of Auero, and a squadron of fresh horse, who being
charged by a great battailon of the Moores Caualary and shot, were soone put
to route, in which retreat their happened the like confusion. And then the whole
body of Molucs army, with Hamet, fell vpon the disordred troupes of King Don Sebastien,
with such fury, as they were no more able to resist them.
In this charge the Duke of Auero was slaine, with many gallant gentlemen, the whole
army put to route and the ordinance abandoned. Yet King Sebastian charging Hamets
troupes made a breach in them, and forced them to turne their backes, but returning,
he saw all his battailons ouerthrowne, euen to that of Mahomet, which was the last and
neerest to the riuer, with an incredible* slaughter of his men; so as Mahomet being forced
to flie, thinking to passe the riuer of Mucazen, missing the foard, he was mired and
drowned with his horse;Death of King Mahomet. but to increase all these miseries, D. Sebastian was charged by
so great a number of Moores, as both he and all they that did accompany him, were
slaine; it is certaine that many left him, flying towards Arzille; but they fell into the
like misery, for being pursued by the victorious Moores, they were in a manner all cut
in peeces. There died aboue 12000. Christians, amongst the which the chiefe, with the
King Don Sebastien,Defeat of the Portugal army, and death of D. Sebastian. were the Duke of Auero, the Marquis of Aranda, the Bishops of
Coimbra and Porto, the Popes Legat Christopher de Tauora, and his brother Aluaro Peres,
Alphonso of Portugal Earle of Vimioso, Lewis Cotigno Earle of Rodondo, Vasco de Gama
Earle of Vidiguera, Alphonso de Norogna Earle of Mira, Iohn Lobo Baron of Aluito,
Aluaro de Melo sonne to the Marquis of Ferrera, Roderigo de Melo eldest sonne to the
Earle of Tentugal, Iames brother to the Duke of Braganca, Iohn de Silueira eldest sonne
to the Earle of Sorteilla, the captaines of the Regiments of strangers, with others, so
as by this defeat many Noble families of Portugall were extinct. There were many
more taken prisoners of all sorts: The Duke of Barcellos, and the King of Spaines
Ambassador were deliuered without ransome. Don Anthony (who was base sonne to
the Infant Don Lewis) Prior of Crato, of the order of Saint Iohn, being taken prisoner,
escaped miraculously^ some of the rest redeemed themselues, but the greatest part remained
slaues in diuers places.
Hamet, a Conqueror, hauing gathered his people together, and caused a retreat to bee
sounded, did that night publish the death of his brother Ahdelmelech or Moluc, whereuppon
he was receyued and acknowledged for King, but to the great griefe of most of them
who knew him to be a man of little valour, and not like vnto the deceased.
The day following, the new King sent some troupes to view the dead, where they
found about 1500. of their men slaine, whome they buried in the same place: they also
found the bodie of Mahomet, who had beene the cause of all these miseries. The body of
King Sebastian was found naked among a troupe of his men that were slaine, and knowne
by two of his seruants, as they say, to whom they had promised libertie, if they could find
him. D. Sebastians bodie was left (as it were in deposito) at Alcacar: but a while after the
Xeriffe Hamet (renuing the allyance and peace which his brother had made with the king
of Spaine) offered him this bodie, and to set his Ambassador, and the young Duke of Barcellos
freely at liberty.
The King would not accept of D. Sebastians bodie,D. Sebastians body sent to the Portugals. but intreated him to deliuer it vnto
the Portugals, the which he did, and sent it to the Gouernor of Ceuta, to whom Andrew
Gaspar of Corsica did consigne it in Hamets name, and tooke an act thereof: Hamet
caused the bodie of Muley Mahomet to be flead, and the skinne to be stuft with straw, the
which was carried in great ignominy throughout the Realme: and the bodie of Abdelmelech,
was carried twenty leagues from Alcacar, and buried with his ancestors. Thus there
dyed three Kings in that battell. The King of Spaine accepted of the deliuerie of the duke
of Barcelos, and of Iohn de Sylua his Ambassador, in requitall whereof he sent a present to
the Xeriffe in Iewelst o the value of an hundred thousand crownes. Don Sebastian had
raigned one and twenty yeares, one moneth, and sixe and twenty dayes, and dyed beeing
foure and twenty yeares old, sixe moneths, and fifteene dayes.
The losse of this battell beeing knowne in Portugall, caused a generall sorrow and
mourning, but they were doubtfull for a time, who were slaine or prisoners, wherof
they were certified by degrees, and this desolation crept into priuate families, so as there
were scarce any among the Nobilitie but felt of it. The Kings death was held doubtfull
many yeares, some denying, that there was any certaine testimonie that his bodie had
beene found among them that were slaine in the battell: saying, that the liberall offer
which Hamet Xeriffe made to king Philip,Death of Don Sebastian vnbeleeued of many. who demanded it not, was a great presumption,
that he himselfe doubted, that the bodie which he left at Alcacar Quibir, was not Don
Sebastians, yea, that he did not beleeue it: others haue presumed to say, that they had seen
him after the battell in Portugall in a disguized habit, shrowding himselfe for shame in
religious houses, and that beeing opprest with griefe for the death of so many of the
Nobility, he had beene so sorrowfull, as holding himselfe vnworthie to raigne, he had returned
into Affricke in a religious habit, and wandred among the Barbarians, who giue
free passage to them that do penance for their sinnes, of what religion soeuer they be: yet
two and twenty yeares after this battell, there hath beene a man found so resembling D.
Sebastian, shewing markes vppon his bodie, naturall or accidentall, so like vnto those
wherewith this Prince had beene marked, and speaking so confidently of things said or
done by this king from his infancie, to the time of this lamentable day, and of secret conferences
and speeches which he had had, as well with Ambassadours of forraine Princes,
which had beene sent vnto him, as other persons yet liuing, which haue certified it; and
discoursing so particularly and truly of the estate of Portugall at that time, as it hath
made many doubtfull whether he were Sebastian or not, whom they held to haue beene
slaine at the battell, in the plaine of Tamita in Affrick. You shall hereafter here it at large,
and the man himselfe speake. But howsoeuer, Don Sebastians funerall was made at Lisbone
with great ceremonie, at the end whereof they cryed Reall, Reall, for the King Don
Henry. King Philip did also make a funerall pompe at Madrid, where it was obserued, that
the Duke of Alba sayd, that the King should go and do those obsequies in our Ladies
Church at Belem in Portugall, and not at Madrid, which made some thinke, that the
king had disouered his conceptions, and had resolued touching the succession of the
Realme.



Don Henry the seuenteenth King of
Portugall.
 BY the decease of Don Sebastian, the Crowne of Portugal seemed to belong to Don
Henry his great Vncle,Don Henry 17. king of Portugall. Cardinall of the title of foure Saints crowned: but King Philips
Councell, (I know not by what law) found that the right which he pretended, was
stronger then the Cardinals, yet he modestly gaue way to his preferment, and the rather
for that seeing him old and broken, he thought he might with more content of the Portugals
take his ranke afterwards without any difficulty or dispute. Yet there were many
other pretendants to this succession, which might cause some troubles in the State, and
therefore the first request which the cittie of Lisbone made vnto Don Henry in the name
of the whole country, was, that for the quiet and tranquilitie of the State, hee would bee
pleased in his life time to name him, or her, who (in his opinion) ought to raigne after
him: wherein they layed a burthen vppon him, which did exceed the force and capacitie
of his iudgement. For this Prince in the whole course of his life had shewed a simplicitie
of manners, and a weaknesse in his discourse, which had made him to be alwaies held fitter
for the Church, then to gouerne a temporall State. Yet seeing himselfe King, hee
sought to be feared, and gaue way to his ambition and choler, which procured him no
more loue then before, but made him to be both hated and cursed. He disappoynted and
dismist all those, that had had any fauour or office in Court during his nephewes raigne,
for that they had not respected and honoured him, as he thought, according to his ranke
and neerenes of bloud, causing some to be arraigned by course of Iustice, for their charges,
for words proudly spoken, and such like things which had past in the life of the deceased
King, who were degraded of honours, depriued of the rewards which they had deserued,
and sent from Court: He intreated Pedro d' Alcassaua more roughly then any other,
who had beene of the secret Councell and high Treasurer. He appointed other Officers
in their places that were dismist, who were no honester then the former, but much
more ignorant in affaires, who framing themselues to their masters humors, thought to
shew themselues sufficient to bring in examinations and reuisions of accompts, against
such as had made parties, and contracted with the King, causing most of those contracts
to be broken, and it may be such as were least vniust.
To know the disposition of this new King, and to make his ministers conformable to
King Philips desire, which was to vnite the Crowne of Portugues to that of Castile, in
what sort soeuer, he sent Christopher de Mora, a Portugall, bredde vp in Castile, to reside
there, with the title of an agent onely, who spared no paines, cost, nor presents to pourchase
friends to his Master. But the better to assure his poursute, he was aduised in Castile
to send some man of qualitie vnto the king Don Henry, with the title of Ambassadour:
the which the King of Spaine had till then forborne to do, for that he thought he shold
thereby preiudice the right which he pretended from the death of Don Sebastian, if hee
did by this act acknowledge him for King of Portugall, in sending an Ambassador vnto
him. There was chosen to this charge, Don Pedro Giron, Duke of Osuna, after the resolution
taken by the King Don Henry in an assembly of the Estates of the Realme, touching
the nomination of his successor, which was, That the King would not name any one at
that present, but might do it in time, by the aduice of the Iudges, assigned by the Estates,
and in the meane time to preuent all inconueniences that might happen, if the King
should dye suddenly, beeing very old, there should be a rowle made of fifteen of the chief
and worthiest men among the Nobilitie, of the which the King should choose fiue, who
should be after him Gouernors of the State,Proceeding for the succession of Portugal. vntill the Iudges had determined who shold
be the true successor to the Crown, in case the king had not named one: and that the fiue
thus chosen by him, should be kept secret during his life: and to examine the rights of euery
one of the Pretendants, and to iudge with the King (being aliue, and sitting in his
Estates) or after his decease, in case there were no sentence giuen, there should bee another
rowle made of foure and twenty Doctors, and men of State, of the which the king

should choose eleuen Iudges, which should make a royall Chamber to that end; and it
was decreed, that all the sayd Pretendants should bee cited and adiourned to appeare, or
their Ambassadors, or Agents, before the sayd Chamber, there to produce their rights
and pretensions, and to be heard in all that they would say and alledge, to the end they
might make report,Pretendants to the Crowne of Portugall. and proceed to the nomination. The Pretendants were Don Philip
King of Spaine, Don Anthony Prior of Crato, Donna Catherina of Portugall, mother to
D. Theodosia of Braganca, Rainucio Farnese, son to her sister D. Maria of Portugal, both
beeing daughters to the Infant Don Edward, and Emanuel Philebert, Duke of Sauoy,
borne of Donna Beatrix of Portugall: all these deriuing their rights from Don Emanuel,
King of Portugall: moreouer, there was Catherine de Medicis the French Queen, the Pope
but especially the realme and states of Portugall.
Don Philip was borne of D. Izabella, eldest daughter to Don Emanuel; the Duke of
Sauoy was sonne to D. Beatrix second daughter to the sayd King, Don Anthonie was issued
from the Infant Don Lewis, who was also sonne to king Emanuel, but Don Anthony
was base, yet he maintained that he had a sentence for his legitimation. The Duchesse of
Braganca was daughter to the Infant D. Edward, who was also sonne to King Emanuel,
but Rainucio Farnese was issued from Mary, the eldest daughter of the sayd Don Edward.
As for the Queene mother of France,Queene mothers title to Portugal. she fetched her pretensions farther off, saying, that
the Kings which had raigned in Portugall since Don Alphonso the third, brother to Don
Sancho Capello, had beene vsurpers of that Realme, the race beeing base and proceeding
from an vnlawfull coniunction: for that they say, Don Alphonso being married in France
with the Countesse of Bullen, by whom he had one sonne named Robert, from whome
the Pretendant was descended, he had left the sayd Countesse to marrie another wife in
her life time, which was Donna Beatrix of Castile, and that from this vnlawfull marriage,
all the Kings were issued which had held the Realme vnto that day.Popes title to Portugal. The Pope pretended
it to be a fee, saying, that the Realme of Portugall was a fee of the Church, and
was so acknowledged by Don Alphonso Henriques the first, who obtayned the title of a
king, who in acknowledgement had bound it to pay a certaine quantitie of markes of
gold for a yearely rent, and for not paying those rights the Realme was deuolued vnto
the Church, to dispose thereof. This right was corroborated after the death of the Cardinall
then raigning, for that (said they) it was the spoyles of a Cardinal. But the realme
and the generall Estates, pretended to haue an aduantage aboue all, for that (sayd they)
women could pretend no right in Portugall to the succession of the Crowne, neither for
themselues, nor their descendants: for they had neuer seene any women raign, although
it had beene often in question, euen with the Castillans, who had beene reiected, and if
they should haue any accesse, or their descenda^ts, it must be after the males, before
whome, women haue no precedence, in regard of their age, the which is not considerable
in fees, much lesse in Soueraigne Estates.
Most of these Pretendants beeing cited, they sent their rights, titles, and Pretensions,
the which were receyued by the sayd chamber without any difficultie, but in regard of
Queene Catherine de Medicis, whose cause was odious, and her allegations iniurious to
the king then raigning, and to his Predecessours; the Abbot of Saint Gelais her Agent
found great difficultie to haue it admitted. Onely king Philip appeared not in this Chamber,
disclayming the Iudges that were chosen, yet all the Portugals in his cause, the
which (he sayd) was so iust and cleare, as it needed not any examination nor doubt, hauing
had consultations vppon that point in the best Vniuersities of the world, as well for
that which concernes right, and the lawes of Realmes, as for conscience, and to satisfie
the king Don Henry, (whom he did importune by his Ambassadors to name him, without
any other forme obserued by the Estates) he sent him a coppie of the councels which
many Lawyers and Diuines in Spaine had made him, that other reasons beeing examined
and weighed, hee might not make any difficultie to name him. Aboue all they had
wonne father Lyon Henrique a Iesuite, his Confessor, who hauing first made him incline
to the Dutchesse of Braganca, laboured afterwards to perswade him to name king Philip
for his successor. The Duke of Ossuna and Christopher de Mora his Ambassador doubting
that this iudiciall proceeding would not preuaile, and that the familiaritie of the Castillans

had beene alwaies odious vnto the Portugals, who detested their gouernement, they had
letters from the King their master, to the chiefe of the Nobilitie, to the Cittie of Lisbon,
and to the principall townes of the Realme, ful of perswasiue reasons and promises, concluding
in the end, that if they did not receyue him willingly (his title beeing so well
grounded) he would vse force, and therefore they should aduise not to draw themselues,
their families, and the whole Realme into a warre, and the miseries which follow it. These
letters were deliuered to many with good words and presents:Lisbon refuseth the King of Spains letters. but the cittie of Lisbone
would not receiue them: and as Christopher de Mora had left them with the Officers of the
Cittie: they sent them sealed vp vnto their King, who was much trobled with this weightie
busines, and could not resolue any thing that was pleasing to king Philip, who threatened
him, and began to let the Portugals know, that he prepared to armes: for not meaning
to be taken vnprouided at Henries death, which could not be long, and that this delay
should not any way preiudice him in that he pretended to be King of Portugal, in despight
of all those that would contradict, he had drawne into Spaine of Germans, Italians
and Spaniards of his old regiments of Italy, to the number of 18000. foot, whom he
entertayned many moneths with great charge and hinderance to his subiects, in Andalusia,
and other places nere to Portugall, which they could not coniecture to be to any other
end, but to inuade that realme, where they sayd openly, that armes and force were
his best title: for he had no right vnto it. He among all the pretendants which did most
trouble him, and the King Don Henry also, was Don Antonio, Prior of Crato, who was
very well beloued of the people, and of many of the Nobilitie. The King was so incensed
against him, as he gaue commandement he should not be heard, and taking vppon him
to re-examine his cause of Legitimation, he sought to dissolue the sentence which was
giuen by Emanuell d' Almada, Bishop of Angra, appoynted Iudge by the Pope: whereof
Pope Gregorie the 13. beeing aduertised, he retayned the knowledge of the cause to himselfe:
yet Don Henry either mooued by his owne passion, or prest by the Castillans, declared
this sentence to be voyd by his owne authoritie, without forme of law, or solemnitie
 of iustice: but Conestagio in the Historie of Portugall, writes, that King Henry had
obtayned a Breefe secretly from the Pope,Sentence of D. Antonio's legitimation disanulled. by the which he gaue him authoritie to iudge
the cause of legitimation absolutely, without any forme of Processe, and that of foure
witnesses, two confessed that they had beene suborned by Don Antonio, and that the other
two were suspected, as his neere allies, and disagreeing betwixt themselues, and that
Lewis his father tearmed him Bastard in his last will, whereuppon hee declared Don Antonio
illegitimate, imposing him perpetual silence touching the pretended marriage and
legitimation, sending a Sergeant to Crato, to seaze vpon the Prior, but hee found him
not. This he writes. But were it true or false, the King leauing the qualitie of a Iudge,
commanded Don Antonio of his royall authoritie, not to come within thirtie leagues
of the Court. Then his indignation increasing, he banished him the Realme, depriued
him of all pensions, priuiledges and fauours which he had receyued of precedent kings,
seeking by all meanes to haue him apprehended, and to put him into some streight
prison: yet Don Antonio went not out of the Realme, but retired to some of his friends,
or to some Monasteries vppon the fronter, neither did he forbeare to come and sollicite
the Iudges, with the which the king was dayly incensed. Being prest by the importunities
of king Philips Ambassadors, terrified by his preparation to armes, and perswaded
by his Confessor father Lyon Henrique, he did adhere wholy vnto him: and there was
then no difficultie, but to find meanes to name him, and to get the consent of the Estates,
and therefore he propounded a kind of accord betwixt the Realme and king Philip, the
which shold be treated by his means in an assembly of the Estates, the which he called to
that end.
But the king of Castile would not put his right to Compromise, and detested this Assembly
of the Estates,K Henry falles sicke. aduertising king Henry, that he should not treate of this businesse
with them, vnited in one bodie, but particularly with the chiefe of the Clergie, the Nobilitie
and the townes. In the meane time the king D. Henry found himselfe ill, so as being
taken with great faintings, which held him long, the Councel, which was about him,
and the Deputies assembled in the towne of Almerin, (whither they were retired by

reason of the plague, which was very violent in Lisbon, and in a manner in all the other
townes of the Realme) thinking that he would neuer recouer it, they presumed to open
the boxe, wherein was the lyst of such as he had chosen to be Gouernors of the Realme,
and to proceede to the nomination of a Successor, in case he had not done it, where they 
found,Gouernors of Portugal. that of the fifteene that were contayned in the rowle, he had chosen George d' Almada
Arch-bishop of Lisbon, Francis de Sada, Lord Chamberlain, Iohn Tello, Iohn Mascaregnas,
and Diego Lope de Sosa, President in the Councell of Iustice at Lisbon. The
king was somewhat recouered, but knowing that he drew neere his end, employing the
remainder of his daies in the care of his soule, and leauing this businesse with others imperfect,An. 1580.
he dyed the last of Ianuary, 1580. hauing held the royall seate, (as the Castillans
sayd) seuenteene moneths and some dayes,Death of King Henry. beeing 68. years old, for he dyed in the same
moneth, and on the same day that he was borne.
This was the last king of Portugall, in whom ended the direct masculine line. And as
the first Lord of Portugall, (though with the title of an Earle) was called Henry, euen so
was the last.Life of King Henry. He was of a thinne bodie, low of stature, and leane of his visage, hee had an
indifferent good wit, and was endowed (besides the Latine toung) with some knowledge.
He was alwaies held to be chast, and did neuer blemish that angelicall vertue, but with
the desire of marriage in his latter dayes. He was accompted sparing, giuing rather then
denying, for he refused seldome, but he gaue sparingly: he was ambitious of all Iurisdiction,
as well ecclesiasticall as ciuill, zealous in religion, but more seuere then was fit in
the reformation of Clergi-men. He was Bishop, Gouernor of the Realme, Inquisitour
Maior, Cardinall, Apostolicke Legate and King. But the greater he grew in dignitie, the
more he discouered his incapacitie and weaknesse, suffering himselfe in greatest affaires,
to be ouer-ruled by his ministers, not able to determine the cause of the succession. Hee
was very obstinate in his opinions, neuer forgetting any wrongs, so as iustice was in him
but an vniust execution of his passions, and therefore a religious man (whome hee had
prest to take vppon him a most strict course of life) sayd vnto him, that hee would obey,
seeing there was no humane helpe against his Commandements, for he had the will of a
man, the authoritie of a Pope, and the execution of a King: To conclude, hee had many
vertues, and fewer vices, yet they were equall: for he had the vertue of a Church-man,
and the defects of a Prince: during his life he was feared of many, and beloued of few, so
as no man lamented his death, onely such as were well affected, (desiring the cause of
succession had beene first decided) had some feeling.
The fiue Gouernors being at Almerin, at the time of his death, they began to exercise
their charge as Kings, and their first resolution was to send Ambassadours to King
Philip, (whome they saw in armes, and who had in a manner threatened the deceased
king, and the Realme) to intreate him to proceede in this busines, by the way of iustice,
and to assure him, that it should be done him, witnessing moreouer the great good will
and respect which the Gouernors, the chiefe of the Nobilitie, and the good townes of
Portugall, bare vnto his highnesse. The king before their audience, made some difficulty,
whether he should receiue them with the accustomed ceremonies to Princes Ambassadors,
or as simple Deputies of his subiects: but he was counselled to heare them as Ambassadors,
to the end he might winne the loue of the Portugueses, so as they were heard
with their hats on, the king beeing vncouered at their comming in. The Ambassadours
were the Bishop of Coimbra, and Emanuel de Mela, and they came vnto the King being
at Guadalupe, who made a long relation vnto them of his rights, and of the consultations
which he had made, as well to make them apparent to the world, as to satisfie his
owne conscience: that he knew well there were many among the Nobilitie and townes,
ill affected vnto him, whom he had good meanes to draw vnto their duties: wherefore
the Gouernours and the Estates should be well aduised, and not be the cause of a warre in
their countrey, giuing them a short time to send him their last resolution. The Deputies
of the Estates of the Realme, who had beene called by the deceased king, were all at
Saint Iren, a towne right against Almerin, the riuer of Tagus running betwixt them who
seeing the Gouernors manner of proceeding, they gaue them to vnderstand, that their
Councell and Assembly was superiour vnto them: as representing the Realme, and the

generall Estates thereof, and therefore they sent word vnto the Gouernours, that leauing
Almerin, which was small, and not able to lodge so great a multitude, they should
come to S. Iren, to the end they might all together determine of that was fitting for the
preseruation of the Realme, and put it in execution, and not make them, vpon euery occasion,
to passe the riuer, for their affaires required expedition, and no delayes, saying,
that their most necessarie prouisions, was to man the entries of the Realme with soldiers,
the which they should haue done before they sent Ambassadors to King Philip. This did
amaze the Gouernours, and caused bad intelligence betwixt them and the Estates, so as
 in disdaine one of another, they did not any good for the publike. Among these Gouernours,
there were there noted to fauour King Philip,Disc^rd betwixt the Gouern^rs and the Estates. the other two were for the Realme.
Among the Deputies of the Estates, most of them were for Don Antonio, Prior of Crato,
who hauing notice of the death of Don Henry, came presently to Lisbone, spake vnto
the Magistrates of the Cittie, shewed himselfe vnto the people, saluted euery man,
seeking to maintaine himselfe in the loue of the multitude,D. Anth^^ies proceedings. with all the humilitie that
might be: hee wrote vnto the Deputies of the Estates at S. Iren, and came himselfe to
present the Popes Bull vnto them, by the which the sentence of the deceased King, giuen
against him, was suspended; he remembred his rights vnto the Crowne, and protested
that he would submit himself to iustice, according to the resolution which was taken whilest
he liued in the open Estates, and conformable also to the sayd Kings last will, made
eight moneths before his death, by the which he declared him his successor, that should
be found to haue most right by the Iudges: This course was desired by all in generall,
namely, by the other Pretendants, except King Philip, who pressing the Ambassadours
much to haue their last resolution, whether they would receiue him for their King or
not, and they desiring him to giue them a longer time then he had prefixed, he told them
plainely, that he would vse his rights according to his meanes and dignitie. The which
the Gouernours, the Duke of Braganca and other Noblemen, that were at Almerin,
seeing, they began to prouide for the frontiers, but so late, and so slowly, as all men wondred:
the Deputies of the Estates insisting stil, that they should all assemble in one place,
to consult ioyntly together how to repulse the iniurious force, which the Castillans, their
ancient enemies, would do vnto the Realme. And although it seemed reasonable, that
the Gouernors, who were but few in number, and had but a transitorie and limited authoritie
for a time, should passe vnto S. Iren, and make shew to allow of it, yet they did
it not, they still remayning in their seuerall lodgings, making very preiudiciall decrees
apart, which in the end blemished the honour of the Crowne of Portugall, one weakening
anothers authoritie, whereas if they had beene well vnited, euery man would haue
obeyed them, and they might haue opposed such forces against King Philip, as happily
he might haue yeelded to a iudiciall course.
The Gouernours sent Commissions into the Prouinces, to raise the Commons, and
commanded the Lords which had lands and vassals to be mounted and armed readie to
march, when they should be called, but they did little regard it. The King of Spaine beeing
aduertised of all their disorders, was exceeding glad, for that they prepared a way for
him to attaine vnto that which he pretended: and without any further delay hee caused
those troupes which he had so long entertayned, to march towards Badajos, where hee
had appoynted the Rendez-vous for the armie: he commanded Don Fernando de Silua,
Earle of Cifuentes, Guidon Major of Castile, to draw foorth the Standard^royal, which
 is neuer displayed, but when as the King goes to the warre in person. Hee made choice of
the Duke of Alba to be his Lieutenant to leade this armie,Philips troupes march^th towards Portugall. whom hee freed from prison
for a certaine precipitated marriage made by Don Frederick his sonne, and by his counsell
causing him to come to Merida, to conferre of the meanes to enter with an army into
Portugall, yet some say, that he saw not the King, but marched directly to the armie.
In the meane time he did write againe, and perswaded the Gouernors, the Estates, the
Nobilitie and Commons, to receiue him without resistance, sending them new consultations,
which he had drawne from the Diuines of the Vniuersity of Alcala of Henares
of Castile, to the which he sayd, there was no reply, and that they were conformable in
euery point to those which he had before from other Vniuersities. King Philip with his

Councell and Lawyers did set downe (as a thing which they ought not to call in question)
that beeing the most ancient male liuing of the race of Don Emanuel of Portugall,
he should praecede all others in the succession to the Crown:Allegations made by King Philip touching his title to Portugall. yea presently after the death
of King Sebastian: for the Cardinall (whome he had suffered to raigne) was not capable
thereof, considering his qualitie, beeing a Clergi-man. This beeing presupposed, he demanded
of the Diuines: first, whether he were bound to submit himselfe to any Iudge or
Arbitrator, to haue the Realme of Portugall adiudged vnto him. Secondly, if there were
any other pretending that Crown, who might decide their controuersies: and that there
beeing no competent Iudge to do it, and the Portugals refusing to receiue him before
the cause were decided, which might be a meanes to ^ustrate him, whether hee might
not take possession of his owne authoritie by armes, without any scruple. And last of all,
if the Gouernors or Estates of Portugall alledge, that they are bound by oath, not to acknowledge
any one for king, but he to whome the Realme shall be adiudged by iustice,
if that may excuse them.
To the first point the Diuines of Castile answered, That Don Philip beeing a Soueraigne 
King,Aduice of the Diuines of Alcala of Henares he was not bound to submit himselfe to any Iudge, but onely take councell,
and that he might thereuppon adiudge the Realme vnto himselfe, and not charge
his conscience, grounding vppon the neerenes of bloud, which was apparent. And if
there were no Iudge in this cause, they sayd, that the Pope, who had the greatest power,
might not take knowledge of it, for that it was meerely temporall, hauing not any circumstance
to bind it to the Spirituality. The Emperor in like manner was no competent
Iudge: for the Kings of Castile are Soueraignes, Emperours in their countries and
Estates.
The Estates of Portugall were inferiours and subiects, and therefore in no sort Iudges:
the deceased King Don Henry could not preiudice the right nor dignitie of king Philip,
in appoynting eleuen Iudges to determine of the Succession of that Crowne: besides,
hee beeing dead, the Commission of those Iudges was expired, and their authoritie
extinct. As for the referring it to the compromise of Arbitrators, it was not vsed but
in matters which were doubtfull: and whereas their titles and interests were obscure. If
they would say, that in this cause King Philip should not be regarded as a King, but as a
priuate person, bound to plead against the rest, pretending the same succession by reason
of bloud: it was a friuolous distinction, for that the dignitie of a King cannot bee separated
from the person that carryeth it, in any case whatsoeuer. If they did pretend, that
the controuersie must be ended, whereas the matter in question lyeth: that this rule hath
no place in matters of Kingdomes.
To the second point they did apply some of the former answers, and to make it more
plaine, they sayd, that it was sufficient for the King to exhibite his titles and right to the
Gouernours, or to the Estates, to iustifie his proceeding by armes,, the which he might
lawfully vse in case of refusall, the which was a king of contumacie and rebellion. And last
of all they sayd, that an oath made by whomsoeuer, to preiudice another, doth not bind
him that hath taken it, especially where there is no Iudge, and he cannot pretend it for an
excuse against a Soueraigne, especially when his title is apparent.
King Philip hauing resolued to enter Portugall with an armie, more (sayd he) to feare
the Portuguezes, then to do them harme, besides, the armie which he prepared at Badajos,
he caused his vassals (after their example) in euery Prouince bordering vpon Portugal
to be in a readines, commaunding the Lords which had their lands there, to shew
themselues in armes, but not to aduance, and that if any neare Townes, Noblemen or
commons would acknowledge him for their King, they should assure them of all good
vsage: The Gouernours were much amazed, yet they made shew, as if they would defend
themselues, sending into France, to the Emperour, and to other Christian Princes for
succours.
But they did aboue all imploy the Popes authority and prerogatiue, that he would be a
meanes to make King Philip lay aside armes, and submit himselfe to a quiet course of iustice:
whereupon they obtayned, that there should be a Legate sent into Spaine to decide

this controuersie; which was Cardinall Alexander Ri^rio, who was not pleasing vnto
the King, being held suspect, neither would he that the Pope should meddle in this busines,
much lesse determine of it: Besides, this Legate came late, the Castillan armie beeing
alreadie entred farre into Portugall: and the Gouernors were in such a confusion,
and did so disagree among themselues, as they suffered to haue a Croisado preached against
the Castillans, as if it had beene to go against Infidels: the Magistrates did the like
in many townes,Hatred of the Portuguizes to the Castillans. and they sayd, that there were slaine Noblemen of Portugall, who by
the meanes of prisoners which were yet in Affricke, since the ouerthrow of D. Sebastian,
did sollicite the Xeriffe Hamet to take vppon him the protection of the Realme of
Portugall against the King of Ca^^le: such was the hatred of these two nations, and the
proceedings of Don Philip so much detested, seeking to be Iudge in his owne cause, and
to decide it by armes, to the preiudice of the other pretendants, and namely, of the generall
Estates of the Realme.
The contrarieties which were obserued in all that the Gouernors did, being fearefull,
irresolute, and yet very ambitious, seeking to retaine the royall authoritie longer then
they might, and to sell their fauours to their owne priuate benefits, did witnesse the confusion
that was in their minds, and in their affaires, being sollicited by the Ambassadors
of Castile,Gouernors bring King Philip into Portugal. they yeelded to declare D. Philip King, vppon certaine conditions, whereof
they drew Articles, which were all signed by the Duke of Ossuna, but the difficulty was
to publish this decree with any collour.
On the other side they fortified themselues daily both within and without the Realme.
In the meane time they had not any money, and suffered the reuenues of the Crowne to
be lost by their bad intelligence, and withall the peoples loue, who might haue supplied
their present necessities out of their store, if they had seene any order or grauitie in
them.
They resolued to sell the Iewels of the Crowne, but the Ambassadors of Castile opposed
themselues, saying, That they did belong vnto the King their master, who was the
true and lawfull king of Portugall. They sent Iohn Tello, one of the bodie of the cittie of
Lisbone, vnder colour to assist Emanuel of Portugall his brother-in-law, who did fortifie
Belen, and other places, at the mouth of the riuer of Tagus, beneath the cittie, but it was
to be ridde of him: for he did not fauour the Castillan partie no more then Emanuel his
brother-in-law:Gouernors seek to dissolue the Estates. and for that the Deputies of the Prouinces and townes which were at S.
Iren, did crosse them, they sought to send them home as vnprofitable, saying, that after
the Kings death, who had called them, their procurations were void, and that there was
not any assembly of Estates: yet they were content the tenne of the said Deputies shold
remaine with them, to bee witnesses of their actions, who should come to Setuuall, a
towne and port of the sea, twenty miles from Lisbone, whether they meant to retire
themselues, by reason of the plague which was crept into Almerin. The Deputies on the
other side maintayned, that their proclamations wer still in force, that the Estates were
not ended, and that in the busines, which was now in question, their assembly was more
requisite then in any other occasion, inuiting them againe to come vnto Saint Iren,
where there was not any danger of the plague: the which they would not doe, but went
to keepe their Councell at Setuual, farre from those that did obserue them, beeing accompanied
by the Duke of Braganca, and the Ambassadours of Castile.
Setuual was one of those places whereof the King of Spaine desired to seize, for that
in holding this port, he might shut vp the riuer of Lisbon: and therefore hee had commanded
Do^ Aluaro de Bassa^ Marquis of Santa Cruz his Admirall, to go thither with
his Fleet, consisting of aboue sixtie gallies, and to make some enterprise, whilest that the
Duke of Alba should enter by land, from Badajos to Eluas, and other places of that
country, as he did soone after, the king hauing first sent Pedro Velasco, Iudge of Badajos,
to see, if with perswasiue words, promises, and presents, he might draw the neighbour
townes and places to yeeld themselues voluntarily, and without force: where hee behaued
himselfe so discreetly, as he caused D. Philip to be acknowledged for King of Portugall
at Eluas, Oliuenca, Serpa, Mora, Campo Maio^la noua, Aroughez, Portalegre, and

others. The Duke of Alba coming to the army, found it much wasted with sicknes, being
in all but 4500. Italians, 3500. Germans, and 3000. Spaniards of the old regiments of Italy,
the which the King supplyed with 7000. Besognes, or new soldiers, which he had leuied
in Spaine, after which he took a view of his army, where he found about 18000. foot, and
6000. horse, with 25. peeces of ordinance, and store of victuals, and other warlike necessaries:
for the carriage whereof he had aboue 6000. carts and wagons. The Duke of Alba
was General both at sea and land: in this expedition. Peter de Medicis was General of the
Italians, being diuided into 3. regiments: of the one Prosper Colonna was Colonel, of the
other Vincent Carrafa, and of the third Charles Spinelli. Ierome Earle of Lodron was Colonel
of the Germans, Sancho d' Auila was Marshall generall at land, and Francis d' Alaua
was Master of the ordinance. There was no Generals of the horse, for all the companies
were commanded by Noblemen that were of the Kings councell, but in executions Don
Francis de Toledo the Dukes son should lead them. With these forces the Duke of Alba
past the riuer of Caya, and entred into Portugall the 27. of Iune, 1580. threatning such as
would not acknowledge K. Philip his Master for their king.Duke of Alba enters into Portagal. The Deputies of the Estates,
which remained at S. Iren, seing the king of Castile to enter the realme with an army, they
accused the Gouernors to haue abandoned the publike cause, and declared D. Antonio defender
of the Realme alone, but soone after the people proclaimed him king, and although 
he excused himself,D. Antonio declared defender of the realme of Portugal. being content (said he) for that time with the title of defender, yet was
he forced to accept it, seeing himselfe enuironed with many swords in the midst of a furious
multitude, cursing the Gouernors, and crying, that he must lead them against the Castillans.
If D. Antonio did then somwhat want a spurre to prick him forward to the royall
dignity, he had afterwards more need of a bridle to curbe him, not to abandon himself as
he did, in a time of so great confusion, hauing an armed enemy in the hart of the country,
who wan the Nobility daily, and wanted neither mony nor credit, which are the sinewes of
war. He might haue apprehended the want both of friends and mony, into the which he
soon fell, hauing no support, but the multitude, and some Monks, who shewed themselues
in his cause, not only passionat, but desperate, or rather mad. A royaltie is held to bee so
sweet
a morsell, and the desire to be a king, is so vehement, as they do willingly breake the
bounds of law to deuoure it, when occasion is offred, without any respect: yea there haue
beene many who to raigne one day, haue not cared to be slaine the next: whereof there
are some examples in the course of this History: so as it is no wonder, if D. Antonio, who
had suffred so many crosses to come to it, hauing got it, sought to keepe it. The first error
he committed, was to haue caused Fernand de Pina, one of the Magistrates of Lisbone to
be slaine, for that he spake against him, and then hee suffered Suares, who had committed
the murther, to be hanged, whom he might haue saued by his authority. The opinion of
the Portugals is and hath beene for many yeares, that the city of Lisbone is the force of a
world, and that whosoeuer holds it, may make head against the mightiest Monarks of the
earth. In truth it is one of the greatest peopled cities in Europe, of great traffick and wonderfully
rich: but a multitude of people is but a weake support, and riches in the hands of
priuate men in tumults, when as euery man sees himselfe in danger, and seekes to preserue
that which he hath, are not assured, nor to be accompted of,, vnlesse they will vse
violence and tyrannie, which make the most lawfull kings to be hated. These considerations
were not regarded by Don Antonio, hee must needes runne to Lisbone, thinking
that if all the Realme were lost, Lisbone alone would restore him.
The bodie of the cittie, and the Magistrates, apprehending this hastie comming, and
the peoples proclamation at Saint Iren, who had cryed Real, Real for Don Antonio, intreated
Iohn Tello, one of the Gouernors, with Don Emanuel of Portugal, as wee haue
sayd, to come and hinder Don Antonio's entrie, if he could, and to perswade him not to
take the name of King vppon him, but onely to tearme himselfe defender of the State
and Crowne of Portugall, against the vniust and tyrannous inuasion of the King of Castile,
that this title would be more fauourable for him, and make him to be followed and
supported by the Nobilitie, and the great men of the realme: whereas that of King, seemed
to bee vsurped out of season, whilest that hee with the rest of the Pretendants
demanded it by iustice.

Don Iohn Tello sent Diego de Sosa, and Francis de Meneses, who could not stay him,
but they returned together into the Cittie, where they durst not stoppe his entrie, yet
comming neere vnto Lisbone, there was a harguebuze shot of, which past neere his
haire,Don Antonio receiued i^to Lisbone. but they could not learne whence it came. Beeing entred into the cittie, hee was
receiued with acclamations, and all signes of ioy, as the time would permit: for the greatest
part of men of qualitie were retired to their houses in the Countrey, by reason of
the plague, which was very great, so as the common people onely made him this reception,
crying, God saue the king. But hauing once seized vppon the pallace, the riuer, and
the Arsenall, and the armes, he went to the towne-house, whither hee called all the Magistrates
that were within the Cittie, and was there saluted for king, and the othe taken
and receiued with the accustomed formalities: which done, hee wrote vnto the Gouernours
beeing at Setuuall, that they should come vnto him. Don Iohn Tello (who had bin
sent by his companions to Lisbone, with procuration to see what was necessarie for the
preseruation of the Cittie, according to their desseigne, and had till then authoritie as a
Gouernour) departed presently, and carryed some others away with him, whome Don
Antonio would haue employed: and by that meanes hee carried away fortie thousand
Crownes, which he had gathered together, vnder colour of reparations that were to be
done at Belen, S. Iulian, Cascais, Cabeca Secca, and other places lying vppon the riuer.
Beeing come to Setuual, the other Gouernours would no more admit him into their
companie, saying, that he was confederate with Don Antonio, and that hee might haue
hindred his entrie into the Cittie if hee had would. The new King beeing discontented
with them all, he wrote againe vnto them, to draw them to Lisbone, yet vsing very mild
words, but they would not do any thing. Hee wrote also very kindly to the Duke of Braganca,
who was with them, and in the end he sent Don Francis of Portugal, Earle of Vimioso,
to perswade them if hee might. In the meane time the Duke of Braganca taking
leaue of the Gouernours, retired himselfe to one of his houses, seeing, that neither the
one, nor the other, did any thing to purpose, and that they could not preuent it, but king
Philip would raigne in Portugall, with whome soone after he made an accord. The Earle
of Vimioso seeing that he could not preuayle with the Gouernours, he incensed the people
against them, who chased them out of Setuuall so hastily, as some were forced to
creepe out of windowes, and to slippe downe the walles in danger of their liues, yet the
Arch-bishop of Lisbone, and Don Iohn Tello stayed still, beeing assured to be spared,
the one for his Ecclesiasticall dignitie, the other, for that he had not beene opposite to
Don Antonio, but had done him good offices.
By this meanes the king seized vppon Setuuall, and went thither to haue the place fortified
and furnished, and then he returned to Lisbone, to whom there yeelded the abouenamed
places vppon the riuer, and other about the cittie. The Gouernours beeing thus
ecclipsed,Decree of the Gouernors against Don Antonio. got, with the Ambassadours of Castil, to Castro Marin, where they made a
strange Decree against Don Antonio, Prior of Crato, condemning him as a Rebell, and
declaring, that the will of the deceased King Don Henry was, that King Philip shold succeed
him in the royall dignitie.
 Whilst these things past, the Duke of Alba aduanced,Duke of Alba's exploits in Portugal. and had taken Villa-vitiosa, the
Duke of Braganca's chiefe house, a place of strength, which might haue stayed him some
daies, and then without any care to march in order with his army (for there was no enemy
to feare) he came with small iournyes to Setuuall, whither he had appointed the fleet
should come. This place was soone yeelded to the Dukes discretion, by men without
iudgement and experience:Setuuall taken by the Castillans. yet he suffered all the soldiers to depart, retayning onely Diego
Botello the yonger, Captaine of the garrison, who sought to escape in a barke. There
remained only one tower which garded the port, the which he battered, and then the captaine
and souldiers yeelded it, to haue their liues and goods saued: after that they had beaten
one of the royall galleons in peeces, thinking it wold haue yeelded to the Castillans.
This place being taken, the Marquis of Santa Cruz came with his fleet (consisting of 60.
gallies and many ships) and lodged most of them within the port, from whence they did
so stop the mouth of the riuer of Lisbon, which is neere vnto it, as nothing could go in,
nor come forth, but by the mercy of the gallies.

The Duke of Alba continuing his course, meant to go to the Cittie of Lisbone,
which is the head of the Realme, and therefore he deuised how he might passe the riuer
with his armie, wherein there was some difficulty, by reason of the old forts which were
at the mouth of the riuer, and those which Don Emanuel of Portugall had newly built
and erected.
Don Antonio beeing returned from Settuual,Estate of Lisbon vnder Antonio (whether hee had gone before the losse
of it) was receyued by the Inhabitants with greater estate then before, causing him to
enter vnder a Canopie, but hearing of the losse of this important place, their ioy was
turned into feare and amazement, for they must now studie how to make head against
the enemie, who they might assure themselues, would be soone at their gates, if they did
not speedily prouide for it. The remedie consisted in a multitude of souldiers and mony
to entertayne them, which they had not. There was a great multitude of common-people
in Lisbone, but not trayned vp in armes, yet full of courage, when the enemy was
farre off. He commanded them to be readie, and to furnish themselues with armes, giuing
them Captaines of their owne sort, for there were few men of qualitie that followed
him, and the best families of the Cittie were absent: but he made publike Proclamations
to call them home in this necessitie, and some he inuited particularly: to such as hee
found willing, hee distributed in paper, honours, offices, commanderies, crosses of the
Orders of Knights which are in that countrey, without regard whether they, to whom he
gaue them, were men of merit, and capable according to the Orders: for many base men
were seene to carrie the crosses of Saint Iames, of Christ, of Alcantara, and others vpon
their Cloakes: but he was indifferent, so as they gaue money. Such as did not obey his
commaundements, and were slow in comming to the towne, hee vsed with all rigour,
causing their houses to bee opened, and their goods to bee sold for the charges of the
warre.
If any rich man within the towne, fearing to be taxed, or forced to pay mony, did seeke
to escape, he was stayed at the Port, stript, and put in prison, so as the great fauor which
Don Antonio had found at his first coming, grew now cold. His most constant friends
were the begging Friars, many of which leauing their hoods, tooke armes, and garded
the ports, or followed him, and made a company in his armie, which he sought to rayse
of this multitude, hauing no other: but they shewed themselues mutinous and rebellious,
when they came to lye in field, a practise which Shoo-makers, Taylors, Mercers,
Vintners, and the other skumme of the people, had not beene inured vnto, by whome
the estate and reputation of Don Antonio were supported, who could not bee ignorant
of this absurditie, but that glorious name of King couered all defects, and made all dangers
light. Hee had sent Diego de Meneses to Cascais, with some troupes to gard the
passage, yet hee did not thinke the enemie would haue past there, but rather would
haue gone aboue the towne towards Saint Iren, where the riuer growes narrow,
for towards the sea, it is very broade: but notwithstanding any thing that Meneses
could do, the Duke of Alba past vnder Cascais, at a place called Marines Vechos, neither
did he euer seeke to hinder his landing, nor offer him skirmish, so hauing forced Meneses
to retire, the Duke was master of the field, Don Antonio who expected some good
seruice from Diego de Meneses, had made him Generall of his forces by land, and his brother
George de Meneses of his armie at sea: where he had good Gallions, and some other
Vessels, but growing iealous of George, he had taken his charge from him, and put him
in prison.
It may bee, hee would haue done as much to Diego, if hee presented himselfe before
him after the Dukes passage, but hee put himselfe into the Castle of Cascais, which cost
him his life. Don Antonio, King of Portugall, must of necessitie issue foorth of Lisbone
against the Duke, and fight with him for his honour, but hee found himselfe very
vnfit for it: for neyther by faire meanes nor rigour could he gather together at that time
aboue a thousand foote, and some fiue hundred horse, ill appoynted, and neuer trayned
vp in the warres, neither could hee possibly stay them aboue that day, for night beeing
come, most of them returned to the towne to supper, for that there was not any breade
in his campe.

The Duke of Alba meaning to attempt Cascais, found it abandoned by the inhabitants,
the castle which was somewhat strong, refused to yeeld, whereupon it was battered
and forced. The captaine who commanded there, called Antonio Pereira was hanged,
and his souldiers stript. Diego de Meneses was found in this place, whose head the Duke
caused to be cut off, although there were some that did sue for his life. The cittie of Lisbon
beeing amazed at the taking of Cascais, expecting to heare the like of the Castle of
S. Iulian, which is, as it were, their key, they protested to D. Antonio, that they wold make
their peace, if he did not put himselfe in defence, who offred himselfe to go, if they wold
follow him. Then euery man was forced to take armes, and go to field, euen the Negro
slaues, of the which there is a great multitude in that Citty, so as of one and other hee
found himselfe to haue an armie of 8000. men, ill armed, ill apparelled, and ill led, (for
there was scarce one that could execute the office of a Sergeant, or place a Sentinell) with
which troupe he went and camped at Alcantara, within fiue miles of S. Iulian, which
the Duke did beseege and batter, which place was yeelded vnto him by Tristanvaz, by
the perswasion of a woman, who had obtayned a safe-conduct from the Duke to draw
foorth a daughter of hers with her husband, which were within it. Cabeca Secca which
 was a fort built vppon the sand in the midst of the riuer right against S. Iulian, was also
abandoned to the Duke.Army of Don An^onio put to r^nt. So as there was not any thing that could hinder him from camping
to the citty gates, but Belem, and Don Antonio's armie, which lay in ther ill-made
trenches at Alcantara, and kept that bridge, the which was forced in it's lodging, and
put to route by the Duke, and chased euen into the towne with some slaughter. Don Antonio
escaped by flight, being hurt, but he stayd not there: for passing through the town,
and as it were, bidding them farewell, whom he could not defend, he tooke the way to
S. Iren, hauing caused his wound to be drest at Sacaben, where he might haue bene taken,
if they had poursued him: but he had the good hap to find meanes to retire to Coimbra,
which of all the townes in the Realme had most resisted King Philip, and most disputed
their pretended rights.
It is the onely Vniuersitie of Portugall, for all faculties, which had giuen aduice and
counsell contrarie to the Doctors of Castile. The Duke of Alba tooke Belem, and soone
after the Magistrates of Lisbone came to offer him the keys of the Cittie, demaunding
their liues and goods: the which was promised them, for King Philips meaning was to
haue it preserued, yet they could not preuent it, but the goodly suburbe which was vpon
the way,Lisbone yeelds to K. Philip. was spoyled, and all the houses and gardens which were about the cittie, whither
the Inhabitants had retired themselues by reason of the plague, and had carried most of
their best moueables thither.
King Philips gallies which were entred into the riuer, tooke them of Portugall, and the
eleuenth of September, that yeare 1580. the Duke of Alba tooke possession in the king
his masters name, of the citty of Lisbone, and made him to be sworne and acknowledged,
the people crying Real, Real for King Philip. Whilst that the Duke of Alba did these
exploites in Portugall, King Philip was at Badajos, whereas he fell so dangerously sick,
as the Phisitions despayred of his life, and it was bruted in Portugall, that he was dead, so
as many Noblemen did put on mourning weedes, and among others the King Don
Antonio: He recouered, but his Queene Donna Anna, who fell sicke at the same time of
a continuall feuer,Death of Q. Anne of Castile dyed.
The newes of the taking of Libone beeing knowne at Court, and what had followed,
many Courtiers sought to disgrace the Duke of Alba's actions, accusing him of great
negligence, to haue suffered Don Antonio to escape: they sayd, that he was more fitte to
destroy then to edifie, not knowing how to do his master seruice, not to get him the possession
of any thing, but defiled, spoyled, and made vnprofitable, and with such excessiue
charge, as it did exceed the value of the thing gotten: this was spoken, for that the suburbes
and places about the cittie were spoyled. It is certaine, that this man for his sower,
disdainfull, and haughtie grauitie, was hated of most of the Noblemen in Court. Then
the King entred into Portugall, hauing first caused a generall Pardon to bee proclaymed
for all those that had opposed themselues against his reception, except Don Antonio,
those that had fauoured him at Saint Iren, at Lisbone, at Setuual, and some others that

were named: the number of which hee did afterwards abate, causing his pardon to bee
reiterated, yet still reseruing some, so as it was commonly sayd, he knew not so well how
to pardon, as to offend.
He did set a price of 80000. crownes for him that could either take or kill D. Antonio:A price set vpon D. Antonios head.
yet notwithstanding this temptation, there was not any one did attempt against his life,
to reueale him, in eight monthes that he went wandring vp and downe the realme after
all these miseries, being pursued and sought for in all places, with the greatest care and
dilligence that might bee. Hauing escaped at the route of Alcantara, hee retired to
Coimbra,D Antonio rayseth a new army. as we haue saied, where hee found so great loue and obedience, as hee gathered
together about fiue thousand foote, with the which hee approched neere vnto the
city of Porto, a strong place neere vnto the sea, where although the Inhabitants had
made shew to be Neuters, or rather inclyning to King Philips party, yet hee entred, and
was well receiued. Being resolued to trie againe the hazard of a battaile, hee made a
kinde of campe vpon the riuer of Duero, neere vnto that city. There hee made some
spoile of them that were of the contrary faction, and sought to draw money from the
Inhabitants. In case of any sinister accident, hee was resolued to flie into France, and
therefore hee caused a barke to lie ready in the roade neere to Viana, a little place vpon
the sea, at the mouth of the riuer of Limas. Whilest that heee busied himselfe about
these things,Sancho de Auila sent against D. Antonio. the Duke of Alba sent Sancho d' Auila against him, with about fiue thousand
foote, some horse and foure canons. Vnto whom the city of Coimbra (which till
then had beene faithfull to Don Antonio) carried their keies; they of Auero did
the like, who had beene spoiled by Don Antonio after that they had yeelded vnto him.
D. Sancho being come to the riuer of Duero which was not to be waded through, he past
his men ouer in certaine boats, which he had brought with him in carts, and others that
he surprized running along that riuer, notwithstanding that D. Antonio had commanded
that all the boats should bee drawne to the other side. Don Sancho found not any resistance,
for as soone as the Portugals, which were camped on the other side of the riuer,
saw him come towards them, they fled, euery man sauing himselfe as hee could, without
any great slaughter: this was in effect a multitude without experience or courage. D.
Antonio hauing no more meanes to subsist, left the towne of Porto, where after that
he had let the Magistrate vnderstand how hee had imployed himselfe to the defence of
the realme, and hauing excused himselfe by the basenesse of the Gouernors, and the smal
assistance he had had from the Estates, he bad them farewell with teares, promising to
see them before it were long, better accompanied, to free them from the tyranie of D.
Philip: for see did hope to finde meanes and succors in France and England to restore
him.
From thence hee went directly to Viana, with an intent to take shipping, where one 
attended him,D Antonio laies aside armes. but the sea went so high as it was impossible to put forth, staying there
vntill the storme were past, behold there came a troupe of horse which sought for him,
wherevpon he put himselfe into a small boat, desyring rather to commit himselfe to the
mercy of the winde and waues, then vnto men. Being come vnto the ship with great
paine and daunger, there was no meanes to force the winde, nor to put to sea, so as hee
was forced to come againe to Land in his boate, the sea driuing him to shoare, whereas
he was not seene by them that pursued him. They of the house of Portugal were with
him, who had alwaies followed him, namely the Bishop of Guarda, the Earle of Vimioso,
and some others; all which hauing disguised themselues like seruants and marriners,
yet well furnished with rich iewels which were sowed vp in their doublets (for D. Antonio
had made good prouision during his short reigne, as well at Lisbone, in the pallace
royall,Portugal wholy reduced vnder King Philip. as in other places) they saued themselues as well as they could. By this retreat
the name of D. Antonio was supprest in Portugal; neither was there any place or man
which made opposition against King Philip in all the maine land of Portugal.
The townes and forts which are in Afrike beyond the Straight,Places belonging to the Portugals in Affrike yeeld to King Philip. yeelded obedience to
King Philip, as Ceuta, Tanger and the rest, where he was content to leaue the same Gouernor
and garrisons that were before: And it was not long before he had newes that
D. Lewis d' Alcaide Earle of Zoghia, viceroy at the East Indies, had acknowledged him

for his King, notwithstanding that he had beene much sollicited by D. Antonio. Wherefore
there remained nothing for the King of Spaine, of all the dependances of the realm
of Portugall, to subiect vnto him, but the Islands of the Tercera's, which are of great importance
both for the Easterne and Westerne nauigations, for the which he prouided
after that he had made his entry into Lisbone.
Before that the King parted from Badajos,Imputations laied vpon the Duke of Alua. the imputations and slanders laied vpon
the Duke of Alba were such, as euery one was perswaded that he caused this goodly conquest
to be trodden vnder foot by his souldiers, and that he gaue them such liberty, as
without feare of punishment, they did spoile, sacke, kill and violate all diuine and humane
lawes: wherefore the King sent two counsellors to informe, the one was called
Francis of Villafaguana, taken out of the royall audience of Castile, the other in that of
Gallicia, whose name was Francis Tedaldi, who found much lesse disorder there then
was spoken of: yet there were some insolencies supprest. There was something iustly
imputed to the Duke of Alba, that by his sower and proud manner of proceeding, hee
had hindred D. Antonios reception into fauour with the King, yea after that hee had
beene saluted for King at Lisbone, and when as the Duke went about to take the forts
that were neere vnto the city, being certaine that King Philip shewed himselfe willing,
when as he vvas mooued by Diego de Carcamo. This Carcamo vvas a gentleman of Castile,
who had serued D. Antonio when he was but Prior of Crato, in the life of King
Henry: who seeing that King Philip had resolued after his decease to seize vpon the
Realme of Portugal by armes, and that the Gouernors made a shew that they would
defend it, he had demaunded his leaue, and was retired into Castile, whereas the King
suffred him to follow the Duke of Albas campe as a voluntary. Being in the army after
the taking of Setuual,Discours betwixt D. Antonio a^d Carca^o. at the passage of the riuer of Tayo, he had leaue giuen him to
goe to Lisbone, to see the new King D. Antonio, letting the Duke vnderstand that it was
the King their Masters pleasure. Being well entertained by D. Antonio, they beganne
to discourse of the present Estate of the affaires, and of what might happen, seriously
and without vanity; they both concluding that D. Antonio had committed an error, in
taking vpon him the title of a King,Carcamos speech to D. Antonio. and that he should haue beene satisfied with that
of defender of the country, and that hauing in effect no support, neither from the Gouernors,
who were opposite vnto him, nor from the Estates, who were disperst, nor of
the Nobility, nor of any other, but of the Inhabitants of Lisbone, and some other
townes, whereas the multitude being ignorant, inconstant, base and vilde, are alwaies
mutinous and disobedient in such occasions, he must needs thinke that he could not subsist,
and that he must yeeld vnto the forces of Castile, being in danger to be ill intreated,
and without any respect if he were taken: and escaping, hee must not hope that any
Prince in Christendome would vndertake a warre for his sake. He might well procure
some weake succors from France or England, vnder the name of voluntaries, without
advow, for once, with the hazard of some incounter; but this were no great foundation,
obtayning a victory either at sea or land, to thinke your selfe thereby setled against a
mighty Prince, as King Philip is, who hath meanes, in an instant, to repaire all the losses
that may happen vnto him. It is true (said Carcamo) that this name and title of a King
or Soueraigne Prince is a sweet enchantment to bewitch men, and it seemes that honour
doth binde your highnesse, hauing once gotten it, to maintaine it with the hazard
of your life, and rather to die fighting then to leaue it: This were good if we knew
our aduentures, which are most incertaine; Man dies not when, nor how hee doth imagine,
it depends of the wil of God. A King is as soone taken as slaine in a battaile. If your
highnesse should be taken, consider, what would be your condition, and seeke no farther
into Gods secret Iudgements, who shewes plainly by the successe of King Philips enterprises,
that he hath ordained the realme of Portugal should be vnited to that of Castile.
That he should haue recourse whilest he had time, to those remedies which might warrant
him from dishonour and infamy, rather then to contend in vaine against heauen
and nature: and cast himselfe into the Kings armes, whom hee holds for his enemy;
assuring him that he should find him milde, and forgetting all that was past, giuing him
meanes to liue with honour, if not with the title of a King, yet in quality of a Prince,

whom hee will loue and acknowledge as his kinsman. Diego de Carcamo did without any
dispute, make D. Antonio allow of these reasons, who knowing them to be most true,
resolued to write an humble letter vnto King Philip, yet still retayning some right vnto
himselfe.
He excused himselfe for that hee had taken the name of King,D. Antonio wri^s to king Philip. and receiued royall honours
at Saint Iren, Setuual, and at Lisbone, the question of succession beeing not decided,
saying, that he had beene forced by the multitude, who would haue yeelded him no
obedience, if he had onely carried the title of defender of the country, and that if he had
prepared to make defence, it was by authority from the states, which is the greatest
power within the realme, the royall seat being voide: and that his Highnesse should
impute that to the loue and charity which euery good Portugues should carry vnto the
crowne of Portugal: being then free, and full of honours purchased by the proper and
peculiar vertues which God had infused into the Nation, both in Kings and subiects,
the which he greeued to see con^ounded, and in danger to be darkened, beeing mingled
with the trophees of Castile: And howsoeuer he held himselfe bound to perseuer in this
defence, thinking the quarrel iust in his conscience, and by the consultations which hee
had had both in the vniuersities of the country, as strangers, as well of Diuines as Lawiers,
yet considering the condition of humaine things, and the vncertentie of their euents,
and also to spare bloud, and to preuent the insolencies and spoiles which follow
warre, he was content to lay aside armes, and the title of King, knowing how his highnesse^ment
to intreat both the realmes and him. This was the substance of the letter
which Diego de Carcamo, carried vnto King Philip, being yet at Badajos, the which hee receiued
in good part, seeming desirous the quarrel might be ended by such submissions,
without any more force. But for that this negotiation fell out, either during the Kings
sicknesse, or vpon his recouery, being it may bee aduised to haue this matter treated of
farre from him, to the end hee might not haue his spirits continually importuned, nor
haue occasion to alter his humors by any difficulty, that should put him in choller, hee
gaue the whole charge thereof to the Duke of Alba, to whom Diego of Carcamo was
sent,
who made some voiages more to Lisbone, and had so well aduanced the businesse,
as there remained nothing, but to draw neere, and to conferre together by their Deputies,
or in person if it might bee; when as Don Antonio receiuing letters from the Duke,
conceiued by the termes thereof, an opinion that hee contemned him, and that hee
would treat with him as a Master: for although that the Duke did witnesse by the tenor
of his letters, that hee would imploy his best endeauors to attaine vnto a peace, saying
that he honoured the memory of the Infant D. Lewis his father, the which did binde him
to seeke D. Antonios aduancement in this treaty, yet he gaue him no other title but your
Lordship, where they had beene accustomed to say vnto him, your Highnesse, since he
was King, and before your Excelleny, when he was but Prior of Crato. This ceremonious
kinde of speaking being omitted by the Duke of Alba willingly, to humble Don
Antonio, was the cause that the treaty went not forward, which was a great crosse both
for the country and himselfe.
D. Philip being now King of all Spaine,King Philip enters into Portugal. entred into Portugall soone after his recouery,
and came to Eluas, where he was acknowledged for King, and in all places where hee
past, and then he did free them of a forraine imposition which was leauied vpon all marchandize
which past from one realme vnto an other, which was valued yeerely at a hundred
and fifty thousand crownes, for a token of the vnion, and to shew that the Castillans
and Portugals were now but one people. He appointed an assembly of the Estates
at Tomar in Aprill the yeere following 1582. hee visited Catherine Dutchesse of Braganca
at Villa Boim, who yeelded her right to the Realme vnto him, if she had any. The
Pope who had till then beene somewhat opposite to the Kings pursutes,Pope Gregory allowes of the conquest of Portugal. did allow of all
that had beene done in Portugall, being aduertised how matters had past; hee exhorted
him that to shew himselfe thankefull vnto God for the prosperities which hee had giuen
him, he should vndertake to make warre against the Queene of England, either directly,
or vnder hand, in fauoring the Irish: hee not onely offred him his spirituall treasors,
but also quit him the fruites of the Archbishoprike of Toledo, which had beene

long in the hands of his Stewards, whilest that the Archbishop remained suspended of
his dignity, and that his processe was in question at Rome, the which amounted to some
millions of crownes, and did belong to the Church and Sea of Rome. The King knew
well that he should not restore those fruits, and therefore he was not eager to enter into
open warre against the English, yet he promised to succor the Irish from Spaine, without
any further declaration, but saying, that he would deale with the affaires of Ireland,
as the Queene of England did with them of Flanders. Hee was also to prouide for the
reduction of the Islands of the Tercera's, without the which his fleets could hardly continue
their nauigations to the Indies.
These Islands are in the Atlantike Ocean,Description of the Terceras. and are otherwise called the Acores; they be
seuen in number, most of them small, and not greatly inhabited. The best are the Tercera
(which carries the name of them al) Saint Michel (which is the greatest) and Fayal: the
other, which be, Santa Maria, P^c, Flowers and Corues, are barren and vnpeopled. The
city of Angra the Bishops Sea, is in the Tercera, but the Bishops aboad is in that of Saint
Michel, at a place called Puncto del Gada, which Island is some hundred miles neerer vnto
Spaine then the rest.People of the Terceras brutish. All the Inhabitants of these Islands are brutish, superstitious and
vaine, yet instructed by Iesuits and many sorts of Monkes which haue their dwellings
there. Vntil that the Marquis of Santa Cruz had conquered them, they were of opinion
that the King D. Sebastian was not dead at the battaile of Afrike, they did hate the Castillans
mortally, and were enterrained in this hatred by D. Antonio, who held them two yeers
after the conquest of Portugal, by the means of some succors which he drew fro^ France,
for this King being expelled, after that he had wandred throughout the realm, poore and
in a disguised habit, for the space of eight months, and yet was neuer wronged nor discouered,
notwithstanding that he spake to diuers men, in the end he had means to fraight a
ship of the Low countries at Setuual, who for 600. crowns brought him to Callis, from
whence going to the court of France, he was kindly entertained by the Queene Mother,
one of the Pretendants to the crowne of Portugal, by whose fauor and authority, hee
found in many priuat men that offred to do him seruice, and went to sea, and to the Islands,
vnder his warrant, hoping to take some Spanish or Portugal ships co^ming from the Indies,
and to inrich themselues with their spoiles, so as it was an ordinary trade from the
ports of France to the Tercera's: where for a time D. Antonio Cyprian de Figueredo commanded,
but not well pleased with him, he displast him, and gaue his Gouernment to Emanuel
de Sylua, who called himselfe Earle of Torres Vedras. They of the Island of Saint
Michel, being some distance from the rest, did presently acknowledge the king of Spaine,
diuiding themselues from the rest, whether French ships came many times to spoile it,
and some Spaniards to defend it, who meeting made furious war, but the Spaniards had
alwaies the worst. They of the Tercera's, were firme for Antonio, and tooke all that came
vpon their coast, and vpon that of Fayal, or that they could see at sea, to make a stock for
D. Antonio, who reaped great commodity. There was one called Iohn de Betancour, descended
from some French house, dwelling in the towne of Angra, who thought to draw
the people into a mutiny for the King of Spaine, who being almost slaine, was cast into
an obscure prison, where he remained long, and it is doubtful whether he died there. The
Iesuits thought to speake, but they walled vp the gates of their conuents, and kept them
long shut vp after that maner, giuing them meate twice a weeke, and yet they feared to
bee worse intreated: but the other Orders of Monkes spake of none but D. Antonio,
whose vertues and praises were most commonly the subiect of their Sermons, medling
much with affaires of state and warre. King Philip to assure himselfe of the Island of
Saint Michel which held for him, and receiue the ships which came from the Indies, being
not aduertised of that which had past in Portugal, least they should vnwillingly fall
into the hands of the contrary party, he commanded that D. Pedro de Baldes should bee
sent with foure ships and six hundred Spaniards, who aduerturing to land in the Island
of Tercera's, with an opinion that there were many in the Island affected to the King his
Master,Pedro de Baldes defeated by them of the Terceras. and by their meanes to doe some good exploite vpon the city of Angra, which
was vnwalled towards the land, he was charged by the^, who slue 400. of his men, so as he
made all the hast he could to get to sea, and returne to Lisbone, where for his welcome

he was put in prison, charging him that he had fought contrary to his Commission, yet
he was soone released, finding that he was not expresly forbidden to fight. Lope de Figueroa
being sent after to second him, thought to find him about the Island of S. Michel,
but hearing of this defeat, he returned also to Lisbone, so as it was then resolued to send
greater forces the next spring.
We haue formerly made mention of certaine companies sent by Pope Gregory the 13.
to succor the Rebels of Ireland, vnder the command to Thomas Stukely, who comming
to Portugal with sixe hundred foote, when as D. Sebastian did arme against the Moores,
they were intreated by him to serue him in that warre, where most of them were slaine
with their chiefe Commander. The rest returning into Portugall, with Sebastian Saniosep
one of their Commanders, they had order to passe into Ireland, and the Popes
Nuntio there had order to leauy Spaniards to fill vp the number, and to increase it, who
should saile into Ireland vnder the Standard of the Church,Forces sent into Ireland by the Pope and King of Spaine defeated. yet at the King of Spaines
charge, hauing money to raise foure thousand men of the country, they being but nine
hundred men in all vnder diuers captaines Italians and Spaniards. These men landed
in Ireland, and built a good fort, called Smerwike, the which was furnished with ordinance,
victuals and munition to maintaine a long seege, into the which there entred
but sixe hundred men, the other three hundred returning in three ships, leauing three
behind; but before they were fully fortified, the Lord Gray, Lord Deputy for the Queens
Maiesty in Ireland, came and beseeged them, and prest them in such sort, as some of the
captaines, compounding for their owne liues, the rest were put to sword: And so that enterprise
was soone made frustrate, hauing more desire then meanes to anoy the English
in those parts.
The time appointed being come for the holding of the Estates at Tomar,An. 1581. the Deputies
of the Clergy,Estates of Portugal held at Tomar. Nobility, Prouinces and good townes of Portugal came thither,
where King Philip was acknowledged by them all for King of Portugal, without any
contradiction, and receiued the oth of fidelity, the which hee caused to be taken to the
Prince his sonne. There they also treated how the Realme should be gouerned, where
the King shewed himselfe very bountifull, for he granted vnto the realme, in a manner, all
the Articles which the Duke of Ossuna his Ambassador had promised and signed to the
fiue Gouernors, before the taking of Lisbone, the chiefe whereof were: That the King
should take an oth, as he did, to maintaine the realme in her lawes, customes, preuiledges 
and liberties.Articles granted by King Philip to the realme of Portugal. That the Estates of the realme should bee held within the realme, and
that they should resolue there, and no where else, of matters concerning the realme of
Portugal. That the viceroy, or by what name soeuer they called the Gouernor, should
be a Portuguese, vnlesse he were a Prince of the bloud, sonne, vncle, brother, cousin or
nephew to the King. That the offices of Iustice, charges of the treasure and reuenues
of the crowne should be giuen vnto Portugueses alone. That such as had offices and dignities
within the realme, as well at land as at sea, preferred by former Kings, should enioy
them still, and in like manner the offices of the house and crowne of Portugal. That
the Gouernors and Captaines of places and the souldiers in garrisons should be all Portugueses.
That the commerce of the East Indies should remaine for the Portugueses,
distinct from them of Castile, as they had beene before this vnion, and vnder the same
lawes. That the money which should be coined in Portugal should haue the armes of
Portugal alone, without any other mixture or addition. That all Clergy dignities,
both great and small, should be giuen to Portugueses, and in like maner all commanderies
of the Orders of Knights. That no Croisadoes, nor thirds of Ecclesiasticall liuings,
should be obtained from the Pope, to be leauied in Portugal. That no fees nor iurisdictions
should be granted in Portugal, to others the^ to Portugueses. That rights excheting
to the crown, should not be giuen to any but to Portugueses. That the King should
take into his seruice two hundred Portugueses, giuing them the pension which is called
Moradic. That the King comming into Portugal, the lodgings of his Court and traine
should be made after the manner of Portugal. That the King going through the realme
he should carry with him a priuat Counsel consisting of a Prelate, Chancellor, Treasorer,
superintendant, and a certaine number of Secretaries, which should bee called the

counsell of Portugal, all Portugneses. That the prouisions of offices, as well of Iustice as
others should be made within the realme, and that their supreme Iudgements should haue
execution. That the Kings Chappel and singing men should be entertained, as had bin
vsed in the time of other Kings, in the city of Lisbone commonly, or where the Kings
person should be within the realme. That al forraine impositions vpon the confines of
either realme, should cease. That al Portugueses should indifferently bee admitted to
serue the Kings and Queenes, and that the Queenes taking Portugal maidens to serue
them, should marry then according to their quallities, as had beene accustomed.
At these Estates there was a generall pardon granted to them that had carried armes,
or otherwise opposed themselues against king Philip. Out of the which were excepted D.
Antonio, the Bishop of Garda, the Earle of Vimioso, and others named to the number of
52. All the religious men which had adhered to D. Antonio, and those that had receiued
office from him, were also excluded out of this pardon, and were made incapable euer
to receiue any grace or charge from the King. The vniuersity of Coimbra, which had
held D. Antonios part, and published his title, was (contrary to the opinion of many) confirmed
in their preuiledges, and taking into the Kings special protection. As for gratuities
and rewards to priuate Portugueses, the King gaue much, yet he pleased not all sutors.King Philips bounty in Portugal.
He confirmed the Duke of Braganca in the dignity of Constable of the realm. The
Duke of Ossuna, who had left Portugal after the Gouernors flight from Setuual, was
made viceroy of Naples, which is the goodliest charge of Spaine, wherevnto the Noblemen
aspire and seeke to come vnto by degrees, as the chiefe of dignities which is giuen in
that court. Christopher de Mora was made gentleman of the Chamber, which is much in
Spaine. All that had imployed themselues to serue the King in his pretension and pursute
of that realm of Portugal, as well of the nation, as others, yea and many which had opposed
themselues, and were afterwards by some meanes reconciled, were gratified and rewarded,
some superfluosly, others more sparingly, so as some thought his recompences
and rewards amounted to six millions of crownes.
 The Estates being ended, the King drew neere vnto Lisbone staying some daies at Almada,Entry of King Philip into Lisbone, and acknowledged King.
not far off, attending the preparations which they made for his reception, and on
Saint Peters day he made his royal entry, where after the triumphes, he wanted not importunat
sutors for guifts and recompences, and there was so great a number of petitions
presented, as the counsel was ouer-charged, and there could not be any expedition, so
as to abridge al delaies, the King discharged the body of the counsell, and committed the
examination and prouision vnto two only, which were, D. Antonio Pignero Bishop of
Leira, and Christopher de Mora.
The Great Turke being at truce both with the Persian and the Catholike King, had
some cause giuen him to doubt a warre in Afrike, for that in Tunis the people had taken
armes, and expelled the Turkes that were there in gard, calling home their old King Amida,
who had beene expelled and liued at Malta, wherevpon Amurath did presently
send Vluccialy with some gallies, who attempted to land some men, but the King of Fez
opposed himselfe, hauing no wil that the Turkes should grow potent in Afrike. And the
Catholike King, who had made a league with the Moore, would not haue the Turke aduance
on that side, protesting to Vluccialy, that by reason of the truce, formerly made
betwixt him and the great Turke, he could not attempt war against him of Fez, vnlesse
he would breake the truce; and therefore if he attempted any thing, hee would send his
gallies against him; which threats made Vluccialy resolue (hauing past thether wel prouided)
not to alter any thing this yeere. The disorders at the Tercera's increased daily, many
comming thether for refuge, after they had beene spoyling at sea, whereof some
were French: And King Phillip being aduertised that in France they prepared many
ships of warre, and leauied souldiers publikly vnder the fauour of the Queene mother, to
come vnto those Islands, there to fortifie themselues against the Spaniards, to cut off
their nauigation to the Indies, and to assure them against the enterprises of the King of
Spaine, and depriue him of the vse of them, he had already commanded D. Aluar de
Bacan, Marquis of Santa Cruz, to carry 5000. men thether, when as hearing that D. Antonio
had set saile with aboue 70. ships and 7000. soldiers (as reports are alwaies greater

then the effects) he prest the Marquis to be gonne, and seemed to be somewhat discontented
with him, for his slacknesse in making ready the ships of Andaluzia, whereof there
were a good number appointed for this voiage: so as hee was forced to goe from Lisbone
on the tenth of Iuly with eight and twenty ships only, some Biscains, the rest Flemings
and Esterlings, appointing the rest which were at Saint Lucar, Santa Maria, and
other ports to follow him. This Castillan army beeing come to the Island of Saint Michel,Armies of French and Spaniards in the Island of Saint Michel.
they found that the French were already landed, and did spoile it. So as they came
happely to preserue the Island, and the chiefe fort of it called Puncto Delgada. Hee was
glad that whilest the French were busie about the spoile of that poore Island, they had
suffred a great ship and very rich comming from the Indies to escape, the which had
come vnwittingly vnto those Islands, beeing ignorant how the affaires of Portugal
had past.
These two enemies fleets were at anchor some thirty miles one from an other, beiug
couered with points of Land which runne into the sea: The French being about
Laguna towards the West, and the Spaniards at Morro, which is to the East, with this
disaduantage, that the Marquis sayling along the Island to finde a fit place to land, the
army had beene fully discouered by the French, which hee could not doe of theirs, lying
couered and hidden: besides the French had taken a Caruell of aduice, the Marquis hauing
sent two vnto the Gouernor of the Island to aduertise him of his comming, and of
the number of ships and souldiers which hee brought with him, and of those
which should follow him. Beeing therefore hard to discouer the French army by
sea, the Marquis was desirous to land some men to learne some certentie, but they were
forced to returne without any certaine knowledge. Wherefore to bee better assured,
he waied anchor, and put to sea with all his fleet, in order to fight, meaning to passe in
that manner along the South part of the Island, where the enemy lay (for the other side
of the Island was desart and had no landing) and by that meanes see what their strength
might be, where at the breake of day there came a smal barke vnto him, in the which was
the Master of a Biscain ship, with letters from Iohn de Castillo, who commanded in the
fort of the city, by the which he did aduertise him of all that had past since the comming
of D. Antonio and his army vnto the Island: That the French had in all 58. sailes, whereof
28. were great ships, and 6000. souldiers; that they had sackt the village of Laguna,
and put to rout Pedro Pexot, and Laurence Noghera, who went to incounter them with
3000. men, part Islanders and part Spaniards, and then had entred into the city which
they had found empty, and that they sought to winne the fort, into the which they were
fled that had escaped at the defeat. That Laurence Noghera was dead of a wound which
hee had receiued in the fight, and that Pexot went away soone after in a Carauel towards
Lisbone, leauing many of his vessels in the Port, which had beene taken or brothen by
the French, and that hee was straightly beseeged in the fort; and therefore hee should
take counsell, whether hee should fight, or retire with all his ships vnder the fort to fauour
it.
The Marquis beeing glad of this aduice sent the Master backe to Iohn de Castillo with
this answere. That hee should not trouble himselfe but hold good, for hee was resolued
to fight, with hope to vanquish the enemy. This report came neere the truth for
the number of their ships, for the French fleet at their comming from Belille in Britan
consisted of fiue and fifty sailes, whereof there were fiue and thirty ships of warre, and
twenty pinaces,Number of the French army at the Terceres. tarrying seuen and thirty companies of foote, which might make some
foure thousand souldiers, whereof Saincte Solene was Collonel of fifteene Ensignes,
nine were vnder the command of the Siegneur of Buz, eight vnder Beaumont, and fiue
vnder Fumee, ouer which Philip Strossy was Generall, and the Earle of Brissac was his
Lieutenant. The Marquis hauing spent that day in consultations, and in ordring all
things necessary for the army, the next day, which was the three and twentith day of
Iuly, the two fleets were at sea, their prowes turned as if they ment to fight, which
it is verie likely they had done instantly if so bee that a calme had not kept them
from ioyning. After dinner the vvinde grovving somevvhat fresh, the Marquis
thinking that the French (vvho had the vvinde) vvould haue charged him, and

hee preparing to receiue them; hee saw them bend their course towards the Island of
Santa Maria; fifty miles distant from that of Saint Michel, the which the Spanish fleet
did in like manner, coasting one an other, and turning their sailes sometimes on the
one side, sometimes on the other, vntill that night came, which was very calme,
so as the French could not execute their deseigne, which was to haue sent ten ships of
warre along the Island to get behind the Spanish fleet, with an intent to charge them
the next day in front, and (...) ^ithier side.
In the morning euery man expected a battaile, but they did not any thing, but play
with their great ordinance a farre off, yet anoying one an other, for the French had one
of their ships sunke. Night being come the Marquis, being tired with this losse of time,
sought to get the winde, wherefore he gaue commandement to all his ships, that hearing
a peece of ordinance shot off, they should beare vp close with the Admiral, and
follow it, bearing no lanthorne, to the end the enemy should not see them: This Order
was obserued by all the ships, except two Easterlings in the which were foure hundred
Germaines; who being not aduertised, through his fault that had the charge, were so far
off as they could not ioyne againe with the rest of the s^eet. But this preuailed not, for
at the breake of day, which was the fiue and twentith of Iuly, on Saint Iames day, the Patron
of Spaine, to whom the Spaniards said that D. Antonio and the French captaines
bare respect, they saw them busie to repaire their ships, which were shot through the day
before, making no shew that they had any intent to fight. The Marquis men were
prest with the like necessity, for that the maine ^ast of a great ship, in the which Christopher
d' Erasso was, had beene bruzed and shaken, so as they were forced to attend her,
fearing the enemy should enuiron and take her, whilest they mended her mast, which
was so shaken, as shee could not saile: So this day was spent, in the which the French,
whose vessels were lighter, had meanes to recouer the winde.
The next day being the sixe and twentith, they must needs fight, their former delaies
proceeding from the sundry opinions that were amongst the captaines of D. Antonios
armies, whereof some would fight, and others were vnwilling, and if their Generall
and Admirall had not aduanced to shew them the way, most of them would not haue
come to it: making their excuse that they had alwaies seene Philip Strossy, and the Earle
of Vimioso (who were in one ship) keepe behinde, which they imputed to want of will
to fight, where as in truth the reason was for that the ship was heauy, and not so good
a sailer as the rest: for these two Noblemen wanted no courrage, but were most desirous
to fight with the enemy: Strossy and the Earle finding this bad impression of their
companions, changed their ships, and tooke one of the best saylers in the fleet, in the
which the Lord of Beaumont was, who was Collonel of those companies which
had followed the Earle of Brissac. The two armies beeing in order of battaile at sea,
within three miles one of an other, and fiue and twenty from Saint Michel, the sea being
calme, they attended some small gale to giue them meanes to approch.
 The which fell out about noone, fauorable for the French,Battaile at sea betwixt the French and Spaniards. wherevpon they ioyned
within tenne miles of the Island, fighting with great resolution. In the front of all the
French army was Strossy and the Earle of Vimioso, their ship holding the place of Admirall,
the Earle of Brissac was with them for vice-admirall, with three English ships,
then followed the other ships, some neere, some farther off. The Spanish fleet had
for their foreward a great hulke, and Francis de Bou^dilla in it; the galleon Saint Martin,
in the which the Marquis of Santa Cruz went, who towed after him with a cable the
ship of Christopher d' Erasso, whose mast was much shaken, and with them the galeon
called Saint Mathew, which carried Lope de Figueroa: all the other ships of the Spanish
fleet, were in a manner couered by these foure. Euery one had chosen where to fight,
but the winde changing and varying, made them to change their deseignes.
The Saint Mathew, wherein Lope de Figueroa was, beeing cast somewhat from the
^est by the agitation of the winde and waues, it was first charged by the Admirall
and vice-admirall of the French, and the other three shippes, which did enuiron
it with a storme of great shot and fire, whom hee ansvvered vvith the like, and made
them to keep aloofe, yet Figueroa vvas so prest by the Admirall, Vice-admirall, and

an other ship as he was often in danger to be lost, for he maintained the fight valiantly
aboue two houres, and was not succored. In the end a Biscay ship of Peter of Garagarza,
in which were two companies of Spaniards, came and releeued him. The Marquis, who
saw him in danger, was much troubled for that hee could not succor him in time as hee
thought; both for that he was forced to answer two French ships which had set vpon
him (whom notwithstanding he had made retire with his great Ordinance, and that of
the Hulke, wherein Francis de Bauadillo was) as also for that he must goe against the
winde, casting about, so as the time would be long before he should recouer him. Yet in
the end he came vnto him, but the order of the army and all their priuate deseignes
were peruerted, as it happens commonly in sea fights, being subiect to the winde and
waues; but he was preuented by the ships of Michel d' Oquendo, of captaine Villa Viciosa,
and an other Biscain, who came first to succor the Galeon Saint Mathew, being
followed by many others. These three last-named did inuest the Vice-admiral, in the
which the Earle of Brissac was, who being already ill intreated by the cruel resistance the
Spaniards had made, sought to be vngrapled, and to retire her selfe. Among others the
ship of Michael de Benesa came boldly and grapled with the General Strossy; So as the
Marquis of Santa Cruz could not approch nere either of the enemies ships, seeing them
enuironed by his galleons; wherefore he obserued what the issue would be, to succor
where need required. The French Vice-admiral defended it selfe valiantly against three
ships that did presse it. Captaine Villa Vicieosa who fought in the prow was slaine. In
poupe they were forced by Michel d' Oquendo, who caused some of his Spaniards to
enter, but finding his owne ship to be perced, and that it tooke in water, he left her, seeing
also other French ships come to succor her. So as this viceadmirall being much
torne and broken, seeing her selfe free, would haue retired, but she could not goe farre,
before she sunke (as the Spaniards say:) the Earl of Brissac with some others sauing themselues
in a little boat, got to the next French ship. As for the Admirall where Strossy
was, which had not yet abandoned the fight, she was so fastned to one of the ankors of the
galleon Saint Mathew, as it was not possible to free her, but they must either vanquish or
die. Before that succors came she was in a manner Master of this galleon, about the
which almost the whole fight was, for there were but 70. men of defence and seruice remayning
in her; but besides the ship of Michel de Venesa, the Marquis, who was watchfull,French defeated at sea by the Spaniards.
comming with other ships, compassed her in round, and id so batter her with musket
shot, as she was forced to yeeld, hauing endured this last charge aboue an houre, and
being shot through in diuers places, she beganne to sinke visibly. There were aboue
three hundred men slaine in her, the rest were taken. Philip Strossy was found sore
wounded with a musket shot aboue the knee, which made him fall, who being drawne
out of the presse,Death of Philip Strossy. to carry him into the galleon Saint Martin, as they past with him from
one vessell to an other, an insolent souldier thrust his sword into his belly, and in this
Estate he was laied before the Marquis of Santa Cruz, who made no account of him,
and seeming not to vnderstand them that said it was philip Strossy, hee turned his head
on the other side, and made a signe that they should cast him into the sea yet breathing.
D. Francis of Portugal, Earle of Vimioso, who also fought valiantly with him, died two
daies after of his wou^ds. The Marquis seemed to lament his death, for he was his kinsman.
This battaile continued, aboue fiue houres, betwixt two very vnequall parties, for
there were scarce ten French ships that fought, by reason of the bad intelligence and
disobedience that was among them, as it happens often amongst a multitude of men,
which are either voluntaries, or not experienced; of the which this army did for the most
part consist, who were fauoured in their faults by their captaines, whereas they should
haue vsed seuerity, especially at sea. Before their comming out of France, they had
falne into quarrels and mutynies, which were with some difficulty pacified: most of the
other French ships were idle spectators of the battaile; Some at the first charge went
to sea, bending their course towards the Island of the Tecera's, where they refused
them the port, as treacherous runne-awaies; and if any one came neere vnto the enemy,
it was but to discharge their canon farre off, which is held by good sea men to be idle
and vnproffitable.

Thus the French army retired, hauing lost their Commanders with about 2000. men,
and eight of their best ships in the conflict,(...) of the dead in the battaile. in the which the Spaniards said they had
not aboue 200. slaine, and about 500. hurt, wherein they flattred themselues strangely, for
in the Galleon Saint Mathew, alone, there were aboue 600. soldiers and ma^riners, who
by their owne confession were reduced to 70. when as Strossy was opprest by the Marquis
and the rest that came. The Spanish fleet remained master at sea, neither cared to
pursue them that fled, both for that night approched, as also thinking that he had done
ynough. He was kept foure daies at sea, by reason of the winde which did rise, and could
not get to the Island of Saint Michel, where he afterwards landed his men to refresh
them, and to cure them that were hurt. There D. Aluaro de Bacan Marquis of Santa Cruz
did an act which was held barbarous, discouering the pride and insolency of certaine
Natures which cannot be pacified, and which neuer take delight in their victories, vnlesse
they be seasoned with some new cruelties,Cruelt^ of the Marquis of Santa Cruz to the French. committed after the fact in cold bloud: for
the first day of August the army being landed, Francis of Bouadilla hauing caused a great
scaffold to be set vp in the market place of Villa Franca, in the Island of Saint Michel,
he caused all the French prisoners, to the number of 300. to be brought thether by foure
companies of souldiers, where he caused a sentence to be pronounced. That whereas
(there being a peace betwixt the Catholike King and the most Christian) they had presumed
to come out of France, in fauor of D. Antonio, sometimes Prior of Crato, in form
of an army, with an intent to spoile the King of Spaines ships, comming from the Indies,
and seize vpon his Islands, where they had already taken great booties; he therefore declared
them common enemies to the commerce and publike quiet, and fauorers of his
Maiesties rebels; and that as pirats and theeues he condemned them to die, commanding
the Iudge of the army to cause that sentence to be put in execution, vpon all those
that exceeded the age of 17. yeeres, for so the seruice of God, and of the two King required.
The age of these prisoners, which were exempted from death, to vse them in the gallies,
was iudged after that they were carried backe to prison by their beards, so as many
which had little or no beards saued their liues, hauing secretly pulled the haire off their
chins. There were found among those that were condemned foure score gentlemen,
who lost their heads, or rather had their throats cut, for want of a good hangman, and the
rest, both soldiers and marriners, were hanged, within two foot of the ground. This inhumaine
and bloudy slaughter, was detested by the Spanish souldiers, and by many of
their captaines, saying, that it did blemish the honour of armes, and that they did wrong
to those prisoners to terme them theeues, beeing apparent that they were not come to
that voiage for D. Antonio,Spanish souldie^s detest the cruelty of the Marquis of Santa Cruz. but to doe seruice to the French Queene, by reason of the
pretensions she had to the realme of Portugal, and that they should make them faire
war, hauing behaued themselues like valiant souldiers, wherevpon they made many requests
vnto the Generall, seeking to diuert him from that cruel resolution, but he was
immouable. After this vnworthy fact (howsoeuer they may colour it) the Marquis staied
some daies about those Isla^ds, to receiue the India^ ships, if any came, so as he saued two,
which might haue somewhat repaired D. Antonios losse, if they had falne into his hands,
whom he put in some feare, and all them that were with him at Angra in the Island of
Tercere, that he would land there, for he past and repast twise or thrice in view of the city,
but he had an other deseigne; for seeing the season approch, when as the seas grow
high, he gaue order for the gard of the Island of Saint Michel, where he left Augustin
I^ygues with 2000. Spaniards, and then sailed towards Lisbone.
The defeat of D. Antonios army, and the death of Philip Strossy did much trouble the
French King, and the Queene-mother, after which he could not procure any great
means to anoy the King of Spaine: Some of the ships of that fleet making hast to recouer
the Ports of France, their captaines were reproched with base cowardise, and some
of them were put in prison, being charged to haue beene corrupted by the King of
Spaine, or his Agents, before they parted from France, and to haue failed of their duties
in the day of battaile. They had prepared for D. Antonio (hauing newes of the comming
of this army) a stately entry in the city of Angra, whether he came two daies before
the battaile, to attend the issue thereof out of danger, by the aduice of the French

captaines,D. Antonios estate after the defeat of the French at sea. the vnfortunate successe whereof made the triumphs to cease: and when as
after the defeat he saw the Marquis lie houering vp and downe, he grew afraide, causing
a light barke to lie ready for his flight, if he should be assailed, but hearing afterwards of
his departure, he grew assured. This poore Prince falne from all his hopes staied their a
while, and was perswaded by Emanuel de Sylua, whom he had made Gouernor of those
Islands, to commit many insolencies to get money, wherevnto he willingly gaue ^are,
for he fore-saw his future necessity. He caused mony of a base standard to be coined, and
set it at a high rate. Yet would he not imitate the Marquis of Santa Cruz in cruelty, being
sollicited to put to death fifty Castillans which were in prison at Angra, to reueng
the death of those that had beene executed in the Island of Saint Michel, which shewed
his generous minde. About the midest of October he resolued to returne againe to
France: for danger and want would not suffer him to liue any longer in the Island of Tercere.
Hauing therefore recommended vnto Emanuel de Silua, that which concerned the
gouernment of those Islands, for the gard whereof he left him fiue hundred French soldiers,His (...) into France.
besides those he had before: he parted with about thirty saile. And for that he
would not arriue in France, whilest that the memory of the losse of so many gallant men
was fresh, whereof they imputed the cause to him, he directed his course towards the
Canaries, and the Island of Madera, to spend the time, and to get some spoile to content
his souldiers: some ships both French and English abandoned him in a storme which
disperst them about the Island of Saint Michel.
The Marquis of Santa Cruz being arriued at Lisbone, he was welcome to the King,
who told him, that seeing he had beene so fortunate in that voiage, he would send him the
next sommer to the Tercera's with a stronger army, and that he should carry some gallies
with him, to make an absolute conquest of those Islands, and to chase away the
French and D. Antonios partisans, and euen there he gaue order for that voiage.
We haue formerly made mention that the King of Spaine after the returne of captaine
Drake from the South sea,An. 1582. had sent D. Diego Florens de Baldes with 25. ships,King of Spaines fortifies the straights of Magellan. to fortifie
and plant in the Straights of Magellan, and to stop the passage of any other Englishmen
that should attempt the like, and that fiue of his ships had beene cast away in a
storme, vpon the coast of Spaine, notwithstanding the King sent commandement that
he should proceed in his voiage, the which he did with sixteene saile, but he could not get
into the straights that yere, so as leauing Diego de Ribera his Lieutenant, and Pedro Sarmiento
(who should be the Gouernor of those forts) to attempt it the next yeere, he returned
for Spaine. And they happily got into the Straights, where they landed 400. men, with
their victuals and munition, which done, Diego de Ribera left Pedro Sarmiento with 400.
men, thirty women, and a ship with victuals for eight months, and returned with three
ships, hauing staied but eight daies in the Straights. Pedro Sarmiento built a towne in the
mouth of the Straight to the Northward, in the which he put a hundred and fifty men,
calling it Nombre de Iesus,Sarmiento fortifies in the straights of Magellan. from whence he went by land, and sent the ship some fiue
leagues within the Straights, where in the narroest part he found a very good port, and
built an other towne, which he called Ciudad del Rey Philippo, or King Phillips towne,
but the snow and extreme cold of the Winter would not suffer him to finish his fort.
Wherevpon pretending to goe to his other towne, hee sailed to the Straights mouth,
to his first built towne, where hauing staied a day or two, he brake his cable in a storme
(as hee said) and went to the riuer of Ienero, and then to Fernambuck to seeke for some
supplie of victuals, where he obtained what he desired: But Sarmiento sayling towards
his Colony, his ship with all his prouision was cast away, three of his men were drowned
and himselfe hardly escaped. At Baya the Gouernor of Bresil fitted him with a barke,
and furnished him with clothes and victuals for his people, but vpon the way he was surprized
with so furious a storme, as he was forced to cast all his fraight ouer bord, and to return
againe to the riuer of Ienero; where attending a whole yere, he neither receiued succors
nor letter from the King, who was offended with Pedro Sarmiento, for that he had giuen
him wrong informations touching the straights, and put him to a needlesse charge,
and losse of men, so as Sarmiento hauing no meanes to releeue his people, was forced to
saile towards Spaine, where at sea he was taken by certaine Englishmen, so as in

foure yeeres those poore Spaniards which hee had left in the Srtaights had no succors.
This yeere D. Diego the Kings sonne,Death of D. Diego Prince of Spaine. Prince of Spaine, died, for the which he was very
sorrowfull; but he did not much regard the death of the Duke of Alba, which followed
soone after, at the least he made no shew of it, whereat the Portugueses (who had seene
their Kings retire themselues for priuat men) wondred.Death of the Duke of Alba. They remembred that King Emanuel
had shut himselfe vp three daies for the death of a Pilot. The Duke of Alba was
74. yeeres old when he died in the Kings lodging at Lisbone: of whose deeds and disposition
we haue spoken sufficiently. D. Sancho de Autla, accounted by the Spaniards for
one of the best captaines of his time, died soone after the Duke, being hurt with a horse
he sought to be cured by a souldier,Death of D. Sancho de Auila. with charmes, and neglected the Art of Surgery.
Among other Acts of his the sacke of Antwerp is memorable, in the yeere 1576.
King Philip being prest to returne into Castile, to consider of a marriage which was
treated of betwixt the Emperour and one of his daughters, being also to goe to the Estates
of Arragon, he made hast, before his departure out of Portugal, for that which was
necessary for the gouernment of the realme, and for the firme vnion thereof with Castile.
He therefore sommoned the Estates for the 26. day of Ianuary the yeere following
1583.An. 1583. and there he caused his sonne D. Philip to be sworne lawfull successor to the crown
of Portugal;D. Philip the Kings sonne sworne at the Estates of Portugal. he caused the funeral of the deceased King D. Henry to be made at Belem,
where he was buried with his Predecessors, and he caused the bones of King Sebastian,
and of diuers other Princes his kinsmen, which had beene left, or buried in diuers Monasteries,
to be brought thether. As for the Gouernment of the realme, in his absence, he
gaue it to the Archduke Albert Cardinal, contrary to the opinion of most Courtiers,
who thought he would haue left it to his sister D. Maria,Archduke Albert made Gouernor of Portugal. widow to the Emperor Maximilian,
who had retired her selfe into Spaine, and was come to him into Portugal at the
time of this conquest. He left for Counsellors to the Archduke, D. George d' Almaida
Archbishop of Lisbone, Pedro d' Alcassoua, who had beene so ill intreated by King Henry,
whom King Philip restored to al his goods and honor, and Michel de Mora, Secretary of
the realme, who was honored by him with the office of Scribe of the purity, which is
one of the greatest dignities of that Court: but the King contrary to the Articles concluded
at the Estates of the realme, and against their priuiledges, put into the Counsell
of the Hazienda, which is for the reuenues of the crowne, two Castillans, one a Lawier
and the other a Merchant. The Empresse did also somewhat discontent the Portugals when
as visiting the conuent of Santos, which is a retreat for Ladies of great houses liuing
like religious women, but yet may marry, she drew out D. Iuliana d' Alencastro, daughter
and heire to the Duke of Auero, being thirteene yeeres old, and tooke her with her
into Castile, whereas they thought she would marry her. The Portugueses were also disconted
at the Archdukes proceedings, who after the Kings departure, in the beginning of
his gouernment, made difficulty to signe the prouisions and ordinary letters, which
ought to be dispatched within the realme, as the King had agreed, sending sutors ordinarily
to Court. In the end the King, to pacifie al discontents, and to leaue a good conceit
of him in his new conquest, gaue many guifts and rewards to them that presented
themselues, and made their seruices knowne, or their desire to doe him any: the Duke of
Braganca and the Marquis of Villareal were they that tasted least of his bounty, the
which was noted,King Philip goes out of Portugal. being the principal persons of the realme, from whence he parted the
eleuenth of February that yeere, presently after the ending the Estates.
The Marquis of Santa Cruz, after his returne to Lisbone, vsed all dilligence to make
ready the army which he should lead the Sommer following to the Tercera's: the which
being knowne in France by D. Antonio,Succors sent to the Te^ceres. and those that fauored him, they wrought so as
he had meanes to send about 1200. men, vnder the command of Mounsier de Chattes
a Knight of Malta, and Gouernor of Diepe, a man well practised in martiall affaires
both at land and sea: there were already in the Islands of Tercere and Fyal, seuen hundred
French and three hundred English, and about three or foure thousand Portugueses
and Islanders. The Island of Tercere was the place which must bee chiefely kept,
to defend the approches whereof, and the landing places,Forts built at the Tercere. Emanuel de Sylua had caused
some thirty forts to be built within compasse of it, which was a weake fortification,

for beeing all small, capable of few men, and farre one from another, they might be easily
forced with few men, and one could not releeue another. This Emanuel de Silua (as
the Spaniards describe him) was a man full of will, and opinion of his own sufficiencie,
but in effect he was ignorant of the art of war, (as in a maner all Portuguezes at that time
were) and of a very tyrannous disposition: so as he omitted no kind of cruelty to get mony:
and did willingly giue eare to them that found out any inuention to call the inhabitants
of the Iland in question, for the breach of his capitulations, Edicts, and Ordonances,
to the end he might forfeit their goods. To effect the which, one Amador de Vieira
gaue him good meanes, who beeing secretly entertayned in that Iland by King Philip, to
discouer who was affected to him, and to entertayn them in that good will to serue him,
when as he thought he had discouered all, he carried the roule to Emanuel de Silua, who
made his profit thereof.Monsieur de Chattes comes to ^ercere. Monsieur de Chattes being arriued at the Tercera's, he would see
all the fortifications of the Iland, and vnderstand the reasons: for he did not comprehend
much, considering the number of men, the defence of so many forts would require: wishing
that Emanuel de Silua had rather made one strong retreat, capable of all that was
good in the Iland, both men, victuals, munition, and other things in the best place therof,
which might haue beene able to endure a seege vntill winter, with the souldiers and
inhabitants that were there, the which making in all fiue or sixe hundred men, good and
bad, beeing well led and commanded, might make a gallant defence, and not trust to
those small forts, which were neither made with iudgement, nor able to hinder the enemies
landing: for they did not defend the third part of the approches of that Iland, the
which hee found not so inaccessible as they had described it vnto him in France: This
Knight did also find, that there was small prouision of victuals and munition, although
there were good store of Ordinance. So as he made accompt, that if the Marquis came
with such forces, as were giuen out, these Ilands were lost without recouerie. Yet like a
man of courage, he repayred, as well as he could, the defects of these hen-rousts, exhorting
them all to be of good cheare, and to hope well, and that howsoeuer, he would dye
honorably with them. The presence of this Captaine did much comfort the inhabitants
of the Iland, and did somewhat assure Emanuel de Sylua: who notwithstanding had prepared
for his escape, if he saw himselfe prest; for he kept two vessels readie in the port, to
fly into, whereof Monsieur de Chattes was in doubt, and therefore he obserued him.
The Marquis of Santa Cruz hauing put to sea with 30. ships of warre,Army of Spaine going to the Tercere. 12. gallies, two
galeasses, 5. galleons, and other smaller vessels armed, to the number of 60. besides carauels,
pinaces, and other ships of burthen, carrying 10000. men, Spaniards, Italians,
Germanes, and Portuguezes, vnder Lope de Figueroa, Francis de Bouadilla, and Iohn de
Sandoual, Colonels of the Spaniards, Lucio Pignatello of the Italians, Ierome Ledron of
the Germanies, and Felix d' Arragon of the Portuguezes. He came to the Iland of S. Michel
the 3. of Iuly, where hauing also imbarked the Regiment of Augustine Inigues, which
he had left there the yeare before, he then sayled towards the Tercere, where the citty of
Angra is, in the port whereof hee saw the ships which had brought Monsieur de Chattes
and his men, and some other vessels, which the Gouernors did vse to send to sea: there he
left certaine gallies to keepe them in, and instantly caused the city to be summoned, offering
a pardon to the Inhabitants,Conquest of the Ilands of the Terceres for King Philip. and a good composition to the Captaines and souldiers:
but they answered him with the Canon: the Marquis seeing that all landing places
neere vnto the cittie were fortified, he began to coast along the shoare to find some fitte
descent, but it seemed to him, that all were rampared and fortified: being in this ca^e, he
was aduertised by a Portugueze, that there was a good landing place at port des Moles,
farre from Angra, where presenting himselfe, he found some accesse, but difficult, both
for that the place was stonie, and there was a fort built: yet he did hazard some souldiers,
who did assure the way for the rest. Beeing at land, they that garded this fort made some
resistance, which gaue Monsieur de Chattes time, being aduertised by the fires and smoke,
and by the bels which hung at either of these forts, to draw his men together French and
Portuguezes, to go and succor them: but vpon the way he found the souldiers which had
abandoned this fort flying, whom he caused to returne with him, being resolued to fight
with the enemie, the which he indeauored to do, and might haue amazed him, if Emanuel

de Silua the Gouernor, and his men had held good: but they did not continue as they had
begun: for hauing skirmished well all the day against the Spaniards, and others of the
Marquises armie, and against hunger, through the bad order of Emanuel de Silua, night
beeing come, they abandoned the French, and retired to the mountaine, whether the
Commander de Chattes was forced also to make his retreat with his French troupe: for
there was no reason, that so few men shold wilfully make head against an army of 12000.
Emanuel de Silua thought then to go and imbarke himselfe, and to flie away, but he could
not, for euery man watched him, and therefore he retired also to the mountaine, to a
place apart. It was strange to heare those Ilanders (who before had seemed so braue) to
call then vpon Castile,Augra at the Terceres taken by the Marquis of Santa Cruz. and to confesse, that those Ilands did belong vnto King Philip. The
Marquis seeing himselfe master of the field, marched towards the citty of Angra, which
he found abandoned and emptie, so as the souldiers made small profit of the sacke thereof.
When as the Marquis entred the citty by land, the gallies seized vpon the shippes which
were within the port without resistance, for there were neither souldiers nor marriners
in them. From thence Don Pedro de Toledo was sent to the Iland of Fayal to subdue them
that would not acknowledge the King of Spaine. In the meane time the Marquis apprehending
the difficultie to draw the French out of those rockes by force, hee sought to
haue them by some honest composition. The Commander de Chattes at the beginning
made great demands, considering the estate whereunto he was reduced, which made the
Spaniards resolue to vanquish them, or to lose their liues, and so they did promise the
Marquis, but he did auoyd that danger, hauing found more moderation in those poore
forelorne men: for so they might well be tearmed: for had he not fought with them, hunger
would soone haue forced them to haue yeelded to his mercie. Their accord was treated
by a Colonel called Pedro de Padilla, whom the Commaunder de Chattes had sometimes
knowne at Malta, where it was concluded, that they should deliuer vp their armes
and ensignes, keeping onely their swords, and that they should lodge in a quarter of the
cittie, and shippes prouided for their retreat. D. Pedro de Toledo beeing come to Fayal,
sought to perswade the souldiers and inhabitants to yeeld without force: wherefore hee
sent vnto the Gouernor, whose name was Pero Antonio Guedes de Sosa, a man of qualitie
that was in his company, who had his wife and children in that Iland, to let him vnderstand
what had happened to the Iland of Tercere, and to perswade him to apply himselfe
vnto the time, and to yeeld to the Conqueror. This Gouernour being proude and disdainfull,
making no other answer to this messenger, slue him: wherefore Don Pedro staying
awhile, doubting that which had hapned, began to aduance with 2500. soldiers which
he had brought, beeing to skirmish with 400. French which came to encounter them,
whom he made to retire soone into their fort, and to yeeld vpon the same conditions, that
the rest had done. Sosa was taken, who (for the vild part he had played with him, that was
sent by D. Pedro) was hung vp by one arme,Fayall and the other Ilands yeelded to king Philip. both his hands hauing beene first cut off. The
Portugals of the Iland were sackt, and then left free, hauing submitted themselues to the
Kings obedience. Anthony of Portugall was left Gouernor there with 200. souldiers, and
the rest returned with the gallies to the Tercere, where as the Ilanders came and made the
submissions that were required. So as there was not any one but did acknowledge King
Philip for king of Portugal. Before the Marquis of Santa Cruz returned, he caused Emanuel
de Silua's proces to be made, hauing had no meanes to escape, who, with some others
were executed, Emanuel lost his head, and so did Amador Vieira, hee who had discouered
the Portugals in the Iland, that were affected to the k. Emanuel Surradas, who had
spoiled the Ilands of Cap Verd, was also beheaded, others of meaner qualitie were hanged.
The mony which had beene coyned with D. Antonio's stampe, was condemned as
counterfeit, and a great quantitie was burnt in the market place of Angra. This done, the
Marquis hauing disposed of the estate of these Ilands, and left Iohn d' Vrbine for Gouernor
of the Tercere, with 2000. foot, he bent his course towards Spain, and arriued safely with
his fleet in the ports of Andalusia, where there was great ioy, as also in Portugal, and
thanks giuen to God for so happy a victory, which put King Philip in a peaceable possession
of the Realme of Portugal, and all the dependances, so as he might then iustly intitle
himselfe King of all Spaine.
The end of the 30. Booke.





A
CONTINVATION OF THE
GENERALL HISTORY OF
Spaine, from the yeare, 1583.
to this time.
THE warre of Portugall beeing ended, Philip, King of
Spaine, subdued the Ilands which had made resistance:
he returned into Castile, whether the Estates
of Arragon, and other weightie affaires did call
him. Among other things, there was a mariage treated
of betwixt Catherine his youngest daughter, and
the Duke of Sauoy, which allyance, hee held, would
be both profitable and honorable to himselfe,Mariage concluded ^etwixt Catherine Infanta of Spain, and the Duke of Sa^oy. and the
whole house of Austria, and therefore he cocluded
the marriage, but it was consumated the yeare following.
This yeare the king would haue his sonne sworne
Prince of Spaine, the which was done with great sollemnitie, in S. Hieromes church
in Madrid, the twelfth day of Nouember, there beeing present the King, his sister Mary,
wife to the Emperour Maximilian, the Prince, and the two Infanta's: where the Cardinall
of Toledo began to sing a sollemne Masse, there assisting the Cardinal Granuella,
with the Bishops of Placencia, Salamanca, Zamorra, Auila, Sego^ia, Coria, Siguenca,
and Osma Granuello presented the Euangell and the Paxe vnto the king, the like did the
Bishop of Placencia to the Infants. Masse beeing ended, the Prince was conducted by
Cardinall Granuello neere vnto the altar, and there he receyued from Toledo the oth of
confirmation, and then was returned backe vnto his place. Then did a King at armes rise
from his seate, and going to the left side of the altar, where as Princes Ambassadours,
and the Noblemen of the Realme did sit, crying out with a loud voyce, That the Prince
Don Philip was to be sworne: but after him there followed one of the Kings Councell,
deliuering in particular the forme of that oth: and how the Empresse Mary shold sweare
with the two Infanta's the Princes sisters: but presently the Emperours Ambassadour
made it knowne, that that Empresse was to take the oath as Infanta of Spaine, and not as
Queene of Romanes.
The first were the King and his sister, who performed that ceremonie vppon the Masse
booke, and the Crosse, which were presented vnto them: but when as the Empresse wold
haue kist her Nephewes hand, according to the custome, hee would not, for modestie
sake suffer, her, and so shee was constrained to kisse his fore-head. After, the Empresse followed
the Infanta's, and then the Bishops, the Admirall of Castile, the Marquis of Villena,
the Duke of Pastrana, the Marquis of Denia, the Prince of Ascoly, and so all the

Grande's and chiefe Noblemen of the Court, the Marquis of Aguilar, and the Cardinal
of Toledo swearing last of all.
The ioy of this ceremonie was augmented by the arriuall of three Ambassadors,Ambassadors come from Iap^n into Spaine. which
had beene sent two yeares before from three Kings of Iapon, of Bugno, Fiunga, and Arima,
to the Pope, by the perswasion of the Iesuits, who desired that those Princes, seeing
the noble and politicke gouernement of these countries, and the greatnes of the greatnesse
of the Pope of Rome, might be edified and freed of a certaine opinion which they
had conceyued, that Christians came into their countries to get meanes to liue. They
came into Spaine beeing accompanied by father Alexander Valignari, Visitor in those
parts, at such time as the Court was full of feasts and ioy, for the prosperous successe of
Portugal, for the conclusion of the Infanta's mariage, and for the swearing of the prince:
so as they were not onely receiued by the Catholike king, and the whole Court, with
greate pompe and state, but with extraordinarie content. The King at their reception,
would not suffer them to kisse his hand, but embraced them as his equals, and to do them
the more fauour, would haue both the Infanta's to do the like: hee made them see all his
delights, and rarest things: and at the Princes ceremonie he commanded they should be
set at his right hand, in the first place, whereas two men appointed for that seruice, instructed
them in the order of the ceremonie, naming euery Nobleman, and what place hee
held, as they went to sweare obedience to the Prince. The king hauing royally intreated
them, and honored them all that might be, being to go for Italy, gaue them a Caroch and
a Coach, commanding, that throughout all his realmes, they should be receiued with all
magnificence, causing a shippe to be prepared for them in Alicante, where they imbarked,
but they were driuen by foule weather into Maiorca, yet in the end they arriued in
Tuscany.
Antwerpe, one of the chiefe townes in the Low-countries, was this Somer so streightly
beseeged by the Duke of Parma, with the forces of Spaine, as hauing no releefe, neither
by sea nor land, they were driuen to extreame want, and almost to despaire, whereupon
they prest their Confederates to succour them: but the Estates not able to rayse so
great an armie, sent a sollemne ambassage of twelue of their Deputies to the French king
to intreat him to take the Netherlands into his protection, as his owne subiects and vassals:
the which did much trouble the Councell of Spaine, seeing that the French king
might with small difficultie get the possession of those countries, hauing the subiects
hearts inclined vnto him: whereupon they sought by letters, and all other meanes to
draw them of Antwerpe to a reconciliation with the King of Spaine. Don Bernardin de
Mendoca, Ambassador at that time in France for the Catholike King (hauing been sent
with some disgrace out of England, for that contrarie to the dutie of his charge, he had
beene a busie practiser against that State) vppon the arriuall of these Deputies to Paris,
came with a great clamor vnto the King,Bernardin de Mendoza his speech to the French King. telling him that the Estates of the Low-countries,
as Rebels to the King of Spaine, had bin condemned of high treason by the Councell
of the Inquisition of Spaine, and therefore were to be rooted out. That remembring
the strict league and allyance betwixt him and his master, he should not giue them audience,
but rather driue such rebels out of his countrie: the which would turn to the good
of France, (lying so neere vnto Spaine) and of all Christendome, which was disquieted
with these wicked people.
That he should do wrong vnto all other Princes, to whome such presidents are very
preiudicial,Answer of the French King to Mendoza. if they should countenance and support their Rebels. But the King answered,
that he would not giue audience to the Deputies of the generall Estates, as to Rebels, reuolted,
but as to afflicted people, who complained of oppressions. That Princes had neuer,
neither ought they refuse to ayde the afflicted, especially when as their greatest desire
is to be reconciled to their Prince (to obtaine the which they informed the King, that
they had made many petitions vnto the King of Spaine, and could get no answer:) and
therefore he thought, that any man might seeke support where he could, if right and iustice
were denyed him, so as he was not to be blamed, if he gaue them audience.
In the beginning of this yeare, there was preparation made in Spaine for the marriage
of the Infanta Donna Catherina, with that pompe that was befitting such Princes:

for the effecting whereof* the King with his children, and the chiefe of the Nobility of
Spaine, came to Sarragossa, about the end of February, the Duke of S^uoy beeing arriued
in Doria's gallies at Barcelona on the 18. of the said moneth* from whence hee went
by land to Sarragossa,Mariage of the Duke of Sauoy, and the Infanta D. Catherina in Spaine. where his Maiesty attended him without the citty, (...) receiued
him with wonderfull signes of ioy, doing him exceeding great honour. The same day
that he arriued, he put the ring vpon his spouses finger, the King h^r father h^lding her
hand, there assisting at the ceremonie, the Cardinall of Seuille, (to whom some few daies
before a hat had beene sent) with the Cardinall Granuell^, who made them sure: Monsieur
Tauerna the Popes Nuntio, the Arch-bishop of Sarragossa* Vincentio G^ad^nigo Ambassador
of Venice, with other principall Noblemen. The next day, according to the custome
of the Realme, the married couple came to the Arch-bishops church, (who performed
the ceremonie) couered with a white raile. Masse beeing sayd, and returning to
the pallace, they dyned in publike at one table, his Maiesty, the Duke, his wife, and the
Infanta Donna Izabella, beeing all set of one side: for many daies after there were great
triumphs, tiltings, tourneys, and other knightly sports made by the Nobility of Spaine,
who shewed themselues very gallant in all their sports, especially the Duke of Medina
del Rio-secco, Admirall of Castile, the Duke of Albuquerque, the Duke of Medina Celi,
the Duke of Maqueda, the Marquis of Denia, the Duke of Pastrana, the Marquis of Aguilar,
and the Prince of Ascoli, besides the great Commander of Castile, who was fauorite
and Lord Steward to the Prince D. Philip.
To these there ioyned a great number of Knights, of no lesse Nobility, but not of so
great dignitie, as well Spaniards as strangers, who were come thither to honour this
feast of the Catholike King their Lord. The Duke of Sauoy had also brought with him a
great troupe of gallant Nobility, of the which, on the foure and twentith day of May, he
made Knights of the Order of Saint Stephen, Iohn Baptista of Sauoia, and the Marquis of
Chambery, and besides these the Marquis of Nemours his cousin, and Ascanio Roba who
were absent; and withall, Ca^lo Pallauicino, newly made Master of the Dutchesse horse,
Count Sanuitali, and Michel Bonelli. But eight dayes after the King did honour three
Princes with the Order of the golden Fleece: the Duke his sonne-in-law, the Admiral of
Castile, and the Duke of Medina Celi. There were many rich presents mutually giuen
by the King and Duke, and by the Noblemen both Spaniards and Italians. Then in the
beginning of Iune the married couple beeing accompanied by the King, Prince, and the
Infanta Donna Izabella, went to Barcellona, where they tooke shippe in Dori^s Admirall
gally, and beeing accompanied with forty other gallies, hee brought them safely to
Genoua, and entertayned them with great state in his owne house, from whence they
past to Nizza, then going with an honorable trayne towards Turin, they were receyued
with great signes of ioy, and the feasts were renewed. But the King of Spaine beeing returned
to Sarragossa, whither he had already sent the Court, he caused the Prince to be
sworne with the ordinarie solemnities, and then he past into Castile.
About the same time there came to Court Pomponio Torello, Earle of Mont Chiarulo,
with an Ambassage from his Princes, the Duke and Prince of Parma, the first requiring
of his Maiestie the restitution of the castle of Placentia,Ambassage sent into Spain from the Duke of Parma. so necessarie for the preseruation,
not of his Estate, but also of his life, the mutinous people of Placentia being animated
by the Spanish garrison, to practise against the Duke, as some conspiratours had
lately done, who beeing not supprest and punished, although they were discouered, gaue
him continuall cause of feare.
The Prince did sollicite concerning the enterprise of Antwerp, and also about his fathers
affaires: yet he refused to receiue it as a fauour done to him, for that hee would not
confirme an opinion, that he was as distrustfull as his father, of the Crowne of Spaine, to
whom, and not to him, hee would haue the castle yeelded. This busines was referred to
Cardinall Granuella, the great Commaunder of Castile, and to Iohn d' Idiagues, at that
time Secretarie of State, with commission not to treate with any other of the Councell,
it seeming the king should yeeld that which hee ought. Gr^^uella shewed himselfe very
willing, not onely for the equitie of the cause, but also for a priuate bond he had vnto the
Prince, from whome he did aknowledge, that his brother Monsieur de Champaigny held

his life, and for his Maiesties seruice, whose affaires in Flanders depended chiefly vppon
the Prince: In the end the King resolued to make this restitution vnto the Duke: and so he
dispatched Count Pomponio with a commission to the Duke of Terranoua, Gouernour
of the State of Milan,Castle of Placentia yeelded. to cause the sayd castle to be restored, the Castellan an beeing absent,
the which was accordingly performed, and free possession deliuered to Prince Raynucio
in his Grandfathers name.
This yeare there grew a popular tumult in Naples, partly through the couetousnesse
of the King of Spaines Ministers in that Realme, during the time that the Duke of Ossuna
was Viceroy, the King hauing giuen order to the Viceroy to supply their wants in
Spaine, with such corne as they might well spare within the Realme, hauing had a plentifull
haruest:Mutinie ^t Naples. but they not onely transported the ouerplus, but that which was needefull
for their owne vse, by a greedie desire of gaine: so as when the Spring came, they found
that they had not corne sufficient, which seeking to helpe by bringing in from fortaine
parts, they were forced to raise the price of corne, and to make their bread lesse: wherewith
the people beeing vexed, (for it seemed strange to them to see scarcitie, whereas
they expected abondance) who endured more by this want, then the rest. Whilst that on
the ninth of May, their elect Iohn Vincentio Starace was with the Deputies in the church
of Santa Maria del nouo, to consult touching the prouision of corne, they began to mutine,
saying, that it had beene accustomed to be done in Saint Augustines church, and
to adde deedes vnto their words, they tooke Starace, beeing weake and sicke, and carried
him with iniuries and ill vsage. Beeing come thither, he retired himselfe into a chappell
which had a grate before it, and there sovght to pacifie the furie of this multitude with
good words, the which notwithstanding increased as the number did, growing almost
madde.
There Staraee growing fearefull, caused himselfe to be let downe into a tombe, which
these mad men vnderstanding, he was suddenly drawne foorth, and murthered with an
hundred wounds, after which they drew him through the streets, and tearing him in peeces,
they carried them vp and downe the cittie, in signe of a cruell reuenge. The Viceroy
carried himselfe indiscreetly in this mutinie, and full of feare, where as in the beginning
he should haue supprest it by force, and not to haue pourchased afterwards the name of
cruell in his seuere punishments, seeking to recouer the reputation which he had lost: but
the King of Spaine stayed this rigour, sending a generall pardon concerning this
murther.
The Deputies of the generall Estates beeing returned from France with many good
words,Deputies sent from the Estats of the ^^wcountries into England. but no effects, by reason of the league, which hindred the Kings desire to embrace
their cause, they had recourse vnto the Queene of England, vnto whom they also sent
their Deputies, seeking to perswade her to vndertake their protection against the king of
Spaine, in regard of her owne priuate interest, and the good of both the Estates. This
matter was weightie, and required a graue and deliberate consultation. Shee called her
Councell, and demanded their opinions, whether shee should voluntarily ingage her
selfe in a warre without constraint, which she must needes do, in taking vppon her the
protection of the Low-countries. Whereupon they concluded, that she might not with
her owne safetie abandon the vnited Prouinces of the Netherlands, vnlesse she would neglect
the preseruation of her owne Estate.Reasons why the Queene of England shold take protection of the Lowcountries. They layed before her the King of Spaines hatred
against her, hauing changed the religion, which he had planted in England, which
appeared by his denying passage to her Merchants throughout the Low-countries, with
armes, powder, and munition which he had bought in Germany. That he had refused to
renue the auncient contracts made betwixt the Emperour Charles his father, and her
predecessours. And to shew his hatred to her Maiestie, he had suffered the Inquisitors of
Spaine to persecute her poore subiects with all crueltie, and had dismissed her Ambassadour
out of Spaine, vppon colour of Religion. That the Duke of Alba his Gouernour
in the Low-conntries, had in hostile manner arrested the bodies and goods of her subiects,
contrarie to the ancient contracts. That he had sent forces to invade her realme of
Ireland, and to ayde her rebels.
Besides these and many other iniuries, the Lords of her Councell layed before her,

how dangerous it would be for her Estate, if the Spaniard should become absolute Lord
of those countries: that he would alter their religion, disanu^ll their auncient Priuiledges
and liberties, and make them subiect to his will and pleasure: which done, he might easily
inuade England, hauing so much shipping, and so many marriners at his command, and
his Indian treasure, to supply all other wants. He would ouerthrow all trade betwixt her
subiects and the Netherlanders, and would breed factions within the heart of her countrie.
These reasons (sayd they) should mooue her Maiestie to embrace the present occasion,
and not suffer the Low-countries to be planted with Spaniards and Italians, considering
that the warre was not vndertaken against those Prouinces, but with an intent to
make a greater conquest.
Whilst that the Queene of England resolues to vndertake the protection of the generall
Estates of the vnited Prouinces, it was concluded to arme out a Fleete to annoy the
King of Spaine vpon his owne coast,Sir Francis Drake with ^ fleet vpon the coast of Spaine. or at the Indies: whence his treasor came. Wherefore
this yeare 1585. in September, Sir Francis Drake was sent out of England with a fleet
of 25. ships and pinaces, and about 2300. souldiers and mariners. Master Christopher
Carlile was his Lieutenant generall, with many other gallant Captaines and Gentlemen,
whose names for breuitie sake I omit, being written at large by others. After some daies,
this Fleet came to the Ilands of Bayonne, vppon the coast of Spaine, where the Generall
putting his men into boates, and pinaces, went into his Galley, with an intent to
surprize the towne: but vpon the way there came an English Merchant vnto them from
the Gouernour, to see what Fleet it was, who after some speech with the Generall, was
returned backe, and one Captaine Sampson with him, to demaund of the Gouernour, if
there were any warres betwixt Spaine and England: and why they did arrest the English
Merchants, and their goods. To whome the Gouernour made this answer, that he knew
not of any warre, and that it was not in his owne power to make any: and as for the stay
of the Merchants, it was the kings pleasure, but not with any intent to preiudice them,
and that hee had receiued a countermaund to discharge them, the which hee did presently.
The lying of this Fleete at those Ilands, did much trouble them in Spaine, beeing ignorant
of their intent. Whereuppon Don Aluaro de Bacan, Marquis of Santa Cruz,
Admirall of Spaine, beeing then at Lisbone, did set downe in writing what harme this
Fleete might do, if it should go to the West Indies, and enter into the South sea, as
Drake had formerly done: and what course was to bee taken to preuent those inconueniences
and dangers.
The English Fleete stayed not long vppon the coast of Spaine, but directed their
course towards the VVest Indies,S. Iago taken. passing by the Canaries, and the Ilands of cape Verde,
where they tooke the towne of S. Iago, which they spoiled and burnt, they came to the
Island of S. Dominica, from whence they past to the Island of Hispaniola, where they
tooke that gallant Cittie of S. Domingo by force, which after they spoyled, and burnt
a third part,S, Domi^g^ taken. the Spaniards made a composition for the rest, paying fiue and twenty thousand
Duckets, at fiue shillings sixe pence the peece. In this Island they found great store
of good prouision, but little siluer or plate, yet in their furniture they were very rich and
costly.
From Saint Domingo they put ouer to the mayne land, and came within sight of
Carthagena, which stands vppon the sea side, where they made a gallant attempt vppon
the towne, and tooke it: they landed their troupes fiue miles from the towne, whither
they marched in battell: comming within halfe a mile of the towne, they were to passe vpon
a narrow causey not fiue paces ouer, lying betwixt the sea and the harbour: This
streight was crost ouer with a wall well flanked, and a good ditch, hauing onely a passage
for horsemen and carriages, if need required: which breach had a good barricado: and
here there were sixe peeces of Ordinance planted, which scoured along the causey, and in
the harbor, or inner water, they had layd two gallies, with their prowes to the shore, hauing
eleuen peeces of Ordinance in them, which did beate crosse this streight, and three
of foure hundred small shot: notwithstanding all this preparation to receiue them, the
Lieutenant generall (it beeing very darke, and not yet day) marched by the sea shoare,

so as they receiued little harme by their shot, and comming close vp to the wall, after
some resistance they ouerthrew the Barricado, and forced the Spaniards to retire, they
entred pel mel with them into the towne, and wan the market place, where the Spaniards
made head awhile, after which they abandoned the towne, and retired to other places,
whither they had carried their wiues at the comming of the English. They had drawne
many Indians vnto them, all bow-men with poysoned arrowes; them they had placed in
corners of aduantage, so as if they did but breake the skinne of any one, he dyed. The armie
stayd here sixe weekes, and burnt the out-parts of it, but in the end there was a composition
made, by the which they should pay an hundred and ten thousand duckets for
the ransome of the rest. They had beene aduertised of this Fleet 20. daies before their arriuall,
which had made them fortifie in that manner for their defence, and to conueygh
away their wealth. Hauing made this composition, they left the towne, and lodged in an
Abbey, within a quarter of a mile of it, demanding a new composition for it, and a fort
which stood at the mouth of the harbor: but not able (as they sayd) to ransome the fort,
it was blowne vp. From thence the Fleet went to Cape Saint Anthony, and then to the
Cape of Florida, where they found a fort held by the Spaniards, the which, vppon their
approach they abandoned: They found in it thirteene peeces of brasse Ordinance, and a
chest of some 2000. pounds sterling, to pay the Kings Garrison, which consisted of a
hundred and fiftie men. This fort was called Saint Iohns, from whence they went vp the
maine riuer to a towne called S. Augustines. And then the Fleet returned into England.
They tooke in this action 200. peeces of brasse Ordinance, and 40. of Iron. In Saint Iago
two or three and fiftie peeces: In S. Domingo foure score, whereof most was Cannon,
Demi-cannon, Culuerin, and such like. In Carthagena sixtie three peeces: and in Saint
Augustines fort fourteene, the rest was Iron Ordinance.
There was such excesse in their styles, and in their speaking and writing one vnto another,
as vpon petition made vnto the King, he made an Edict and set downe a forme,
what termes they should vse both in their speaking and writing, as followeth:




Pragmatica, or an Edict:
In the which is set downe a forme which is to be kept
and obserued in their entertainments and courtesies of word
and writing, and in carrying of Coronets vpon
their Armes.
DOn Philip by the Grace of God, King of Castile, Leon, Arragon, the two Sicilies,
Ierusalem, Portugall, Nauarre, Granado, Toledo, Valencia, Gallicia, Maiorca,
Seuile, Sardinia, Cordoua, Corsica, Murcia, Iaen, the Algarues, Algezire, and
Gibraltar: of the Ilands of the Canaries, of the East and West Indies, and the Ilands and
firme land of the Ocean sea; Arch-duke of Austria, Duke of Bourgondie, Brabant and
Milan, Earle of Ausbourg, Flanders, Tirol, and Barcelona, Lord of Biscay, Molina,
etc. To the Prince Don Philip our most deere and welbeloued Sonne, and to the Infanta's,
Prelates, Dukes, Marquises, Earles, Barons, Priors of Orders, Commaunders, and
sub-Commaunders, Captaines of Castles and places of strength, and to those of our
Councell, Presidents, and Iustices of our Courts, Commissioners, and Prouosts of our
House, Court, and Chancerie, and to all Corrigidors, Assistants, Gouernours, chiefe
I^stices, etc. and to all other our Officers, and naturall subiects, of what estate, preheminence
or dignitie soeuer they be, or may be, in all the citties, townes, places, and Prouinces
of our Realmes and Seigniories, both present and to come, and to euery one of

you whom the contents of this our Edict may concerne, health and peace.
You shall vnderstand, that at the sute of the Atturneys of Courts of the Citties and
Townes of these our Realmes, we haue beene forced to prouide a necessarie and conuenient
remedie, concerning the disorder and abuse, which is in the entertainements by
word and writing, the excesse whereof was growne so great, and come to passe, as it had
caused some inconueniences, and daily more might be expected, if it were not reformed,
and reduced to some good auncient order, seeing that true honour doth not consist in
vanities, or titles giuen by word or writing, but in greater matters: whereunto these do
neither adde nor diminish. And hauing often treated thereof with our Councell, Wee
haue ordayned as followeth in this our present Edict.
First, although it be not necessarie to treate herein of our selfe, nor of the persons of
Kings, yet to the end that it may be the better obserued and kept, which doth concerne
them, We will and command, that from hencefoorth, on the toppe of the letter or paper
that shall be written vnto vs, there shall bee no other title put, but Seignior, or My
Lord, nor in the end of the letter, any thing, but God preserue the person of your Catholike
Maiestie, nor the subscription below, any thing but his name that writes it: and vpon
the superscription, there shall be onely set, To the King our Lord.
That to the Princes heires and successors of these our Realmes, they shall write in the
same forme, changing only Maiestie into Highnes, and that of King into Prince, and in
the end of the letter, God preserue your Highnesse.
The same forme and style shall be obserued, with the Queenes of these our realmes,
as with their Kings, and likewise with the Princesses of the sayd Queenes, as with their
Princes.
That the Infants and Infanta's of these our Realmes, shall onely haue the title of Highnesse:
In the top of the letter they shall write, My Lord, and in the end, God keepe your
Highnesse, without any other ceremonie: and vppon the Superscription, To my Lord
the Infant D. N. or, To my Lady the Infanta Donna N. Wherefore when they do speake
or write Highnesse, without any other addition, it is onely to bee vnderstood of the
Prince, the heire and successor of these our Realmes. Declaring, that it is not our will
nor intent, that the contents of this Edict shall extend to Donna Maria the Empresse,
my most deare and welbeloued sister, although she be an Infanta of Castile, beeing certaine,
that she is to be called and written Maiestie; and vpon the superscription, To my
Ladie the Empresse: and her sonnes, (brothers to the Emperour, our most deare and
welbeloued Nephew) shall haue the same titles that are giuen to the Infants of these
Realmes, and in like manner to the Arch-dukes his Vncles.
That to the sonnes-in-law, and brothers-in-law of the kings of these Realmes, shall be
giuen the same titles that their wiues haue, and daughters in law to the sayd Kings, shall
be vsed like vnto their husbands.
And as for the entertainment which the sayd royall persons are moreouer to haue, our
meaning is not to innouate any thing of that which hath beene accustomed.
That the style vsed in the petitions which are presented to our Councell, and in the other
Councels, Chanceries and Tribunals, and the words which they vse when they are
in Councell, shall be obserued as hath beene hitherto, vnlesse it be contrarie to this our
prouision, and on the toppe they may set, Most mightie Lord, and no more.
That in the signing of all our letters, scedules, and prouisions, our Secretaries shall set,
By the King our Lord, in the stead of Maiestie, and in the signing of our Secretaries of
the chamber, they shall do the like.
That in all iudiciall seates, as well belonging vnto vs, as to any other, and of what
qualitie soeuer, whether they speake in priuate or in publike, the petitions, demaunds,
and quarrels shall be begunne in a lyne, with that which they are to treate of, without
setting any title, word, or signe of courtesie on the toppe: And in the conclusion, they
may say: For the which I implore the office of your S. or your W. (according to the
persons and Iudges to whome they are to speake.) And the Notaries shall onely say:
By the commaundement and decree of N. the Iudge setting to his name and surname

onely: they may also adde the name of such a mans Office, and the dignitie and degree
which he hath taken, without any other title.
That no man of what estate, condition, dignitie, degree or office whatsoeuer, shall
assume vnto himselfe, either by word or writing, the title of Excellencie, nor of excellent
Lord, neither may any be called Reuerent Lord, but onely Cardinals, and the Archbishop
of Toledo, as Primate of Spaine, although he be no Cardinall.
That to Archbishops, Bishops, Grande's, and such as we command to be couered, all
men within our Realmes, shall be bound to giue the title of Your Lordship, and also to
the President of our royall Councell.
That to Marquises, Earles, great Commanders of the Orders of S. Iames, Alcantara,
and Calatraua, and to the Presidents of our other Councels and Chanceries, the title of
Lordship may be giuen both by writing and word, and not to any other, vnlesse it be to
the chiefe citties of the Realme, and to Senates, and to Metropolitane Churches, to
whom they may giue that addition, as they haue beene accustomed.
That to Ambassadors in like manner, which haue place in our Chappell, may bee
written or spoken Seigneurie or Lordship.
That in what concernes writing from one man vnto another generally without exception,
this forme shall be obserued. They shall begin the letter with the busines they are
to treate of, without setting beneath the Crosse, or on the toppe of it, or at the beginning
of the line, any title, cypher, or letter: and they must end the letter, saying, God
keepe your Seigneurie, or Lordship, or Worship, and then the date of the time and
place, and then his signature, without any courtesie before it: and hee that hath taken a
title, shall mention it when he signes, and whence that title is.
That in Superscriptions, to a Prelate shall bee set downe the ecclesiasticall dignitie
which he hath, and to a Duke, a Marquis, or an Earle, that of his estate, and to Knights,
and other men their names and surnames, saying, To the Cardinall, Archbishop or Bishop
of such a place. And in like manner, To the Duke, the Marquis or Earle of such a
place: and to meaner men: To Don N. or to N. adding his surname, and to euery one
named in this Article, may be set the dignitie, office, charge, or degree which hee holds.
The vassall shall not be excepted out of this order, writing to his Lord, not the seruant
to his master: but the father to the sonne, and the sonne father, may adde their naturall
name to their proper, and betwixt the husband and the wife, they may note the estate of
their marriage, and betwixt brethren the like allyance.
That the complements to women, and among themselues, by word or writing, shall
be the same that is vsed to their husbands.
That to men of religious Orders, there shall be no other title giuen but father-hood,
or reuerence, according to the charge which he holds. And in the superscription with
his name, they may set the charge and degree which he hath in those Orders.
That whatsoeuer is contayned in these our letters and prouision, shall be obserued by
all the subiects of our dominions, yea writing to them that are absent.
Moreouer, to preuent the great disorder and excesse which hath beene, and is daily
committed, in setting Coronets to their Scutcheons of armes, and to their seales and
somter cloathes, We do ordaine and command, that no manner of person shall set any
Coronet to his seale or sompter cloath, nor in any other place where he hath armes, except
Dukes, Marquises, and Earles, who we hold may carry them, beeing in their right
forme, and not otherwise: And that the Coronets which haue beene carried, shalbe presently
left, and no more vsed.
And to the end it may be the better kept, obserued, and executed, we ordaine and command,
that whosoeuer shall go against the contents of this our Edict, or any part therof,
shal for euery breach incur a penalty of 10000. marauidis to be diuided after this maner:
a third part for the Informer, another third part for the Iudge that shal giue sentence, and
the rest to godly vses, the which shalbe executed without any remission. Wherefore we
command all and euery of you, that shall see these our letters and prouision, and the contents
therof, (the which we desire should hold the force of a Law or an Edict, made and
registred in our courts) that you obserue and keep it, and cause it to be obseru'd and kept in

euery point, according to the contents, against the forme and tenour whereof you shall
not do, nor suffer to be done at any time, nor in any sort, vppon the penalties which they
do incurre, which breake the commandements of their Kings and naturall Lords,
and vppon paine of our displeasure, and the said thousand marauidis, for euery one that
do to the contrarie. And to the end that no man shall pretend ignorance thereof, wee
command that these our said Letters and prouision shall be proclaimed publikely in our
Court, and that the contents be precisely and inviolably obserued, from the first day of
the yeare following 1587. and that no man do otherwise in any sort, vpon the said paines.
Dated at S. Laurence the 8. day of October, in the yeare 1586.

Signed. IO EL REY.





THis yeare Don Pedro de Toledo,Pedro de Toledo vnfortunat in Affrick. sonne to D. Garcia, sought to make an attempt vpon
Affricke, but the little experience of some Neapolitans which landed in a small Iland
called Cherchine, was the cause of their ouerthrow and death, beeing defeated by
a small number of Moores which put them to flight. Toledo beeing landed with the rest
of his troupes, and gone vp the other side of the Iland, he vnderstood by the mariners of
his mens successe, which holding for an ill presage, without care of any reuenge, hee began
to faint, retiring with all his men into his gallies, and bent his course towards Sicily,
where seeking to find some Pyrates, in the end he came to Naples, whether soone after
came D. Iohn de Zuniga,Earle of Miranda Viceroy of Naples. or Estuniga, Earle of Miranda, and Viceroy of Naples, the D.
of Ossuna beeing called home into Spaine, to the great content of the Neapolitans, who
taxed him for his cruell and couetous gouernement.
This yeare there was another enterprise by an English Gentleman, whose name was
Thomas Cauendish, who passed into the South seas, as Sir Francis Drake had done: where
after many accidents in Nouember 1587. the Generall hauing two shippes, mette with a
great shippe of the King of Spaines called Saint Anna, the which was Admirall of the
South-sea,Cauendish takes the S. Anna in the South seas. beeing about 700. tunnes burthen, the which, after six or seuen houres fight,
and thre seuerall charges, yeelded, to haue their liues saued. In which shippe, by the
confession of the Captaine and Pilot, they had an hundred and two and twenty thousand
Pezo's of gold, and the rest of the lading was in silkes, satten, damaske, muske, with many
other good commodities: in the end they set fire of the Kings shippe and burnt her,
hauing to the quantitie of 500. tunnes of goods in her: then sayling by the Philippina's,
the Moluccos, and the Cape of Bona Speranza, they arriued safely in England, in September
1588.
King Philip (after much warre, the losse of his wiues and children, and the little hope
he had of long life in the Prince his sonne, beeing of a weake complexion, and ill disposed)
beganne this yeare to haue more cause of content, for now the young Prince began
to bee vigorous, and of a spirit befitting an heire of so great dominions: and on the other
side, the second Infanta Donna Catherina hauing had a sonne the last yeare, did this yere
double his ioy with another, giuing him the more content, for that the first was christened
with so great solemnitie the twelfth day of May, foure daies after that the second was
borne.
Yet touching his publike affaires, the Low-countrie warres troubled him much, the
which hee referred to the valour and wisedome of the Duke of Parma, and liued himselfe
quietly in Spaine. But finding, that the Queene of England did fauour and protect
his Rebels of the Low-countries, (as he tearmed them,) and that shee did feed the fire, of
that long warre, to be reuenged of that iniurie, and to employ his forces to aduance the
Romish religion, he made preparation to transport the miseries of warre into England,
giuing countenance and entertainment to all the fugitiue Papists of that country.
The Queene of England beeing aduertised of this great preparation in Spaine for the
inuasion of England, shee was aduised to preuent it: whereuppon shee armed foorth a
Fleet of some 30 sayle, in the which there were 4. ships, and a pinaces of her Maiesties, the

rest were Merchants of good seruice. Sir Francis Drake was appointed Generall of this
Fleete, which went towards the coast of Spaine this yeare, in Aprill. And beeing aduertized,
that there was great store of warlike prouision at Cadiz, the which was readie to go
for Lisbon, he made all possible speed thither, to intercept these prouisions: so as on the
19 of Aprill, he entred with his Fleet into the harbour of Cadiz; where at the first they
were affronted by sixe gallies, but they soone retired vnder their fort.
There lay in the roade sixtie ships, with diuers smaller vessels vnder the fort; and such
as could passe the sholds, fled vp to port Real: there came foure gallies more downe against
them from Saint Mary port, and port Real: but they were well beaten: they burnt
in this harbor a shippe of Ragouca, of a thousand tunne, hauing fortie peeces of brasse
Ordinance in her,Ships burnt at Cadiz by the English. and richly laden, and another great new ship of twelue hundred tunne,
belonging to the Marquis of Santa Cruz, high Admirall of Spaine, with many others
laden with victuals, wine, iron workes, biscuit, oyle, fruite, and other commodities, which
were to be transported to the Indies, or to serue for the prouision of the Fleet which was
preparing for England: so as they burnt, sunke, and carried away to the number of thirty
shippes and barkes, beeing as they esteemed them ten thousand tuns of shipping. Whilest
they lay in the roade, the gallies and forts shot continually at them: and such shippes
as they could defend no longer, they fired, to driue among the English shippes, who were
somewhat troubled to auoid them. This resolute attempt was performed in one day and
two nights, to the great amazement of the King of Spaine, and the Marquis of Santa
Cruz his Admirall.
After their comming out of the roade of Cadiz, this English Fleete was followed by
ten gallies, who notwithstanding suffred them to ride quietly at an anchor by them. Then
they bent their course towards cape Sacre, beeing well victualled at the enemies charge:
vpon the way they tooke at seuerall times, almost an hundred shippes, barkes, and carauels,
laden with hoopes, gally oares, pipe-staues, with other prouisions for the King of
Spaines armie intended for England; all which they burnt, and landed the men. They also
spoyled the fisher-boates, and nets, for the fishing of Tunies. And comming to Cape
Sacre, they landed, and tooke three forts, some by force, the rest by composition. From
thence they came neere vnto Lisbone, anchoring neere vnto Cascais, where the Marquis
of Santa Cruz was with his gallies, and yet he came not foorth against them. Hauing
a message sent him by the Generall, that he was readie there to exchange certaine
bullets with him: the Marquis returned him an answer, that hee was not readie for him,
neither had he any such commission from the king his master.
The Generall seeing no more good to be done vpon the coast of Spaine, hee bent his
course towards the Ilands of the Acores, where (by good fortune) beeing within thirty
leagues of Saint Michels, he met with a Caracke of Portugall, called S. Philip, the which
they tooke,Carack of Portugal taken by Sir Francis Drake. hauing made little resistance, sending the people home into their country,
in other vessels well furnished with victuals. And this was the first Carake that euer was
taken comming from the East Indies. The riches of this prize was held exceeding great,
whereupon they resolued to returne into England, the which they did with their whole
Fleete, and their admirable rich prize.
The religious desire which the Catholike King had long had, to haue Friar Diego Seniliano
of the castle of Saint Nicholas,S. Diego canonized. to be canonized a Saint, being dead in Spaine some
hundred and fiue and twenty yeares before, with an opinion of holinesse throughout all
Spaine, did this yeare take effect: for that since the yeare 1563. instance beeing made by
him, and the Spaniards, to Pope Pius the fourth, to Pius the fifth, and then to Gregory
the 13. all which dyed before this busines could be ended. But continuing in this zealous
disposition, he commanded the Earle of Oliuares, his Ambassadour resident at Rome, to
mooue it againe to Pope Sixtus the fifth, so as on the third of Iuly this yeare, hee was
canonized a Saint, at the charges of the King of Spaine, and his feast day appoynted the
twelfth day of Nouember, to the great content of all Spaine. This yeare the Catholike
King sent the Duke of Sabioneta out of Italy into Poland, to pacifie the tumults and
confusions of that Realme, which were growne by the election of two kings, the Pope
hauing also sent Cardinall Aldobrandini thither to that end.

The King of Spaine after the conquest of Portugal, hauing gathered together a great
Nauy of ships, and leauied a mighty army, euery man thought, hee would make some
great enterprise according to the opportunity that was offered; but mens opinions
were diuided touching the action, for that their humors and dispositions beeing diuers,
they propounded things according to the quallitie of their owne passions. And
so it fell out in the ordinarie discourses which were made touching the Catholike
Kings enterprise, which they all restrained to three, against Afrike, England, or the vnited
Estates of the Netherlands: but to resolue which was most expedient for his Maiesty,
they all disagreed, some seeking to perswade him to attempt the Netherlands, others
Afrike, but most England.
In the end a truce beeing concluded betwixt the King of Spaine and the Turke, and
thereby the enterprise of Afrike cut off; the question was now whether hee should invade
England or the Netherlands. Wherevpon there was one which deliuered his
reasons, by way of discourse to the Catholike King, shewing that it was more conuenient
for him to make warre against England, then against the vnited Estates. It seemes
hee was vassall to the King of Spaine,(...) prepara (...) of Spaine 1588. as you may iudge by the vanity of his disc^urse.
Many (said he) considering at the first sight, the Catholike Kings interest to the Netherlands
and to England, affirme, that although hee haue great pretensions to this Island,
yet he is more bound to recouer the Netherlands, then to conquer England; for that
in all policy of state, wee should rather seeke to preserue that which wee hold, then to
conquer new. Although this maxime of state be of great force, yet (said he) I doe not
hold it to bee of such import, as it shall sway downe the ballance, without all contradiction.
For in these graue consultations, we must not onely consider what is to bee done, but
how it may be most profitable, most easily, and most conueniently done: For that many
times Princes are incited to enterprises by honour and duty; and yet the consideration
of many circumstances and discommodities restraine them: wherefore the consideration
(which binds vs more to preserue that which wee hold, then to get new) is not sufficient
to conclude, that his Catholike Maiesty should rather vndertake the enterprise
of the Netherlands, then that of England, neither should wee in effects of so great importance,
giue credit to such light reasons. But to the end it may appeere plainely that
the King of Spaine is bound in all respects to the enterprise of England. I will first of all
(said he) lay not onely a true, but a necessary foundation, which shall support the whole
building of my opinion; which is, that conquering England, he shal at the same instant
conquer the Netherlands: but winning the Netherlands, England is not gotten, nay
their hopes are no whit increased.
Moreouer, hee said, that the conquest of England was not so difficult as that of the
Netherlands. If then (said he) the conquest of England drawes with it the Netherlands,
and if bee more easie and more certaine; who doubts, that to peruert this order, were
to loose a goodly occasion, and to bee the workeman of his owne disgrace? but I will
prooue (said he) with pertinent reasons either member of my ground. That the conquest
of England is more profitable then that of the Netherlands; and that it is more
easie. For my proofe of the first ground, I will produce three heads. The first that
the Low countries haue not so long maintained warre, but with the helpe of England,
without the which they could not stand, no more then mans bodie can liue without
nourishment: That fire is more easily quenched by taking away that which feeds it
then by casting on water, for that not hauing wherewith to feed it, it consumes it selfe:
but seeking to vanquish it by the contrary; it may bee it will grow more violent. So
the Florentines could not quench the rebellion of the Pisans, before they had taken away
the matter which nourished that fire which came from strangers, and therefore
it was all one action to take away their succours which came from confederats Princes,
and to winne the city, which otherwise all their forces and of their confederats would
not haue beene able to effect.
For my second head (said he) I set downe, that England doth not onely maintaine the
rebellion of the Nertherlands by sending succors, but also by her countenance: for where

as the Netherlanders see the forces of Spaine conuerted against them, they flie vnto
England as to a Sanctuary, knowing that the English would alwaies take armes against
any that should inuade them. Wherein they imitate the Athenians, who thought
themselues safe as long as the Olynthians stood, who being subdued, they knew not how
they should keepe Philip out of their country. Euen so if England should fall into the
Spaniards hands, the Netherlanders should loose the ground of their rashnesse, being
destitute of that support which hath maintained them in their insolencies.
My third reason (said he) is, that the burthen of so long a warre, hath so wasted the spirits
and faculties of the Netherlanders, as they scarce haue any pulse remayning; they
hauing not onely beene cruell butchers of their owne liues, but Tyrants ouer their
goods, taxing themselues at aboue forty in the hundred; besides hauing lost so many
yeeres profit, their land being vntilled, and their trade of Marchandise fayling which doe
much import them; hauing also endured so many spoiles, inuasions, burnings, routs of
armies, and ruines of townes, with other great losses: So as they cannot possibly maintaine
this rebellion wanting life and spirit, which England gaue it. Whereby it appeeres
that the conquest of the Low countries followes that of England, as the shadow
doth the body. But on the other side we must not thinke the Netherlands being won
England would be so easily vanquished: the which being a rich and a mighty Kingdome,
seekes no support from any other, but relies vpon her owne forces; the which they
would oppose against their fortaine enemies, if the Netherlands should fall absolutly
into the Spaniards hands, standing as they doe now, wherefore England in her defence
depends onely of her owne power, and if it should expect any forraine succors,
they would not flie vnto those rebellious States, which are needy, and depend vpon
others.
Hetherto (said he) we haue shewed the difference of these enterprises, and how much
more proffitable that of England would be. Now I must prooue the second head of my
ground; that the conquest of that Island is more easie then that of the Netherlands, and
therefore ought to bee preferred, whether wee doe consider the proffit, the oportunity,
the possibility, the honour, and safety, or any other important consideration whatsoeuer.
But discoursing now of the easinesse of this conquest, in regard of that of the Netherlands,
I will proue (said he) that the difficulties be the same to inuade England and the
Netherlands. First of all I presuppose that a sufficient army beeing leauied, a royal enterprise
is sooner brought to perfection, when as they are attempted both by sea and
land, the which King Philip may do with greater aduantage in the enterprise of England
then in that of the Nertherlands: for as the voiage by sea is shorter and more easie, so he
may more commodiously inuade England by land, hauing meanes to land part of his
army safely in Scotland, as we will hereafter shew: whereas if he should send an army by
land into the Low countries, the way would be long to passe from Spaine through Italy
and Germany, and it would be exceeding chargeable and dangerous. The second reason
is, that it is more commodious, neerer and more safe to passe into England; for that
from the straight of Gibraltar thether, is all open sea, without any let; but to go into the
Low countries, hee must of necessity passe by England, the which by all reason of state
should let the King of Spaine vnderstand in his passage, that neither friends nor foes are
welcome, when they come with a great power, wherefore there is no doubt that whosoeuer
wil muade the Netherlands hee must breake this barre, or make plaine this mountaine
of England, which crosseth him in his passage.
My third reason (said he) is grounded vpon a firme maximy of the Art of warre; that
thou must neuer seeke to inuade any place, and leaue any thing behind to disturbe thee,
wherefore it were a rash enterprise to attempt the Low countries, and leaue England behind,
who beeing full of iealousie, may sodainely set vpon the Catholike Kings army in
the hottest of their warre against the Netherlanders.
The forth, that going to conquer the Low countries, they must fight with braue old
souldiers bred vp in the warre;See here his error and ignorance. but on the other side the English are without Art or practise
of warre, they cannot vse the harguebuse, nor any other offenciue armes, but onely
bowes and arrowes, the which are of no force against corselets and head-peeces, as wee

vse: so as (said he) there is the like comparison to bee made betwixt the English and the
Dutch souldiers as is betwixt idlenesse and exercise; or an armed and disarmed man.
And what an aduantage it is to fight with vnskilful souldiers, it it apparent by the example
of Miltiades in the fields of Marathon, who with lesse then 10000. braue men, put to
flight that mighty, but vnwarlike, army of Xerxes, being aboue 600000. men.
The fifth, that there is more difficulty in that of the Netherlands, for that they will
keepe themselues more close, so as they must bee wonne by inches, and a whole army
must be imployed in the seege of a towne and so of the rest, the which happely wilbe of
no great importance, but that they wil stay in course of his victory that seekes the winne
them. But contrarywise England hath not any towne to stay the violence a victorious enemy,
hauing once set footing into the Island, the which wilbe no difficult thing for the
King of Spaine to effect. So as England being without any forts but vpon the frontiers,
and the Low countries ful of forts both within and without, there is no doubt but the enterprise
of that is more easie then this, as it is more easie to vanquish them that make no
resistance. Whereof the Low countries are a familiar example, where notwithstanding
that the King had great garrisons, yet they many times found so great crosses, as they
were often vanquished by the opposition of those forts, whereas there being no place in
Portugal able to resist the enemies forces, the Spaniards entred into the heart of the
realme, they being not able to make resistance.
The sixth reason is that forts and townes of strength are to an inuading army but incombers
after they be wonne, for that the greatest part of the army, is drawne away into
garrisons, whereby it is much weakened.
The seuenth reason (said hee) seemeth sufficient in this case to proue the truth of my
opinion. If the King of Spaine sends an army to purge the rebellious humors of the
Netherlanders, it is to bee feared that this Phisicke will rather stirre vp the good humors
then euacuat the bad, breeding a disease full of corrupt matter: whereas now the good
matter hauing the predominant power, wee may hope that in time it will vanquish the
violence of the disease: whereas by this course the humors of Malcontents may bee corrupted,
and they drawne to desire innouations: we know that by the composition made
betwixt the King and his subiects, the Malcontents, they haue taken vpon them the burthen
of this warre, so as the Spaniards and other strange souldiers might bee drawne out
of the Low countries: If then an army should bee sent out of Spaine to subdue the Netherlanders,
or they should but heare it were so resolued: they would easily vnderstand
that the victors would prescribe a Law to the vanquished: and the Malcontents would
not only loose that great desire they had to beare that great burthen of the warre, and
the reward which they expected from his Maiesty, but they would feare to loose their
preuiledges and liberties, in regard whereof they haue made cruell warre against themselues.
By this then and many other reasons it apeeres, how dangerous it is to exasperates
the mindes of friend with so sharpe a medicine. If the Malcontents should ioyne
themselues with the aduerse partie, and oppose against the Spaniards, that warre would
proue more difficult then euer for the Catholike King, not only for that the Kings forces
should be diminished, but also for that the enemy should be fortified: So as we haue hetherto
proued that it is more easie and more commodious to inuade England then the
Netherlands.
Now we will shew (said hee) not by way of comparison, but in respect of it selfe, how
much it doth import the Catholike King, and how easie it is for him to inuade England.
It is not to bee doubted but the Phisicke is best, which not onely cures the member that
is greeued, but also takes away the cause of the disease. If then the Catholike King seeke
to conquer the Low countries, hee may well close vp the wound of their rebellion, but
he shall neuer euacuat the corrupt humors, which haue fed the disease, seeing that England
hath alwaies norrished the rebellions of the Low countries: And admit it were
cured of this present indisposition, what health can it bee called, when as the body is still
subiect to these peccant humors: wherefore England is first to be attempted, that afterwards
wee may with safety digest or euacuat all concurrent humors. But to intreat
more plainely of the facility of this enterprise: I denie not but that England is a mighty

Kingdome, and the greatest Island that the ancients haue made mention of, conteyning
in circuit with Scotland two thousand miles, yet late writers haue made it two hundred
lesse: That it is well fortified with a wall which the sea makes about it, whereby it is so
defended, as if Scotland were vnder that iurisdiction, it were not to bee inuaded by land;
Notwithstanding the glory which that nation hath gotten by armes, is rather to be attributed
to the ancient, and not to them that are now, for as it often happens that the
minde being great with the imagination of great matters, doth still retaine the same
imaginations although that matters change; euen so it happens here, that we doe measure
the forces of England, not by the present Estate, but as they haue beene when as
they had in their possession Normandy, Brittan, Gascony, and other florishing Prouinces
of France, yea they commanded in a manner absolutly ouer all France, and Henry
the sixth, was crowned King in Paris. But hee that will looke into the present Estate
of England, may easily iudge that it is great, rather by the reputation of her ancient fame,
then by the quality of her present forces, and that it is no more that England, which was
fearefull to the greatest Princes of Europe.
And without doubt it hath beene obserued that not long since there haue so many
disgraces fallne vpon that Island,Ignorance and mallice of the writer. as at one instant it not onely purchased the hatred of
men, but of God, euer since it fell into Schisme. So as since the change of their religion,
England hath suffred great shipwrackes, whereof wee may see the effects, hauing lost that
support whereon depended their reputation and safety, that is the Authority and command,
which they had at sea, for that in former times this Island did maintaine many
ships, and did continually entertaine a good fleet at sea; yea sometimes their preparations
were admirable, as amongst others when as Henry the sixth, went almost with
eight hundred great ships against Charles the sixth, the French King, making a bridge ouer
the Ocean: but the state and condition of that Island is changed, for since Henry the
seuenth and Henry the eight, they could not maintaine those hundred Ordinary ships,
which they were wont to keepe in a redinesse for the safety of that state, but the Island is
growne to that extremity, as they haue beene constrained not onely to diminish, but also
to sel the greatest part of those ships which did secure them from forraine inuasions, so
much doth want presse those Princes, more their owne safeties.
But the better to explaine that which I haue spoken of the easinesse of the enterprise,VVeakenesse of England compared with the power of Spaine.
I wil (said hee) propound two things, the one of him that is inuaded, the other of him that
doth inuade; whereby it shall appeere that the one is as vnable to defend, as the other is
powerful to offend. If wee consider England which is to bee inuaded, without doubt it is
not able to resist the King of Spaines forces, if hee will inuade it with such prouisions as
he may, and the importance of the action doth require, the which will appeere by diuers
reasons.
The first, for that, as I haue said, the Island of England is at this day in great
want; and if in this weakenesse, shee should seeke to make head against the power of a
mighty Potentate, it were as much as if she should seeke to support Heauen, beeing nei-Alcides
nor Atlas.
Secondly,VVant of ships in England. in respect of this necessity (he said) that the crowne of England could not
entertaine that number of shipping which was wont to be appointed for the gard of the
realme; and if they should seeke to make any prouision, it were to draw force from
weakenesse, or to prescribe a Law to time and nature; seeking in great want and in a
short time, to make those prouisions which require a great treasure and many yeeres:
Moreouer to beginne to make preparation of those things which King Philip hath
in a readinesse, were to put themselues in defence, when as the enemy held his sword
ouer their heads. It were vaine for any one to say that the English in daunger may
vse priuat mens shippes for the publike seruice: this remedie would come to late
when the daunger is at hand, neither could those ships bee easily called together from
remoate places, neither doe priuate men willingly imploy their commodities to publike
vse. Wherefore it it necessary that the deseignes of Princes in great enterprises,
flow from the fountaine of their owne power.
Thirdly, for that the English doe altogether want, or are very defectiue of horsmen

which is a chiefe ground of warre, for speaking of men at armes they haue scarce any
knowledge of them, and as for light-horses, they doe not much import, vnlesse the number
supply the defect of the quallity. Besides all the horses of that Island being continually
put to pasture, are full of diseases and weake, which proceeds partly from the temper of
that aire.
Fourthly, that the Kings of England haue either through negligence or disability omitted
to make prouisions for the war, like vnto al other Princes, that they may be readie
against any sodaine tumult that may rise either within or without their states; for that in
former times their whole care was for prouision by sea, so as the land-seruice was neglected,
as if in an Island there were not any need to goe to field against strangers, or
that warre could not bee mannaged at land with sea prouisions.
Fiftly,Behold the lying vanity of the Spaniards. it is most certaine that the English are by nature desirous of innouations and
change, for who so shall read ouer their History, hee shall finde that seditions, conspiracies,
treasons and such like, haue made their dwelling in their Iland.
Sixthly, for that the English, in respect of their ancient greatnesse, are more desirous
to anoy others then to be anoyed themselues when they shal see themselues charged by
braue enemies, they wil be daunted. To see Fortune turne her face is a fearefull spectacle
for them that are not accustomed therevnto.
Seuenthly, for that England beginning to decline by the iust iudgement of God, euery
man knowes how easie it is to cast it downe, a declyning being nothing else but a
way to ruine. So that mighty Empire of the Romaines, when it began once to decline,
it fell sodainely, and drew with it a great ruine.
Eightly, for that the English nation haue not in a manner any Commanders to mannage
their warre, which defect beeing ioyned with the insufficiency of the souldiars of
that realme, it will prooue that the army of Lyons, commanded by a Hart, wil be little
esteemed: one of the Harts led by a Cony wil be ridiculous, the which will happily fall
out in England.
Lastly, admit that England were furnished with armes, captaines, souldiers, victuals,
ships and all other things necessary for the warre; yet (said hee) all was of no moment,
wanting money, which giues forme and essence to all enterprizes, for that the crowne of
England, not onely by the small reuenues, but also by the superfluity of their ordinary
expences, is growne into that want, as they are not able to vndergoe any royall enterprise,
hauing scarce meanes to entertaine themselues, for he that doth arrogate to much
to his owne force, and ouer-chargeth himselfe with warre, is the instrument of his owne
ruine. Hauing hetherto shewed that it is easie for the Catholike King to inuade England,
in regard of it; I will proue the facility thereof with greater reasons in regard of the
Catholike Kings forces.
The first is the great power of the King of Spaine, whose dominions doe imbrace the
whole diameter of the globe, and is Lord of more land then any Monarke or state in the
world did euer hold. A Prince, rich in armes, souldiars, captaine shipping, victuals, and
all other necessaty prouisions for warre. A Prince who as Iudge and moderator, seemes
to gouerne the reines of the Empire of the sea and land.
The second is, for the great nauy which hee hath ready, which is not onely that which
of late yeeres made the enterprise of Portugall, but 150. more which hee hath gotten in
that Kingdome, which, ioyned with the rest, will breed admiration in all men, and seeme
to fill the sea with their multitudes.
The third, that besides these ships, and those which hee may haue in Biscay, as faithfull
to the crowne, as expert in nauigation, besides the ships of priuat men, which his Maiesty
hath in a readinesse; he shall receiue no small seruice from his gallies, who in the action
of Portugall discouered our error in thinking that they were not of any vse in the
Ocean sea at any time, as if that sea were not calme in Sommer, and that it were neuer
to be failed in; so as there is no doubt but our gallies may safely aduenture in those seas
the three monthes in Sommer. They that obiect Caesars wrack in the Brittish seas, doe
not remember that he himselfe doth not impute it to the sea, but to the Moone, which
not only in the Ocean, but in all other seas doth shew her power, as the Meteoroligikes

and experience doe teath. The fourth, that the Catholike King being Lord at sea by
reason of his great fleet, he will at the same instant bee Lord at land: For hauing sufficient
forces to vanquish the defences of the Island, he shal with ease land his men, and ouer-run
the Island with his victorious armes, for such is the condition of that Island, that
as soone as an enemy is entred, and his army orderly lodged, hee may cut off their victuals,
and famish the Islanders.
Fifthly, for that by sea King Philip shall haue the fauor of them of Ireland, who haue
securely shewed themselues to adhere vnto him, and by land there is no man doubts (said
he) but that Scotland will assist him in his deseignes with all her meanes.
The sixth in order, but the first to be considered, is the Iustice and honesty of the cause,
the which carries so honorable a title, as the defence of religion and the Catholike faith,
as nothing shalbe able to hinder it; yea his Maiesties pretensions (said he) are such to that
realme, and such is the duty which hee owes vnto the name which he carries, of Catholike,
as there is no enterprise more due to him then this; whereby he shal not only take
possession of a realme which is his due, but also hee shal purchase vnto himselfe immortall
glory, aboue all other Kings, adding so rich and famous a Kingdom to that of Spaine.
The seuenth is the commodity of the passage, knowing how short a cut it is from the
Streight of Gibraltar to the Island, and what great commodities grow by expedition,
and the ease of transportation of victuals, soldiers, artillery, munition, and al other prouision
necessary for the enterprise.
The eight, if King Philip makes warre against his enemy at his owne doores, he shal fill
England with feare and amazement, and the approching danger will trouble all their
counsels. There is nothing more terrible then to see the sword that must be the murtherer
of them and theirs.
The ninth, for that (said he) his Catholike Maiesty had many partisans in that Island; it
importing much to haue some that fauor him among his enemies. And to proue that
he hath some at his deuotion in that Island, I wil produce three reasons. First the remembrance
of his clemency which remaines yet in the hearts of those people, and of his curtesie,
hauing sometimes gouerned them as their lawful Prince, with so great satisfaction
to them al in general, as any other gouernment, in respect of his, should seeme tyranous.
The second reason is that of religion, knowing that there are many in this Island which
adhere to the Church of Rome. The third is the riches of King Philip, who in his large dominions
hath so many commanderies, pensions, offices and rents, to aduance men that
shal deserue wel, as it wilbe easie for him to draw the hearts of the English vnto him.
Hauing thus shewed the reasons why the Catholike King should rather inuade England
then the Low countries, and with what facility it is to be performed, I will (said he)
to the end that nothing shal remaine vnsatisfied, make answere to an ordinary obiection
which is made by many vpon this subiect, which is, that the king of Spaine making an attempt
against England, he shal reuiue the emulation which hath beene betwixt him and
the house of France, which fire lying now smothered vnder the ashes of peace, may kindle
a great warre, for if the French should remaine as spactators of this tragedy of England,
it might in the end turne to the preiudice of France, whereby they conclude that
the Christian King should be forced to ioyne with England, least that hauing conquered
that Island, he should afterwards turne his forces vpon France, which obiection notwithstanding
he left vnsatisfied.
During this great preparation of three yeeres in Spaine, which held all Europe in
suspence, the King of Spaine caused an ouerture of a peace to be made vnto the Queene
of England (onely as it seemed to abuse her with the imagination of a treaty, and to
make her neglect the defence of her realme) who imbraced this proposition, and sought
to draw the vnited Prouinces into this treaty, which they absolutly refused. Notwithstanding
the Queene desirous of a peace sent her Commissioners in February 1588.
to Ostend; and in March following there came others to Bruges from the Duke of
Parma, to treat with them in the King of Spaines name; who these Commissionars
were, and what the successe of that treaty was, I leaue to the Netherland History, beeing
but a fained shew of the Spaniard, to winne time, and to find England vnprouided

the Queene of England (seeing the Spanish fleete almost at her doore) called home her
Commissioners, and prepared for her defence.
But now to come to this admirable fleete; the King of Spaine had deuised how hee
might conquer England,King Philip resolues to inuade England and the Netherlands. hoping by that meanes to recouer his Inheritance in the Low
Countries; for beeing Lord in England, hee might cut off their trafficke by sea, the
which many (well acquainted with the scituation of both countries) held easie to bee
done. Wherefore the King of Spaine (hauing spent one and twenty yeares, and wasted
an infinite treasure, in those Lowe Country warres,) resolued to make an other attempt
vpon the Netherlands by sea, but with greater forces, for that England was now his enemy,
and might hinder all trade into those parts. So as hee resolued first to inuade England,
wherevnto he was perswaded by diuerse subtill spirits, both Spanish and Dutche,
and by some English rebels, holding it more easie to bee conquered then Holland and
Zeland, and that it would bee more profitable to inuade both England and the Lowe
Countries by sea at one instant, then to maintaine a continuall armie to cut off their
traffick from both the Indies. For the effecting of this resolution, hee had for some
yeares together made preparation of a great Nauie at Lisbone, the like whereof had not
beene seene in many ages in the Ocean sea. It was ready in the beginning of this yeare
1588. the fame of this action was such, as there was not an honorable house in Spaine,
but had a sonne, a brother, or some of the bloud in it, thinking all to winne euerlasting
honor with this inuincible Armie (as they called it) and to make themselues rich with
the spoiles of England and the Netherlands.
The King had resolued to make Don Aluaro de Bassan Marquis of Saint Cruz, (a
Nobleman of great note, who had done the King great seruice in the conquest of Portugall,
and the Tercera's) Generall of this armie. Hee sent vnto him, and acquainted
him with his desseigne; hee put him in minde of his promise, that hee would spend his
life in his seruice, and hee commanded him to prepare himselfe to conduct this fleete.
The Marquis in his answer humbly thanked his Maiestie, yet hee seemed by circumstances
to disswade the King from this enterprise, telling him that the English were gallant
men at sea (of whome they had made good tryall) that they had good shipping, and
that he should finde strong opposition. The King was much discontented with the Marquis
for this answer, hauing euer relyed vpon him, and sent him word, that seeing hee
failed his expectation, and had no courage to vndertake this Action, he would finde an
other to command his Army, wherevpon he made the Duke of Medina Sidonia his Generall.
The Marquis finding himselfe in disgrace with the King, conceiued such greefe
as he died before the fleet went to sea. But let vs returne vnto the Armie, whereof I will
make a perticular relation,Discription and perticular preparation of the Spanish Fleete. as the Spaniards themselues haue set it downe.
Portugall did furnish ten great Gallions, with two smaler ships, vnder the command of
the Duke of Medina Sidonia the Generall, in the which were 1300. saylers 3300. soldiers
and 350. peeces of Ordinance.
Biscay set forth ten Galleons and foure Pinasses,An. 1588. with saylers, soldiers, and ordinance
proportionably, vnder D. Iohn Martines de Ricaldo, the Admirall.

Gnipuscoa did arme ten Galeons and fourteene Pinasses, vnder Michel Oquendo.
Andalouzia set forth ten Galions, and one Pinasse, vnder comand of D. Pedrode Baldes.
Italie had furnished ten Gallions, the which were commanded by Martin de Bretendona.
Castille prouided fourteene Gallions, and two Pinasses, ouer which squadron Diego
Floris de Baldes had charge.
There were also three and twenty Hulks conducted by D. Iohn Lopes de Medina.

From Naples there were foure Galeasses sent, comanded by D. Hugo de Moncado, they
had in them 1200. slaues to row, 480. saylers, 870. soldiers, and 200. peeces of Ordinance.
Portugall sent foure gallies, vnder the conduct of Diego de Medrana, with all thinges
proportionably.
There were 22. Pinasses and other smal ships, vnder the gouernment of Antonio Buccado
de Mendoca.
Besides all these there were 20. Carauells, which carried owers and other necessaries
for the ships, so as there were 150. sayle of all sorts, in the which they had aboue 8000.

sailers, and 20. thousand souldiers, besides Commanders, Officers and voluntaries, with
2650. peeces of ordinance.
The galleons being 66. in number, were very great and strong, built high like castles,
easie to fight withall, but not easie to board.
In this great fleet there were 1600. great brasse peeces, and aboue a thousand iron, to
the which there were two hundred and twenty-thousand bullets, 4600. kintals of poulder,
one thousand kintals of lead, 1200. kintals of match, 7000. muskets and caliuers,
10000. pikes, partisans and halberds with canons, field peeces, and all prouision for carriages,
or whatsoeuer might be needful for an army, either at land or sea. And for the seruice
of the ordinance there were leauied 4200. men whereof 400. of them were Pioners.
There was bread and wine for six months, euery one hauing halfe a hundred of bread
euery month. The countries subiect to the King of Spaine did furnish a great part of
the prouisions of this fleet, as some of them write. viz.
Andaluzia did contribute 12000. kintals of biscuit. Malaga and that country 27000.
and 500. Carthagena and Murcia, 5000. kintals. Sicile 50000. kintals, Burgos and Campos
56000. Naples and the Islands 15000. kintals.
Seuille and Extremadura did contribute 4000. kintals of salt meats, Gallicia 6000.
Asturia and other parts a thousand kintals.
Seuille and Extremadura did contribut 5000. kintals of hogs flesh and bacon, Ronda
2000. Gallicia 2000. and Biscay 2000. kintals.
Algarbe did contribute 8000. barils of fish, Almendraua del Duca 11000. barils and
Cadiz 4000.
Maiorca did contribute 2000. kintals of cheese. Seuille and Extremadura a 1000. Portugal
25000. Genoua and Valencia 14000. kintals of Rise. Andalouzia and Naples did
contribut 23000. pezes of oyle and vineger, euery peze beeing 25. pounds, and euery
pound 16. ounces.
Malaga, Marouella, Xeres and their iurisdictions did furnish 13000. buts of wine. Naples
6000. and Seuille with that iurisdiction 7000. buts.
Cathagena did furnish 15000. Aneghes, Naples and Sicile 11000. Aneghes of beans
and peaze.
Andaluzia, Naples and Biscay did furnish other prouisions of corne, iron, wollen and
linnen cloth, with other necessaries. They had in the fleet 12000. pipes of fresh water,
with whatsoeuer else might be thought needfull. This army as D. Diego Pimentel did confesse,
cost the King 30000. ducats a day, reporting the army to be 32000. strong.
There were fiue regiments of the old souldiers of Naples,Collonels of the regiments. Sicile and the Terceres. The
fiue Colonels were D. Diego Pimentel brother to the Marquis of Taueras, cousin to the
Earles of Beneuent and Calui, a Knight of the Order of Saint Iohn, and very wel allied,
2. D. Francisco de Toledo brother to the Earle of Orgas. 3. D. Alonso de Lucon. 4 D.
Nicholas d' Isla or Patritio Anselmo, the 5. and last D. Augustin Mexia, who afterwards
was Castellan of Antwerp; there being 32. companies in euery regiment, besides certaine
Portugal and Italian bands. D. Lewis Peres de Guzman, Duke of Medina Sidonia,
Marquis of Saint Lucars, and Knight of the Order of the Golden fleece, was General of
this great army,Officers of the army. as you haue heard, D. Iohn Martines de Ricaldo was Admiral of the fleet,
and D. Francisco de Bouadilla Marshall. There were of the Councel of war, Diego Pimentel,
Flores de Baldes, Pedro de Baldes, Michel Oquendo, Alonso de Lieua, Diego Maldonado,
D. George Manriques with many others. There were many Noblemen, and about 120.
gentlemen of note, voluntaries, that went to win honor, amongst which were the Prince
of Ascoly, the Marquis of Pegnafiel, the Marquis of Berlango, with many others of great
account.
The Duke of Parma during this preparation,Preparation of the Duke of Parma to ioyne with the army. had commandement from the King of
Spaine to make ready ships and boats to land men, and to haue his forces in a readinesse
to ioyne with his army that came from Spaine, who spent much time with great care
and industry to prouide all things ready for such an enterprise. He had 32. ships of warre
within Dunkerke, and an infinite number of boats for transportation, hee lodged all his
forces neere vnto the sea, being about 30000. foot and nine hundred horse.

There came many Princes and Noblemen from forraine countries running to this imaginary
conquest. Out of Spaine, the Duke of Pastrana Prince of Vuly, sonne to Ruy Gomes
de Sylua, but hee was held to bee the Kings base sonne: the Marquis of Bourgawe
one of the Archduke Fernands sonnes,Noblemen come into Flanders. D. Vespasian Gonzaga, of the house of Mantoua, a
great souldier, D. Iohn de Medicis, base sonne to the Duke of Florence, D. Amadeus a bastard
of Sauoy with many others.
The Queene of England hearing of all this preparation in Spaine and the Low countries
omitted nothing that might serue for her iust defence.Preparation in England. Shee sent forth her best
ships of warre, with some Merchants, to lie at Plymouth in the West parts, there to attend
the enemy, commanded by the Lord Charles Howard, high Admirall of England,
and now Earle of Nottingham, beeing accompanied by the Lord Thomas Howard, second
sonne to the Duke of Norfolke, and now Earle of Suffolke; the Lord Sheffeld, and
many other Noblemen and gentlemen of quality: And in the narrow seas, betwixt
Douer and Calis the Lord Henry Seymor, sonne to the Duke of Somerset, lay with forty
or fifty saile of smaler ships. The vnited Prouinces had prouided twenty small ships to
keepe all the coast of Flanders, where there be great flats, and when as the Spanish fleet
was ready to come, they sent in the end Iustine Nassau their Admirall with fiue and thirty
tall ships well appointed, to ioyne with the Lord Henry Seymer, which ships vnited,
should keepe the Duke of Parma from comming forth, whereon their preseruation did
depend.
But let vs returne to this great fleet of Spaine,Spanish fleete disperst at sea. which beganne to way anchor at Lisbone
on the nine and twentith day of May this yeere 1588. and sailed to the Groine in
Gallicia, where they tooke in more men and some munition. From thence they put
to sea, but they were disperst by a storme, so as the Duke was forced to returne againe
vnto the Groine with his fleet, eight of his ships hauing spent their masts, of the foure
gallies one recouered that port, and the other three were driuen into Bayonne in France,
whereas all the slaues escaped.
The army being refreshed and the ships repaired, the King did daily importune them
to put to sea, which they did, on the twentith of Iuly, sayling till they came to the entry
of the English Channel, from thence they sent to aduertise the Duke of Parma of their
comming, to the end hee might bee ready to ioyne with them. The fleet was discouered
by one captaine Fleming, who aduertised the Lord Admirall of England when hee
little expected them, which made him with all possible speed to drawe his ships out of
the hauen of Plymouth, imbarking his men with great confusion and difficulty, himselfe
putting to sea that night but with sixe ships, and the rest following as they could. The
two fleetes hauing discouered one an other on the thirtith day of Iuly, the Spaniards
leauing the English, kept on their course towards Flanders, according to the stricknesse
of their Commission, which was to ioyne with the Duke of Parma, and then ioyntly to
inuade England.
In this manner the Spanish fleet went on with a small saile close together, fearing to
loose some of their company, for that the English had got the winde, and bare vp within
musket shot. Passing on in this close manner the Gallion wherein Pedro de Baldes
was, brake her mast against an other ship, so as it was not able to follow the fleete, neither
would they stay to helpe her, but falling off from the rest it yeelded the next day to
Sir Francis Drake, besides D. Pedro, there were diuers gentlemen and 450. men in her,
and as it was said some of the King of Spaines treasor: at the same time Michel d' Oquendos
the viceadmiralls ship was by casualty set on fire, and burnt to the water, of the
which there were some saued.
On the second day of August there was a hot fight betwixt the two fleets right against
Portland, but the Spaniards left it and went on their intended course. On the fourth
day was the like before the Isle of Wight, where the English Admirall accompanied
by the Lord Thomas Howard in the Lyon, the Lord Sheffeld in the Beare; Sir Robert
Southwell in the Elizabeth Ionas, with some few others, did charge the Spanish Admiral
being in the midest of his best ships, but in the end the Spaniards went away before
the winde, and on the sixth of August they came to anchor before Calis, meaning

there to attend the Duke of Parma, whether the next day the English fleet came and anchored
close by them, who that night sending downe ships before the winde, being full
of wood, poulder, wild-fire and other combustible things, and beginning to burne, they
made the Spaniards in that amazement, cut their cables, and to put confusedly to sea. In
this confusion the great Galleasse of D. Hugo de Moncado, lost her helme, and was driuen
vpon Callis sands, where D. Hugo was slaine, and the Galleasse spoiled by the English
and lost, where there were three hundred slaues set at liberty.
The morning after their disorder, the Spaniards had put themselues againe into battaile:
and the English charged them before Graueling, but they desired to passe along
with the winde, and to stand vpon their defence onely; this fight continued the whole
day, in the which some of the Spanish ships were sunke, and some being spoiled, and
not able to follow the fleete, were taken by the States men and carried to Flessingue, I
omit the repitition of euery particularity, because you may reade them in the Duch History.
The Duke of Medina seeing that he had done what hee had in charge, thought it
best now to retire, holding it better to hazard a dangerous passage by the North of Ireland,
then to stay stil vpon the coast of Flanders, with apparent danger, hauing no means
to ioyne with the Duke of Parma: wherevpon they packt on all their sailes, hauing a
greater will to flie then to fight, whom the English followed for a while, but seeing them
bend their course Northward, they left them, and retired into England. It seemes that
God did miraculously defend the English, for in all their seuerall fights, they lost not one
ship, nor a man of account, and not aboue a hundred common persons.
Thus the Spanish fleet hauing lost ten or twelue of their best ships, with foure or fiue
thousand men, besides those that were sicke and wounded, whose number was great, distrest
with wants, and despayring of all helpe from the Duke of Parma (who prepared for
their returne) they sought to get into Spaine behind Scotland and Ireland, expecting
smal releefe in Scotland, and that Norway could not supply their wants, they tooke all
the fishermen they could meet withall to serue them for Pilots, and fearing the want of
fresh water, they cast their horses ouer-board, and so they sailed Northwards, till they
came to 62. degrees. Then the Duke of Medina commanded the whole fleet to bend
their course for Spaine or Portugal, and himselfe with about 25. saile, that were best prouided
of fresh water, kept out at sea, and so got into Spaine. Don Martin de Ricalde the
Admiral with some forty ships, sailed neerer Ireland, hoping to refresh then selues there,
but a great storme arysing about the second of September, they were disperst, and
many of them were driuen vpon that coast,Ships cast away vpon the coast of Ireland. and there cast away; some sunke, some broken,
some runne on sands, and some burnt by the Spaniards themselues, to the number
of seuenteene great ships: some write, they lost vpon sixe and thirty or eight and thirty
ships, in which I take it they comprehend some that were lost vpon the coast of Norway
and that sunke at sea. Yet it was constantly reported, that of all that great fleet of a hundred
thirty foure saile that went out of Lisbone, there returned but fifty three ships great
and smal. Of them perished in Ireland there were specially named a Galleasse two great
Venetian ships, called La Ratta and Balanzara and the Galleon called our Lady of Rosa,
of a thousand tunne, in the which D. Michel d' Oquendo, General of the squadron of Guipuscoa,
was, in which ship there perished (by the confession of the Pilot) fiue hundred
men,Others write that heremained in Flanders after his lang at Calis. and not any one was saued but himself, among others (besides the General Oquendo)
there died as he said the Prince of Ascoly (held to bee the King of Spaines base son)
Matut a Commander of the souldiers, Villafranca captaine of the said ship, with many
Knights and Aduenturers of account: Moreouer hee confest that there was in that ship
50. canons all brasse for the field, 25. peeces of brasse and iron belonging to the ship, 50.
tuns of sack, 15000. ducats in gold, with much plate and rich furniture.
After the Duke of Medin as returne with the remainder of his fleet into Spaine, many
died of sicknesse, or of the wounds which they had receiued. Many taxed the Duke for
this vnfortunate successe, but he (like a iudicious Prince, who had vnwillingly vndertaken
that charge) laied the blame vpon his Pilots, and the Duke of Parma, who was not ready
to ioyne with him, so as the King allowed of his reasons, and gaue him leaue to goe
home, and rest himselfe. There died many Commanders and men of account after their

returne, as D. Iohn Martinez de Ricalde, D. Diego Floris de Baldes, D. Alonso de Lieua,
D. Diego de Maldonado, D. Francisco de Bouadillo, and D. George Manriquez, al of the counsell
of warre. And many were taken prisoners, some in Ireland, as D. Alonso de Luson, a
Collonel, two of the house of Cordoua, and D. Roderigo de Lasso, and some in Zeland, as
D. Diego de Pimentel a Collonel. Finally the losse was such, as there was not any great
house in Spaine, but had some particular cause to mourne for some one of their bloud.
The Duke of Parma was much blamed by the Spaniards that were in the Low countries,
but he excused himselfe, for that (as he said) the Spanish fleet came to soone, and to free
himselfe, he caused some to be hanged, which had not discharged their duties. After the
ruine of this great Spanish fleet,An. 1589. there fel a great iarre betwixt the Lord of Champagni
and Mounsieur Richardot, who was much fauored by the Duke of Parma, these two hauing
run contrary courses in their treaty of peace in Flanders, with the Queene of Englands
Commissioners. So as after this bad successe, Champaigny taxed the Duke of Parma
of negligence, writing many letters of the like tenor into Spaine, where of the Infanta
Isabella the Kings eldest daughter, affecting the Duke well, did still aduertise him, who
seeing his reputation and seruice thus called in question, sent Richardot, President of Arthois,Richardot sent into Spaine by the Duke of Parma.
into Spaine to the King to make answere to all obiections and slanders, wherewith
they had incensed him, seeking to bring him in disgrace, and to get his gouernment
from him, accusing him that hee had not done his duty concerning the Spanish fleete,
and that hee had receiued a great affront before Berghen vp Zoome, for that hee
would not beleeue the counsell of such as would haue disswaded him from that enterprise;
but Richardot gaue good satisfaction to the King and his Councell, and returned
with a Commission for the continuance of his gouernment, in despight of his
enemies.
The King of Spaine beeing aduertised of the vnfortunate successe of his fleet and army,
which he had sent to inuade England, after the returne of such as were remayning
of that miserable wracke, hee beganne to examine euery mans merits; and who had deserued
reward, and who punishment in this action, to preserue vnto himselfe, with
the feare of some, and the loue of others, the authority of a wife Prince: wherevpon
hee rewarded the heires of Don Alphonso de Lieua, who (as they said) was
drowned with a thousand persons vpon the coast of Ireland.
He did punish seuerely Fernando Lopes, who was campe Master generall; and Antonio
de Gueuara, Pouruoier generall, was depriued of his Office, for his misdemeanors.
In the meane time they had newes in Spaine of a great army preparing in England
to send into Portugall,Prouision for defence of Portugal. for the restoring of Don Antonio, wherevpon the King
made prouision for the defence thereof, sending the Earle of Fuentes for Generall into
Portugall, with good troupes, hee augmented the number of their horse, giuing the
charge to D. Alphonso Vargas, he made D. Francis de Padiglia Camp-master General,
Andreas d' Alua Pouruoier, and Iohn Maldonado Auditor.
The prouisions for this enterprise beeing made,Voiage of Portugal. they went from Plimouth in Aprill:
Sir Iohn Norris and Sir Francis Drake being Generalls; they had with them sixe of
the Queenes, twenty ships of warre, and (as some write) a hundred and forty for transportation,
hauing when they tooke shipping a eleuen thousand souldiers, and two
thousand fiue hundred marriners: within sixe daies after their departure from England
being the twentith day of Aprill, the army landed in a bay within a mile off the Groine,
without impeach, from whence they marched presently towards the towne, approching
within halfe a mile they were incountred by the enemy, who beeing charged retired
to their gates, and then the Generall lodged the army in the villages and houses
thereabouts. Generall Norris hauing viewed the towne before daie, resolued for to
attempt it by scaladoe, and to land some Artillerie to beate the shippes and gallies
which did play vpon their troupes,Groine the base towne surprized. the which was effectually performed, so
as the Gallies were forced presently to abandon the roade, and goe to Farrol, and
then they prepared with all speed to surprize the base towne, the which was done
the next day after, they entring it in three seuerall places, where after good

resistance in one place, they were forced to abandon it, they all retyring into the high
towne, the which they might easily doe for that the English knew not their passages. The
rest that were not put to the sword, in the fury, fled to the rockes in the Island, where
they did hide themselues in caues, whereas many were daily found out.
D. Iohn de Luna, a man of great command, hauing hidden himselfe in a house came
forth the next morning and yeelded himselfe. Iohn de Vera a Commissary of the victuals
was also taken that night, who confessed that at the entry of the English into the
towne, there were fiue hundred Spainards in seuen companies, (as it seemed) returned
weake from the voyage of England, all vnder D. Iohn de Luna: the captaines names
were D. Diego Bacan base sonne to the Marquis of Santa Cruz. D. Antonio de Herera;
D. Pedro Manriques brother to the Earle of Paredes. D. Ieronimo Mouray, of the Order
of Saint Iohn, hee was in the fort, D. Gomes de Caruajal; captaine Moucon and Caucasa
de Socas. And that the day that the English landed there came from Retenzas the
companies of D. Iohn de Mosale, and of D. Pedro Ponce de Leon. He confessed moreouer
that there was order giuen for the baking of 300000. of biscuit: that there was
two thousand pipes of wine in the towne, and a hundred and fifty in the ships. That
there was lately come 300000. ducats from the Marquis of Seralba. That there was
a thousand Iarres of oyle, with great store of beanes, pease, wheat and fish. That there
were three thousand kintals of beefe, and not twenty daies before, there entred three
barkes laden with mach and harguebuses. There were some others taken, and there
were slaine by the common souldiers about fiue hundred. At their first entry into the
towne, the souldiers finding three sellars full of wine distempred themselues, so as many
beeing drunke were hurt from the high towne, and this disorder was the cause of a
great mortality which fell in the English army. There was aboundance of victuals,
and prouision for shipping and warre; which the Commissary confest to be for a new
voyage into England.
After the taking of the base towne, there came some two thousand men out of the
country, downe to the very gates, as resolutly as if they would haue entred, but the
English that were in gard making head against them, they fled away disordredly, hauing
lost some eighteene of their men. The Generall attempted the high towne both by
mine and battery, and going to the assault the loose rubish vnder their feete failed
them so as they could not stand. They had diuers men hurt in their retreat, and they
lost some twenty or thirty vnder the ruines of a tower which fell.
The day after that the English had offred an assault,Succors come to releeue the Groyne. the General vnderstood, by a prisoner,
that the Earle of Andrada had gathered an army together of eight thousand men,
at Puente de Burgos, six miles from the towne, which was but the beginning of an army,
there being a greater leauy ready to come vnder the conduct of the Earle of Altemira,
either to releeue the Groyne, or to incampe neere vnto the place where the English
should imbarke, and to hinder there shipping for to that end the Marquis of Seralba had
written vnto them both the first night of their landing, as the Commissary had confest,
or else to stop their passage into the country, whether they went daily by troupes, and
burnt, spoiled, and tooke great booties. The Generall resolued the next day to goe and
visit these forces, leading nine Regiments with him: In the foreward were the regiments
of Sir Edward Norrys Master of the Ordinance, Sir Roger Williams and Collonel Sydneys:
In the battaile that of the Generall, of Collonel Lane, and Collonel Medkerke:
And in the reereward, Sir Henry Norrys, Collonel Huntleys and Collonel Brets Regiments,
leauing the other fiue Regiments with Generall Drake for the garde of the Ordinance.
Vpon the sixth day of May in the morning they discouered the enemy within
halfe a mile off their campe; against whom the shot of the foreward skirmished, and
forced them to retire vnto their bridge, which was of stone, built vpon Arches,
ouer a creeke that came from the sea. At the foote whereof on the other side the
enemy lay verie strongly intrenched, who beeing with his shot at the further end
of the bridge, Sir Edward Norris (who ledde the foreward, and marched in the
head of the pikes) past the bridge without any stay at all, beeing accompanied

by Colonell Sydney, Captaine Hinder, Captain Fulford and others. The way was euen,
but they must passe thorough a storme of small shot; for the bridge was flanked on both
sides with their shot, at the farther end there was a barricado, but they that had it in gard,
seeing the proud approch of the English,Sir Edward Norris nurt. forsooke it, where Sir Edward Norris entred,
and charging the first he encountred, with his pike, ouer-thrusting himselfe hee fell, and
was sore hurt on the head, at the sword, but was honorably rescued by the Generall his
brother, Colonell Sidney, and some other Gentlemen: Captaine Hinder hauing his cask
shot off, had fiue wounds in the head and face at the sword. This ^^empt full of difficulty,Spaniards defeated at P^^ente de Burgos.
beeing seconded by the Generall, their brauest men which defended that plaace, being
ouerthrown, their whole armie fell presently to rour, and the English had (...) chase three
miles foure sundrie waies. The Generals Standard with the Kings armes was taken what
number of the enemy was slaine, was not certain, but only by coniecture how many two
thousand men, (for of so many consisted the foreward) in such a poursute might kill. And
to increase the number, hauing giuen ouer the execution, and returning to their stands,
they found many hidden in the vineyards and hedges, whom they slue. And Colonell
Medkerke beeing sent with his Regiment three miles farther to a cloyster, which he burnt
and spoyled, he found two hundred men there, which he put to the sword. The English
lost onely one Captaine Cooper, and a priuate souldier. The execution beeing past, the
Generall sent three parts of the armie three seurall waies to spoyle and burnt, so as the
countrie round about was on fire. They found good store of victuals and munition in
the campe, with some plate, rich apparell, and other booties, which they had left behind
them.
Thus the English armie returned to the Groine, bringing small comfort to the Spaniards
that were within it: and the next day the shipt their Ordinance, and then they set fire
vppon euery house in the base towne, and on the Cloister, so as they left not any one
standing. And on the eight of May, the English imbarked their armie without losse of
one man, which (had they not beaten the Spaniards at Puente de Burgos) they could
not possibly haue done, they hauing (as it seemed) an intent to charge the English when
they should imbarke: the Commissarie confessing, that the first night of their landing,
the Marquis of Seralba did write vnto the Earle of Altemira, the Earle of Andrada, and
to Terneis de Sentisso, to bring all the forces they could rayse, wherewith they might either
beseege the English in the base towne, if they tooke it, or lye betwixt them and
their imbarking place, and so fight with them vppon an aduantage, they hauing aboue
25000. souldiers vnder their commands.
The English armie leauing the Groine,English leaue the Groine. on the thirteenth of May, there came vnto
the Fleete the Earle of Essex, his brother Master VValter Deuereux, Sir Roger Williams,
Colonell generall of the foote, Sir Philip Butler, and Sir Edward Wingfield. The Earle
hauing put himselfe into that action, contrarie to the opinion of the world, and with the
hazard of his fortune, yet much to his honour. After which, the armie went and landed
at Penecha in Portugall, within shot of the castle. The enemie beeing fiue companies of
Spaniards (vnder the commaund of the Earle of Fuentes) sallyed out of the towne, and
came to the water side, as the English landed.
But the Earle of Essex, with his brother, and Sir Roger Williams hauing landed men
enough to make two troupes, they left one to go by the waters side, leading the other
ouer the sand-hilles: which the enemie discouering, they retired further into the land,
that they might haue the better meanes to passe away, yet they did it in such sort, as beeing
charged, they came to the push of the pike, where they slue an English Captaine:
These Spaniards beeing fledde, the English entred the towne, which was neither fortified
nor defended by any man.
The Generall summoned the Castle that night, which was held by a Portuguese,
called Antonio d' Aurid, who promised to yeeld it, so as he might bee assured, that Don
Antonio was landed, and so he did. Thither came some Friars and poore men to their
new king, promising within two dayes good supplies of horse and foote. Hauing stayd
at Penecha one day, the Generals resolued, that the armie should march by land to
Lisbone, vnder the conduct of Generall Norris, and that Generall Drake should meete

him in the riuer with the Fleete, that there should bee a companie left to guard the Castle,
and fiue in the shippes.
After which conclusion, hee marched with fourteene Regiments towards Lisbone,
commandement beeing giuen from the Generall, that no man should spoyle the countrie,
nor take any thing from a Portuguese, the which was very streightly obserued, so
as the souldiers grew to some want of victualles in their march, but vppon complaint
made vnto the King, it was better supplyed. In sixe dayes march the armie came to Lisbone,
without any incounter of the enemie, who was betwixt them and the cittie, but
they dislodged as they approched.
Beeing come to the suburbes of Lisbone,English armie comes to Lisbone. Sir Roger Williams, and Captaine Anthony
Wingfield with some thirtie shotte, scowred the streetes neere vnto the Towne, where
they found not any but old folkes and beggers, crying Viua el Rey Don Antonio, and
their houses shut vp, the inhabitants hauing carried much of their wealth into the town,
and fired some houses by the water side full of Corne, and other prouision, for that the
English should not make vse of it. The whole armie beeing quartred in the suburbes,
the souldiers beeing tyred with their sixe dayes march, and desirous of rest that night, the
enemie beeing aduertised thereof, sallyed foorth about one of the clocke, and came vppon
the English by three seuerall streetes, but especially vppon Collonell Brets quarter,
who beeing (as most of the Companies) at his rest, made all the hast hee could to draw
his men into armes, in which charge hee was slaine, with some other Captaines of his
Regiment: but there was such resistance made in all quarters, as they were suddenly put
to a foule retreate, and chased euen to the Cittie gates, where they loft many of their
best Commaunders: In this salley the Spaniards lost treble the number of the English,
and some of good qualitie.
During their march, Generall Drake came with the Fleete to Cascais, where hee entred
without any resistance, the Inhabitants beeing fledde with their goods to the mountaines,Cascais entred by the English.
but the Generall sent a Portuguese vnto them, to offer them all fauour, if they
would acknowledge their king, and supply the wants of his armie: which offer they willingly
embraced, sending two chiefe men to signifie their loyaltie to Don Antonio, and
their loue to the English. Whereuppon the Generall landed his Companies, but the castle
was held still by 65. Spaniards.
The day after the Spaniards salley, Generall Norris called a Councell, to aduise whether
it were fit to attend there for the horse and foote, which the King of Portugall had
promised, and to send some conuenient troupes to Cascais to fetch their Ordinance and
munition, which was with their shippes. The opinions of the Commaunders were diuers,
some fedde with a vaine hope of Don Antonio, thought it best to stay there, and to
send some three thousand men for the Ordinance. Others (despayring of all succours
from Portugall) perswaded to march away, and not to stay vppon any vaine hopes. The
Generall beeing loth to haue an imputation layed vppon him for his too great hast, or
to loose any more time vppon don Antonio's promises, tould them, that although the
expedition of Portugall was not the onely desseigne of their iourney, but an aduenture,
the good successe whereof might get them great wealth, and much honour, wherin they
had done so much, as whatsoeuer happened, it could not blemish their credits and reputations.
Yet in regard of the Kings last promise, that hee should haue that night three thousand
men armed of his Countrie, hee would not dislodge that night. And if they came,
that he might send the like number for his munition, and resolue to trie his fortune for
the Towne. If they came not, he thought it not fit to diuide his forces, by sending any
to Cascais, knowing how boldly they had sallyed foorth the day before, and that there
were more souldiers armed within the towne, then was in their campe. And that before
their men could returne from Cascais, they expected more supplies: for the duke
of Braganca, and Don Francisco of Toledo were attended with great succours: whereuppon
he concluded to march away the next morning, if the promised supplies came
not that night: yet all the Portugueses which came vnto their king, would not make a
cornet of horse, and two hundred foote.

The Generall attended the effect of the Kings promise vnto the last houre, and hee
sought to perswade him to stay eight daies longer, in which time he might haue ingaged
himselfe, and receiued an affront, attempting a towne that was well fortified, and great
troupes of men in it. So as the next day, seeing no Portugueses appeare to ioyne with
them,English armie retires from Lisbone. as was promised, the English Generall gaue order to march away, the Earle of
Essex, and Sir Roger Williams making a stand, vntill that the whole armie was drawne into
field, and so they marched out of the suburbes: Captaine Anthony Wingfield, and Richard
Wingfield, beeing in the reere of them with some shot: after which the Battalions
marched in order that night to Cascais. In their march, that day the Galleys of Lisbone
did somewhat annoy them, (their way lying along the riuer) and followed them vntill
they were past Saint Iulians, spending many shot, but doing little or no harme. The
horse-men followed them afarre off, and cut off many sicke men, which were not able to
hold march, hauing no carriages for them.
Hauing beene two dayes at Cascais, they were aduertised by a Friar, that the Spaniards
came marching strongly towards them, and were at Saint Iulians, wherewith the
Earle of Essex, and the Generals were much pleased, desiring nothing more then to
fight with them:Challenge sent by the English General to the Spanish. Whereuppon the English General sent away a messenger with a trumpet
that night, who carried a challenge to the Spanish Generall, wherein he gaue them
the lye, for that they reported, that the English had retired disorderly and with feare
from Lisbone, challenging him to meete him the next morning with his whole armie, if
he durst attend his comming, and there to trie the iustnesse of their quatrell by battell:
by whom also the Earle of Essex (preferring the honour of his countrie, before all other
respects, sent a challenge to any one of his qualitie, that would meete in the head of their
Battailes, single, or with more companie, to trie their fortunes, offering assurance for
their returne, and honorable vsage.
The English Generall put his armie in a readinesse by three of the clocke in the morning,
and marched to the place where they incamped: but they had dislodged in the night
in great disorder and feare, as the Generall was the next day informed: so as the troupes
followed them to Lisbone, but could not get any answer to his letters, they threatening
to hang him, for that he presumed to bring such a message: but fearing the like measure
to their prisoners, they sent him away without answer.
The armie beeing come to Cascais, the Castle was summoned, where the Captaine
promised to yeeld it vppon sight of the Cannon, and not otherwise. Whereuppon the
Generall caused three or foure peeces of batterie to bee brought, where after the first
volley,Castle of Cascais yeelded to the English. they compounded to depart with their Armes did baggage, he had in the Castle
one Cannon, two Culuerins, one Basiliske, and three or foure field-peeces, three-score
and fiue souldiers, with good store of victuals and munition, which hee might haue kept
longer then the English had any intent to stay: the armie beeing imbarked and readie to
set sayle, the fort was blowne vp.
Whilest they lay there in the roade, the Fleete, in sixe dayes, fetched in to the number
of three-score Hulkes, laden with Spanish commodities, as it seemed, for the Kings
prouision, and were going for Lisbone: their chiefe lading was corne, Masts, Cables,
Copper and Waxe: among which, some were of great burthen, very well built for sayling,
hauing no great lading in them, and therefore it was thought they were brought
to supply the Kings decayed Nauie. Into the which the English that were in flie-boates
were shipped, and the flie-boates sent home, with an offer of Corne for their hire. And
then they sent shippes to fetch their men which they had left at Penecha, where as the
enemy entred presently.
There were nine Galleys sent from Andalusia, to strengthen the riuer of Lisbone, who
in their returne, set vppon some shippes that were becalmed, and farre from the Fleete,
but they did no great harme. The Fleet, by reason of the wind, went to the Islands of
Bayonne,Vigo taken by the English. where they landed two thousand men, beeing all that were able to fight,
and marched to the Towne of Vigo, which beeing entred by Captaine Anthony
Wingfield, hee found the streetes full of Barricadoes, but not any one to defend
them: for hee found but one man in the towne, they beeing fledde away to Bayonne:

the Generall with some others, beeing entred into Vigo, they sent some Captaines out
to spoyle, and burne the Countrie, which they did seuen or eight miles in length. In the
towne they found not any thing, but wine, all their goods beeing carried away, and in
the morning the Colonell generall hauing drawne the Companies out of the towne, he
caused euery house to be set on fire, and then they imbarked againe, and returned home
into England.
The Duke of Sauoy had an intent to beseege Geneua, which he pretended to bee his,
in which attempt he craued ayde from the King of Spaine his father-in-law,King of Spaine sends forces to the Duke of Sauoy to beseege Geneua. who sent vnto
him out of the Dutchie of Milan, Pyrrho Malaezzi with fiue thousand foot, who went
vnto him with all speed: from Naples hee had Alexander Sforza with a good number of
horse, and Paul Sforza with foote: and from the countrey of Cremona, William of Lodron
with fiue thousand Germaines, and hee obtayned the Marquis of Saint Martin
from the Duke of Ferrara, to bee Lieutenant generall to the Duke of Sauoy, to whome
he was allyed, furnishing him also with money, so as it seemed rather the King of Spaines
action, then the Duke of Sauoys.
The King of Spaine aspiring (as it seemed) to the Crowne of France,An. 1590. whereof he had
taken vppon him the name of Protectour,Pretext of the King of Spaine to make warre in France. tooke now a new cloake to make warre,
which was in the name of his eldest daughter, Donna Izabella Clara Eugenia, whome he
had by Elizabeth of Valois his third wife, daughter to Henry the second of France, pretending
the Dutchie of Brittanie to bee fallen vnto her by lawfull right and succession,
by the death of King Henry the third, her Vncle by the mothers side. Vppon this pretext
hee sent certaine troupes thither, seeking to dismember it from the Crowne of
France, to the which it was incorporate, by the death of the Ladie Anna of Brittanie, accompting
the descendants from the sayd Ladie Anne, who was promised to Maximilian
Arch-duke of Austria, and afterwards Emperour, but married to Charles the eight,
the French King, who dyed without heires, and then shee was married to Lewis the
twelfth, by whome shee had one daughter married to Francis the first, father to Henry
the second his successour, who had by Catherine de Medicis foure sonnes, all which dyed
without children, and three daughters, Elizabeth third wife to the King of Spaine, Claude
married to Charles Duke of Lorraine, and Marguerite wife to Henry the fourth King of
France and Nauarre.
All the fore-sayd children beeing descended in the direct feminine line from the Lady
Anne of Brittanie, their Grand-mother, so as the sonnes hauing no lawfull heires, the
succession of of the sayd Dutchie of Brittanie did belong vnto the Lady Elizabeth of Valois,
the eldest of King Henryes two daughters, and mother to the sayd Infanta: the which,
according to the Lawe, the King her father would maintaine, should represent her deceased
mother: for that the sayd Dutchie beeing but a fee of Fraunce, may descend vnto
the daughters as well as to the sonnes, as appeareth in the sayd Dutchesse Anne, daughter
to Francis the last Duke of Brittanie, who brought it to Charles the eight, and Lewis
the twelfth. The French answered, that Dutchies, which were but fees, and held by homage
of the Crowne, beeing once incorporated, can bee no more dismembred, with
many more allegations, as you may reade in the French.
The King of Spaine could not forget the affront hee had receiued the last yeare by the
English in Portugall, hee sought how to bee reuenged, if not of the whole State in
generall, yet of priuate Merchants, whose liuing consisted, and wholly depended vpon
Trafficke into diuers parts, and hearing that the English Merchants had great trade
within the Streights of Gibraltar, to Venice, Constantinople, Alexandria, and other
places of commerce, hee resolued to interrupt them, and intercept them if he could by
any possible meanes: Whereuppon hee gaue charge vnto certaine Galleys to lye
continually in the Streights to attend their passage.
It happened this yeare,Fight betwixt the Spanish gallies and English ships. that there were tenne good English shippes, and well
fraught, comming from diuers parts, mette together at the Streights, and were bending
home-ward. These shippes comming neere to the mouth of the Streights, hard
vppon the coast of Barbarie they descryed twelue tall Galleys, wonderfully well
manned, and gallantly appoynted, beeing commaunded by Andrew Doria for the

King of Spaine: who on the foure and twentith day of Aprill, in the morning, bare vp
with the shippes, and waued them amaine for the King of Spaine, and the English did
the like for the Queene of England: after which, the fight beganne, one of the shippes at
her first shot raked away all the men of one side of a Galley, and so pierced it, as it was
readie to sinke, but the fight continued very furious, for the space of sixe howers. In the
meane time, whilest they were in the hottest of this fight, there came in two Flemings
to the Fleete, who seeing of what strength the Galleys were, the one of them strucke
her sayles, and was presently taken by the Galleys: the other Flemming was also readie
to yeeld, if the trumpetter of that shippe had not threatened to kill the Pilote at the
Helme, if he did not speedily put off to the English fleete, and take part with them, by
which meanes they were preserued from the Spaniards, whereas the other was taken
basely and cowardly. After this long and furious fight the English shippes escaped, for
the Gallies were so torne, as they were forced to flie into harbour, for that some of them
were readie to sinke, neither durst they come any more foorth, notwithstanding that
the shippes lay becalmed in the streight.
The Catholike King finding himselfe ouer-burthened, and weakened with the
warres which he had at one instant maintayned against his enemies, his treasure beeing
exhausted, and hee wanting money to make his necessarie prouisions both for Flanders,
and France vppon all occurrents, hee commaunded the Duke of Sessa, who was newly
come Ambassadour to Rome, to succeede the Earle of Oliuares, who was gone Viceroy
into Sicily, to intreate his Holinesse to grant him part of the reuenues of the spirituall
liuings in Spaine, leauing vnto the Priests a competent liuing according vnto euery
mans qualitie, but this demaund was not allowed of, nor held conuenient in the Court
of Rome.
This yeare there was a memorable fight at the Ilands of the Acores betwixt the king
of Spaines Armado,Fight betwixt the Reuenge and the Armado of Spaine. and one of the Queene of Englands shippes called the Reuenge.
The Lord Thomas Haward, second sonne to the Duke of Norfolke, and now Earle of
Suffolke, going foorth with sixe of the Queenes shippes, sixe victuallers, and some pinaces
to attend the West Indian Fleete in their returne, lying at one of the Ilands of the
Acores, they were aduertised of the approach of the Spanish armado, (beeing three and
fiftie sayle of men of warre, commaunded by Don Alphonso Bacan, brother to the Marquis
of Santa Cruz) the which were presently in sight, many of the English beeing then
on shoare, to furnish themselues with ballast, fresh water, and other necessaries, so as
their shippes were light for want of ballast, and halfe their men sicke and vnseruiceable
for fight.
The Spanish Fleete beeing couered by an Iland, were come so neere, as they had
scarce any time to weigh their anchors, yet some were faine to slippe their Cables, and to
set sayle. Sir Richard Greenfield (who was Vice-admirall in the Reuenge) wayed last, staying
to recouer her men that were in the Iland, which otherwise had beene lost, and not
able to recouer the wind, as the Admirall, and the rest had with some difficultie done, he
was perswaded by the Master and some others to cast about, and to trust to the sayling
of the shippe: but Sir Richard would by no meanes turne head to the enemie, protesting
that he would rather dye, then dishonour himselfe, his Countrie, and her Maiesties ship.
But he could not force through them, as he thought, but was boarded of either side by
their huge Galleons.
The fight beganne at three of the clocke in the after noone, and continued very furious
all that euening. The Spanish shippes were full of souldiers, in the English there
were not any but Marriners, and some few voluntarie Gentlemen, with their seruants.
They made many assaults, thinking to force her with their multitudes, but they were stil
repulst. The fight continuing all the day, and some howers in the night, many of her
men were slain and hurt, and one of the great Galleons, with the Admirall of the Hulks
sunke, and a great slaughter made in diuers other Spanish shippes. The Spanish shippes
which attempted to board the Reuenge, as they were beaten off, others came in their places,
there beeing neuer lesse then two mightie Galleons by her side, so as shee had beene

assailed by fifteene seuerall Armados, yet at the breake of day they were more willing to
hearken to a composition then to make any new attempt.
At the breake of day the Reuenge saw none but enemies, nor any hope of reliefe:
their poulder was spent to the last barrell, their Pikes were broken, forty of their best men
slaine, and most of the rest hurt. In the beginning of the fight they had but a hundred
sound men, and nintie sixe lay sicke vpon the ballast. And on the other side the Spanish
ships were still supplied with soldiers from the other squadrons, and with all kinde of
armes and munition. The Reuenge hauing her masts beaten ouer board, her takcle cut
a sunder, and in a manner made euen with the water, there being nothing left aboue head
to make defence. Sir Richard Greenefield, finding himselfe vnable to make any more resistance,
hauing endured the assaults of so many seuerall ships, and (as it was thought)
eight hundred shot of great Ordinance, and that he and his ship must needs be taken by
the enemies, being in a ring round about her: he commanded the maister Gunner (beeing
a resolute man) to sincke her, to the end the Spaniards might reape no glory of that
victory, seeing they could not take her in fifteene houres, with fifty three ships, and about
ten thousand men, perswading the company to yeeld themselues to the mercy of God,
and to none else: And as they had like valiant men repulsed so many enemies, so they
should not now blemish their honours by prolonging their liues for a few houres. The
Gunner was willing with diuerse others, but the Captaine and Maister diswaded him,
pretending that the Spaniards would willingly entertaine a composition, and that there
were diuerse valiant men (whose wounds were not mortal) which might hereafter do their
Prince and country good seruice, assuring him withall, that the Spaniards could neuer
recouer the shippe, hauing sixe foote water in hold, three shot vnder water, and so weakly
stopt, as shee must needes sinke with the first working of the sea. But Sir Richard could
not bee remooued from his resolution. Wherefore the Maister of the Reuenge was
conuayed aboard the Generall Don Alphonso Bassan, who (finding no man willing to
enter her, fearing they should be all blowne vp) yeelded their liues should bee saued, the
company sent into England, and the better sort to pay reasonable ransoms, and to be free
from the Galleys and imprisonment. Wherevnto hee yeelded the more willingly, as well
to auoyde a greater mischiefe, as to recouer Sir Richard Greenfield, whom hee seemed to
honor and admire for his great valour.
This answer beeing returned,The Reuenge yeeled to the Spaniards by composition. most of them left Sir Richard Greenfield and the Gunner,
who beeing desperate would haue killed himselfe. Don Alphonso Bacan sent vnto Sir
Richard to remooue out of his shippe, beeing vnsauory like a slaughter house, with bloud
and dead bodies. Sir Richard answered, that hee might doe with his body what hee list,
for he regarded it not. The Generall vsed him with all humanitie, and tryed all meanes
for his recouery, much commending his valour, and lamenting the danger wherein hee
was, beeing a rare thing to see one shippe make head against so many huge and great
Armado's.
There were slaine and drowned in this fight neere a thousand Spaniards, and two speciall
Commanders.^osse of Spaniards at the fight. Don Lewis of Saint Iohn, and Don George de Prunaria of Malaga;
The Admirall of the Hulkes and the Assention of Seuile were sunke by the Reuenge,
one recouered Saint Michaels, and did sinke there, and a fourth ranne a ground to saue
her men. It is said, that Sir Richard dyed the second or third day aboard the Generall,
and was much lamented. The rest of the Queenes shippes did not ingage themselues
so farre in the fight, the reasons were. They were but sixe shippes in all, whereof two
were small: the Reuenge was past recouery: the Iland of Flores was on the one side,
and fifty three Spanish shippes on the other, full of Soldiars: halfe the English were
sick, and not seruiceable, the shippes fowle and wanting ballast, hauing beene sixe moneths
at sea, so as if they had all entred the fight, they had all beene lost. Notwithstanding
the Lord Thomas would haue entred among their Squadrons, but the rest would
not yeeld to it, and the Maister of his shippe offered to leape into the sea, rather then
to conduct her Maiesties shippes to bee a prey to the enemy, where there was no hope
eyther of defence or victory. A shippe of the Queenes wherein Maister Thomas Vauasor

now Knight Marshall commanded) continued two houres in fight, as neere the Reuenge
as shee could, but beeing in danger to bee compassed in by the Spanish squadrons, hee
cleered himselfe with great difficulty.
Some dayes after the fight, the English prisoners beeing disperced in the Spanish
ships, there arose a great storme, so as the whole fleete (Indians and others) were disperced,
they beeing newly come vnto them;The Reuenge cast away with many Spanish ships. of the which there were foureteene saile, and
the Reuenge, with two hundred Spaniards in her, cast away vpon the Iland of Saint
Michael. There were fifteene or sixteene ships of warre more cast away vpon the other
Ilands; and of a hundred saile and odde, expected that yeare in Spaine from the Indies,
there were aboue three score and ten lost in seuerall stormes; the Spaniards confest that
there were ten thousand men cast away in that tempest.
This yeare happened that miserable and lamentable condition of the Arragonois,Arragonois spoiled of their ancient priuiledges by the King.
especially of them of Saragoca, the chiefe citty of the realme. From whom the King of
Spaine (whether by lawfull or vnlawfull meanes I will not iudge) tooke, or rather pulled
away violently their liberties and ancient priuiledges, after this manner. The King had
giuen vnto Don Iohn of Austria, his base brother, one Iohn de Soto, to serue him as a Secretarie,
a man by nature tending to great matters, to raise his Lord and Maister to a superlatiue
greatnesse, and by the meanes of Pope Pius the fift, to aduance him to the
realme of Tunes.Motiues of the bad vsage of the Arragono^^ for their liberties. The which beeing suspect and displeasing vnto the King (fearing the
diminution of his presented Monarchie) after that hee had well obserued his dessiegnes
and actions, it was thought fit to call home Soto from D. Iohns seruice and to substitute
Escouedo in his place. In the beginning this Secretary Escouedo did serue his Lord Don
Iohn well, to the Kings good liking: but in time they discouered plainly, that hee troad
in the same pathe that Soto had done, entertaining secret correspondencies in the Court
of Rome, for his Maisters aduancement by the Popes poursute, who possest him with
an Imagination of the Crowne of England, the which did much displease the King,
although it were no preiudice to him. Don Iohn beeing returned soone after out of
Italy into Spaine, to receiue his commission and Instructions for the gouernment of the
Netherlands, he parted well satisfied and full of hope of this Conquest of England. Beeing
come into the Netherlands, and hauing ratified the pacification of Gant, made by
the Generall Estates, the Prince and the particular Estates of Holland, Zeland, and their
associates, with the Estates of Brabant, Flanders, Arthois, Henault, etc. by which pacification
all strange Souldiers should depart the countrie: so as Don Iohn thought, (and
such was his first and most assured desseigne) to make vse of the sayd Soldiers, in their
retreate, to execute this exploite of England. But whether the Generall Estates of the
Lowe Countries (who had then made an alliance with England) discouered his intent,
or not: when as hee could not finde meanes to retire his souldiers by sea, for want of
shippes, which they refused him, that desseigne of England turned into smoake. Notwithstanding
that the Pope would haue assisted him, as well with money, as with Bulls,
granting him the inuestituure of that Realme, to hold it of the Popes Sea. The which the
King of Spaine (without whose priuitie this businesse was in the beginning managed)
(hauing himselfe a greedy desire to that realme, as did afterwards appeare) could secretly
crosse.
Don Iohn beeing much grieued in heart at this escape, yet seeming still very obsequious
and dutifull to the King, hauing in some sort caused the Spaniards and Italians to retire,
but not far off, and keeping the Germaine Collonels at his deuotion, and not causing
them to retire, hee afterwards seazed vpon the Castle of Namur, whereby all his
practises were discouered, and many letters were intercepted, written by him and Escouedo
his Secretarie: Wherevpon hee was declared an enemy to the Lowe Countries.
Then hee beegan to treate secretly, and to make priuate alliances in France,
with the Duke of Guise, all without the King of Spaines priuitie and knowledge,
the which did mooue him much, obseruing these courses of Don Iohn and his Secretary
Escouedo: whereof Antonio de Vargas, Ambassador for the King of Spaine in France,
aduertised Antonio Perez, Secretary of State to the sayd King, who presently acquainted
his maister therewith. Among other things, that Don Iohn said, that hee had rather seeke

his fortune in France with 6000. foote, and 2000. horse, then to stay any longer in the
gouernment of the Netherlands. On the other side, Don Iohn by his letters which hee
did write into Spaine, made strange complaints, full of bitternesse and despaire, yea
with threates; if they suffered him to languish any longer in that estate: and his letters
were seconded by Escouedo, who wrote to Antonio Perez, whom he held to be a friend to
Don Iohn and himselfe; but hee discouered all their secrets vnto the King; as it appeared
by letters written from Perez vnto the King, and noted in the margent with the
Kings owne hand.
During all this businesse, Escouedo beeing sent for into Spaine, the King resolues to
haue him made away, either by murther or poyson, as well for the great liberty and boldnesse
hee vsed in his writing, as for the strange speeches he sometimes vttered, which were
very displeasing vnto the King, taking for a coulour a certaine proposition made by him
to fortifie and man the rock of Magro, and of some 6000. Ducats imployed by him,
contrary to the Kings intent. In the end, after that he had conferred with the Marquis of
Velez, and duly considered of all Escouedos practises: holding it a dangerous matter to
send him back to Don Iohn, the King found it expedient to haue him slaine. So Escouedo
returning home to his lodging in the night, he was murthered in the streete by Garcia of
Arres, and his confederates, at the induction of Antonio Perez, who had receiued commandement
from the King. Hauing beene formerly concluded betwixt the King and
Perez, that if the murtherers should chance to bee apprehended, that Perez, taking the
fact wholy vpon himselfe should flie into Arragon, whereas the King might more easily
defend him then in Castile. Escouedo beeing murthered in this manner, the fact began to
be discouered. The widow and her sonnes made their complaints against Perez. The
King receiued them into his Councell of State, but hee sent them not before their Ordinary
Indge, himselfe giuing the whole knowledge of the fact to the President of Castile,
and commanding him to talke with Escouedos sonnes, and to the Secretary Mathew
Vasques, who presented their complaint, to the end they might bee silent. But all the Presidents
admonitions were of no force, yea hee made them more violent in their complaints.
Perez aduised the King to suffer this fact to come to a triall of lawe, with a moderate
and slow poursute, yet not to decree any thing, or else that he would giue him leaue
to retire from Court; the which the King tooke in ill part, promising him by the faith of
a Knight, neuer to abandon him, and that hee would keepe him in his seruice. But Perez
in the meane time saw the storme approching, whereof hee was the more assured after
the death of the Marquis of Velez, who had beene a liuely witnesse vnto him. The King
seeing him perplexed, and in distresse for this death, did confirme this promise againe vnto
him more strictly. In the meane time they doubled their complaints, the which (in
like maner tending to the dishonor, and to charge the Princesse of Eboly) the complainants
framed at large by writing, and presented it to the King, yet for all this hee gaue no
sentence: but being prest by Vasques, to whom he had begun to discouer himselfe, as appeared
by the answer which hee made him in writing, coppyed by Perez, with a postscript
of the Kings.
In the end the King commanded his Confessor to reconcile the Princesse and Perez,
with Vasques: wherevnto the Princesse would not giue eare, finding her selfe wronged,
for that she held him vnworthy to conferre with her. The which did wonderfully discontent
Perez, not daring to mooue her therewith, for that he held himselfe bound vnto her
seruice, for the fauours he had receiued from her. And seeing that by their reiterated complaints,
notwithstanding the Kings promise in the faith of a Knight, they pursued him
with all violence: he besought the King, at the least, to do him this fauour, that hee might
retire himselfe. The king finding himselfe wronged on both sides; by the Princesse, for that
she would not reconcile her selfe with Vasques, as hee had commanded; and with Perez
for that he would retire himselfe. After that hee had consulted with his Confessor, and
with the Earle of Barayas, he caused the Princesse and Perez to be committed to prison,
vpon a coulour, that by this imprisonment hee should force them to bee reconciled, the
King himselfe beeing a spectator of this apprehension, made by his commandement, the
which was in the yeare 1579.

The next day, the King sent to visit Perez wife, and to comfort her, wishing her not to be
troubled for her husband. Hee in like manner sent his Confessor to visit Perez, seeming
to haue a care that hee should be well intreated. After that he had beene detained some
moneth in prison, hee sent him with a certaine guarde home to his house, where he commanded
Perez that he should sweare to Don Roderigo Manuel, by the faith of a Gentleman,
that he would continue friend with Vasques: Perez remitting his splene (yet hauing
the knife neere his throte) yeelded therevnto: and so continued in his house, bearing
the charge thereof, vntill the yeare 1585. and receiuing no allowance nor fee. At the end
of which time (to the end the blind should not see any thing) hee was with other Secretaries
put to the Visita (which is a lawe to examine the actions of such as they meane to
intrap.)La visita in Spaine is the law of fisiing.
The charges of this Visita were more honourable to Perez then hurtfull. They
did consist of two points, the one concerning the Kings secrets, whereof hee aduertised
the King, for that he would not discouer them, seeing that they meant to force him thervnto;
hauing alwayes faithfully acquit himselfe in keeping them in his bosome, as the
King had trusted him. Hee in like manner informed the Confessor, shewing vnto him
for his discharge, a writing of the Kings owne hand: wherevpon the Confessor did forbid
him to purge himselfe by his Kings writing: wherevnto he obayed, for that he would
not diuulge his secrets: suffering himselfe to bee condemned in a fine of thirty thousand
Ducats, suspension of his office, two yeares imprisonment, and then to be banished eight
yeares. The which Perez endured by the perswasions and goodly promises of this Father
Confessor.
This condemnation was made by the strangest Act that hath beene seene, whereof
the Councell had no knowledge, neither was it signed, nor any iudiciall sentence pronounced.
The Act beeing insinuated to Perez, being lead from his house to the Castle,
his goods before seazed on were freed,Trick of a false Monke. and it was told him that hee should not performe
the said Act, so as hee would deliuer the papers and Instructions which hee had
written vnto the King, and from the King to him: that by this meanes hee might wholy
discharge the King, and lay all vppon Perez owne head, wherein consisted the end of
their proceeding. For there were yet two secret points in the sentence: the one was,
they would make Perez guilty of Escouedos death: the other, that hee had no meanes
to complaine of force and violence in his Country of Arragon: besides an accusation
of ten thousand Ducats wherewith they charged him, whereof by many liuely reasons,
and by a note of the Kings owne hands hee was discharged. Which note hauing beene
deliuered into the Confessors hand, hee read and retained it, and afterwards denyed
the hauing it.
When they came to execute the said Acte, Perez thinking to preuent it, fled into a
Church for liberty (fearing that his enemies would murther him in prison) from
whence notwithstanding hee was drawne, but hauing obtained a sentence to his aduantage,
this execution was stopt. Notwithstanding hee was afterwards taken againe, and
carried to the Castle of Turnegano, where hee was cruelly intrested by one Torres of
Auila a Licentiat, who kept him ninety dayes in Irons, from the sight of his wife
and children, who were in like manner committed to prison; to the end they should
not demand Iustice, as the wife had done once at Lisbone, vppon the Kings promising
by the faith of a Knight, the which was done to the end they might the better
come to the Kings papers and her husbands, which this Friar Diego Chanes hunted
so after, knowing how much they did import to free the King. To attaine vnto the
which hee had already written two letters (by the meanes of the Earle of Barayas
President of Castile) to Perez wife, sending her word, that there was no other meanes
to see her husband in liberty, then in yeelding vp the sayd papers: and in so dooing,
that both shee and her husband should bee deliuered out of prison, wherevnto shee
resisted couragiously, refusing statly to giue them. So as in the end her husband did
write a note vnto her with his owne bloud (so straightly was he kept) that she should deliuer
them, the which she did, yet by a diuine instinct shee reserued some, sending them
in two cofers to the said Confessor, beeing at Monzon, with the Keyes, the which were

deliuered into the Kings owne hands by him that had charge of the cofers; by the deliuerie
of which papers, the Lady onely was set at liberty.
At the Kings retnrne from Monzon, the papers beeing read, Perez was somewhat inlarged
in the towne of Madrid (but not without a further meaning) for the space of
foure moneths, hauing leaue to bee visited, and the weeke before Easter to go to Masse,
but this was a short ioy, for Escouedos sonne came to renew his old complaint, and Perez
was againe sent to the Castle to prison, and soone after hee was called into the Court:
where beeing examined vpon this complaint, hee continued faithfull and constant vnto
the King; refusing to declare any thing according to his commandements and promises;
aduertising him notwithstanding what the euent might be of such kinde of proceedings:
but all was in vaine; for it was ordred that hee should answer within ten dayes, vnto the
cheife points of a processe, which had lasted ten yeares. At this examination the Confessor
aduised him, to confesse Escouedos murther, but not to declare the motiues and
reasons; which Perez did not approoue. But rather, to the end the King might bee discharged,
to compound with Escouedos children, who were the parties interressed, the
which was effected at Perez charge, for twenty thousand Ducats, and it was presently
paid. All this did not serue the turne, for the President Roderigo Vasques, a Kinsman to Escouedo,
seeing that Perez could auoyde all stormes, wrote vnto the King that hee should
consider well of the composition which Perez had made, by the which the world did
murmure and surmise, that his Maiestie had caused him to do it. And therefore his regall
authority required, that hee should declare, or cause Perez declare the reasons of this
accord; whereby his Maiesty should stop all mens mouths, and Perez should bee better
discharged. Wherevpon the king did write vnto Perez, to tell the reason why, by his commandement
and for his seruice, hee had caused Escouedo to be slaine. This note and command
from the king, made the greatest to murmure; for (said they) if the king hath commanded
him to murther Escouedo, what reason, or what reparation do they pretend? Is it
now time, after twelue yeares since it was done, to demand the cause? yea a Cardinall, and
the Popes Legat spake vnto the Confessor in Perez behalfe: To whom he answered, that
they should rest satisfied, and that what had beene done, was to giue contentment to the
President Roderigo Vasques, and that all should be well. As in like manner Father Salinas a
preaching Friar, discoursed sufficiently in a Sermon which he made in the kings Chappel,
in Iustification of Perez, but all was without effect, the Confessor holding it a sinne to
demand Iustice: Notwithstanding Perez remained firme and constant, and being examined
vpon the Kings note, he would not declare any thing, for he did not easily giue credit
therevnto: wherevpon the Iudge tooke occasion to put Perez to the rack (although his
minde were sufficiently tortured, with the confusion of a precedent order) yet relying
vpon the Kings first instruction and commandement,An. 1591. he continued constant, and endured
the torture,Arragon action. euen to the effusion of his bloud, yet in the end hee was forced to declare the
motiue causes of the murther of Escouedo, with the circumstances, producing the Kings
originall letters to that end, and an Autentike witnesse, who was yet liuing: whose testimony
they receiued, but all making for Perez, they supprest his deposition, and the Kings
billet, and did not produce it. Perez finding by all these violences and out-rages, that they
would draw his life into question,Peres escapes out of prison, and flies into Arragon. he found no better means, then to seeke how he might
escape out of prison in Castile: as he did by the assistance of his wife, and of Giles de Mefa,
a Gentleman of Arragon, his kinsman, in the night, the Thursday before Easter: running
thirty leagues post, without any rest, vntill he came into Arragon: for the which his
wife and children smarted, for they were cast into prison, with a friend of Perez, which
cruelty was intollerable before God, as in such euents, whereas wise men are dombe,
God makes fooles to speake, and to tell Kings and Princes the truth, to their confusion.
For Thio Martino the kings foole, and a natural, hearing that the chiefe in Court reioyeed
that Perez had so escaped, asking the King what that Perez was, for whom euery man did
so much reioyce? Surely said he, he was not guilty, had therefore Sir, be thou also glad.
These words by a foole were obser^ed by the wisest. It seemed that imprisonment of Perez
wife and children, proceeded from hatred, or to stop their iust complaints, or else that
the Confessor sought to be reuenged of them, for that the said Lady had once charged

him that insteed of a Confessor, hee was a Soueraigne Iudge, teaching him what was
written of the poore widdow in the holy Scripture. And also for that which Do^^a
Gregoria Perez their daughter, after a long pursute, spake with great courage and griefe
of heart, vnto the President Rodrigo Vasques, that she was come with her yong Brethren
aud Sisters, to the end that without making them to languish any longer in misery, hee
should make hast to suck vp their bloud, and that they were come to that end, desiring
rather to dye at once, then they should thus suck their blouds by degrees. Wherewith
the President was no lesse terrified, then the Confessor was at the Mothers words. Perez
hauing recouered Arragon with great difficultie, beeing much broken with the Racke,
and his long and miserable imprisonment, hee stayed some time at Calatajub, where
hee retired himselfe into a Monasterie. There were priuate letters sent to a Knight of
that towne, without any Act, or sufficient warrant, to draw him from thence: the which
not able to effect, beeing hindered by the religious men of that Conuent, hee gaue him
a Monkes Sell for his prison. Perez did write from this place vnto the King, but all was
in vaine; for vpon new complaints and accusations, hee was drawne out of this Conuent
by the Kings expresse commandement (not without some mutinie of the townesmen)
and lead to Saragoca, from whence hee did importune the King with new letters,
sending a religious man expresly, with good instructions of all matters. This religious
man spake vnto the King, who gaue him good words: but hee was not welcome to
the reuered father the Kings Confessor. But nothing could helpe him, to stay these
pursuites begunne: or else God would haue the truth knowne to all the world, the
which some priuate mens mallice sought to suppresse.
Perez seeing that hee preuailed nothing, hee had recourse to his papers, letters, and
instructions, as well from the King, as from some others, which had beene kept safe by
his wiues industrie: whereof hee made a collection, decifering the whole estate of his
businesse, and made a Booke, the which hee presented vnto the Iustice: whereby his
aduersaries seeing themselues confounded, and that hee should be absolutely discharged,
they inuented an other meanes to intrappe him: which was that the King reseruing all
his rights, should desist from this action against Perez; and that they would charge him
to haue ill acquitted his duty to his Prince. Although that this seperation of the cause
was repugnant to the customes of Arragon, and that the King might not doe it: yet
they gaue it forth that they had instructions, impugning them of Perez, the which was
alledged wholy against the Kings authority, to the blemish of his reputation, and contempt
of his writing, the which Perez, neither in prison, nor out, for the onely respect he
bare vnto the King, would euer shew, but onely at this last charge, where hee was forced
to make vse of them, least he should fall into the like inconuenience that Piso had done,
who would not iustifie himselfe of Germanicus death, by the writings of Tiberius Caesar,
who had commanded him: Perez discharge beeing the more receiuable, for that hee did
make euery man know by liuely reasons, what had mooued the King to doe it. Perez
enemies seeing there was no aduantage to bee gotten of him before the Soueraigne
Iudge, they drew him to the seate of the Inquests of Arragon, where as the King is both
Indge and party. There he was examined vpon the old Artlcles, the fift day after the separation,
and also vpon two new points: by the which in their Interrogatories they did
obiect against him, that when as he heard the French King did prosper, hee reioyced, and
contrarywise hee was sad, when as he heard of the King of Spaines good successe. Moreouer
that he had a desire to retire himselfe into Berne, or into Holland and Zeland. To
whom he answered, that they ought not to search into the secret Cabinet of God, who
alone knowes the hearts of men, protesting of the force and violence they offred him, to
the preiudice of the Kings seruice: Offring yet to produce more Instructions before any
third person, whom it should please the King to name, and especially before the Archbishop
of Saragoca: But this offer was not allowed, nay not any one durst deale in his businesse,
no not his owne Aduocate, hearing the threats of the Marquis of Almenare, who
had corrupted some witnesses vpon Perez retreate into Holland.
Yet this Inquest could not worke out any thing to preiudice Perez: then his aduersaries
tooke a new resolution, to deliuer him ouer to the Inquisition, vppon

those witnesses which had beene suborned by the Marquis of Almenare, touching his
te^eate into Holland, accusing him also of Inchantment. This forged Act of the Marquis,
was censured throughout the realme, and euery man would take knowledge thereof,
who found it to be such, as it was nothing preiudiciall to Peres: yea the Salmedine
of Saragossa (which is the supreame Magistrate of the towne) was afterwards committed
to prison, for that he had receiued the depositions of these false witnesses: wherby
all the people and Estates of Arragon, did see with what passion and spleene they did
proceed against Peres:Peres put into the Inquisition. and would haue them iudge definitiuely, whether he were guilty
or not, the which if they refused to doe, then said they, Peres cause was good. Notwithstanding
the Officers of the Inquisition, (contrary to the priuiledges of the manifestation,
and other rights of the realme) came vpon the fiue and twenty of May, that yeare
1591. and tooke him out of the prison, leading him to the Inquisition; but within foure
houres after, the Inquisitors were forced through a mutiny of the people, to deliuer him
back to his first prison of the manifestation: the tumult was very great, with the effusion
of some bloud, and the burning of houses: yea the Marquis of Almenare, for that
he had done against their priuiledges,An. 1591. was committed to prison, hauing a thousand iniurious
speeches giuen him by the women and children,Arragon. and beeing out-raged and beaten
by the skumme of the people: whereof fifteene dayes after, (hauing in his extremitie
freed Peres) he dyed in prison. Peres enemies being not yet sufficiently taught, by
this third bloudy and horrible error, they persisted in their obstinacie to haue him in the
Inquisition: wherevpon thirteene Lawyers of the realme, were appointed to Iudge,
whether Peres cause deserued to be sent thether, or not. At the first they ordeined, that
it was against all right to deliuer him to the Inquisition: But afterwards by the solliciting
of Iohn Lewis Murano, who had wonne most of them with presents, they gaue an
other sentence, contrary to their first, directly impugning the priuiledges, examples,
concordants and declarations of the realme, which disanull the Edicts of Confiscation,
proceeding from the Inquisition. Yet his aduersaries would proceed, and the rather, for
that the King had commanded the Gouernor of Arragon, to keepe Peres in perpetuall
prison: or at the least that he might neuer goe out of the realme of Arragon: wherein
the deputies, to obey the King, agreed most together. The people notwithstanding were
resolute, seeing the wrong and violence they not onely did to Peres, but also to his wife
and small children, yea to religious men that were his sollicitors: the which all the world
detested: and in like manner to his reuenewes, so as in prison hee liued onely of almes,
the which were grudged him, besides the wrong which was done vnto his mooueables,
basely sold at an out-cry, yea the shirts and smocks of his little Infants borne in the prison,
with the thimble and needle wherewith Donna Gregoria his eldest daughter did sow;
besides many other great indignities, which were done to him, his wife and children,
whereof the people had great pitty; concluding thereby, that whatsoeuer he endured,
proceeded onely from reuenge, hatred and spleene, and that he was not culpable.
His pursuing enemies knowing well, and hauing found it by experience, how the people
stood affected to their priuiledges, and to Peres, durst not attempt to put him againe
into the Inquisition (which should haue beene done on the twentith of August) without
force: and therefore they gathered together a good number of the Kings soldiers, with
many Noblemen and Knights of the Viceroyes house (which had neuer beene seene
before) the which troubled both the Citty of Saragosca, and the whole realme, for that
it was directly against their priuiledges: but all turned for this time into smoake, they
not daring to effect any thing. Not content herewith, they made better prouision of
men on the 24. of September following, hauing raised 2000. men to take Peres, beeing
assisted by the Officers, Noblemen and Knights. On the day appointed, the Gouernour
called his soldiers together before the breake of day, and put them into battaile: and to
strike terror into the Burgesses, he caused them to giue a charge of shotte, where there
was a yong child slaine, and some hurt by the Gouernours owne hand. At the houre of
Councell, the Inquisitors arriued, who demanded to haue the persons of Peres and of
Iohn Francisco Maiorini deliuered into their hands. Vpon which demand (notwithstanding,
a petition presented at the same time, by some good Countrymen) they

obtained, Fiat. Wherevpon many Noblemen and officers went to the prison to receiue
him. Whether being come, a Lieutenant called Micer Claueria, with the Officers of the
Inquisition, beeing accompanied by some soldiers, leading with them two Notaries, the
better to qualifie their exploite, they entred into the prison, and caused Peres to come
downe, where hauing obserued the ceremonies of his euocation, they demanded to haue
him for some points concerning religion, and the faith. Peres seeing this, and standing
vpon his right and the priuiledges of the realme, nothing would preuaile, but they put
Irons vpon both his legges, and prepared to lead them away. Whilest that the Viceroy,
or Gouernour, the Soueraigne Iudge, the great Noblemen, Earles and Knights of this
company, were in Armes in houses neere vnto the prison: at the same instant the people
came running in great troupes,Tumult in Saragossa for Peres. crying, Liberty, liberty, (the which in the like case
vpon the breach of their priuiledges, is lawfull.) At the first they were but a multitude
of labourers, and the skumme of the people (whereof few were armed) which fell vpon
them that were vpon the place of Iustice. The rest of the people seeing that they had
no leader, and that it was not onely for Peres, but also for their liberties, that made them
to stirre, they went and intreated Giles de Meza to bee their head, who hauing taken
vpon him this charge, with those men he had, and such as came scattering vnto him, hee
charged the horsemen, and the rest of the Gouernours souldiers, whom he presently put
to flight, who were also set vpon by two hundred children, armed according to their ages
and strength, and a poore naturall foole, who played his part with stoanes. Finally,
their fury was so great, as they flew the Coche Moyles, and burnt the Coches, which
should haue carried Peres and his companion into Castile, they also set fire of the house
whereas the Viceroy and other Noblemen had saued themselues, There were slaine in
this tumult the said Iohn Lewis Murano, and Pedro Ieronimo of Baradix, one of the chiefe
Councellors of the towne.
This Combate, happened for their liberties, was done with such zeale and heate, as a
very old man would haue exposed sixe or seauen of his sonnes to sacrifice themselues
for this cause, commanding them to arme, and rather to dye: and a Gentlewoman of a
good family, sent her Nephew and onely heyre. The furie being past by the death of
fifty or sixtie persons, and aboue a hundred and fifty hurt; the people returned to the
prison, with an intent to haue Peres. The Officers of the Inquisition, seeing in what
danger they were, tooke off his fetters, and by their Maisters commandement, intreated
him to goe out of prison, fearing to be slaine there. Peres demanded an Acte, but for
that by reason of the confusion hee could not haue it, hee went forth, to the great ioy
and content of all the people: who conducted him to the house of Don Diego of Eredia.
This done, they went to retire Iohn Francisco Maiorini, setting all the other prisoners
at liberty. The same night Peres went out of Saragoca, with Giles de Meza,
remaining three dayes vpon a Mountaine, during the which hee vnderstood that the Gouernour
caused him to be pursued, wherevpon hee returned back into the towne, where
he lay hid forty dayes, to vnderstand what would become of this businesse: which was
that they prepared an Armie in Castile, to come towards Saragoca, and yet the Viceroy
gaue out a brute of an Accord, which was but to vnderstand where Peres remained:
as appeared by the letters of an Inquisitor, who had feed men to that end, hoping by
such a seruice to get an Archbishopricke: By reason whereof Peres retired the day before
that Don Alonso de Vergas entred with his Armie into Saragoca, hiding himselfe
among the rocks, vntill in the end hee came to Sala, where hee rested himselfe some
dayes, vntill that hearing of the new and intollerable Accord, hee sent Gilles de Maza
vnto the Lady Catherine Princesse of Nauarre,Peres escape^ out of Arragon and comes to Paris. the French Kings onely sister, intreating
her to receiue them vnder her protection and safegard. And hauing certaine intelligence
that they pursued him, and sought him in all places, hee went by night from
Sala and came to Pao,Action of Arragon. where hee found Giles de Meza, with an answer from the Princesse,
which was that hee might come boldly, where hee should find all freedom, going,
comming, or staying, with liberty of his religion, yea shee sent some horses to fetch
him vnto her. Where beeing arriued, and hauing saluted the Princesse, she gaue him as
good a reception as he could expect of such a Lady.
Perez beeing thus vnder the protection of this Princesse, the greedinesse of the Spaniard
to shed his bloud, did hunt after his death, offering new Accords, to entertaine him
neere vnto them, vntill they might finde some meanes to effect their desseignes, to which
end they bargained with diuerse persons for his life. Beeing at Pao, there was a very good
agreement offred him by Don Martin de la Nuca, in the behalfe of the Viceroy, of Don
Alonso de Vergas, and of the Inquisitors, but he durst not trust them. Many letters haue
discouered the treasons and practises to murther Perez, and the names of the vnder-takers:
among others, of one Bastamantes his owne kinsman: of another Arragonois furnished
with poyson, and letters from the Viceroy, found about him, who being discouered,
hee was condemned to dye, but at the request of Perez, the Princesse pardoned him:
then there was another of Nauarre hired to that end, who discouered himselfe to Iohn
Francisco Maiorini: to whom in the King of Spaines name, hee promised pardon and
great rewards: But going about to perswade him by his reasons, that in executing the
Kings will to murther or poyson Perez, was no treason. Iohn Francisco hauing discouered
the ground of his speech, hee reuealed him, and the Nauarrois was banished. They
would also haue suborned a naturall Foole to murther him, but he was wiser then they
that sought to corrupt him.
All these practises and attempts were the cause that Perez retired into England, considering
that in France hee should neuer bee safe from such practisers against his life:
Notwithstanding that hee was comprehended in the letters of Pardon granted to them
that had offended the King of Spaine, which were afterwards dispersed throughout the
world. Wherevnto hee would not trust, taking example by Don Bernardo de Cabrera,
the Kings Secretarie, who seeing how hee was enuied, retired from Court, and became
a Priest, yet the King called him back againe, beeing loth to loose such a seruant: beeing
returned, their enuie increased, and he was so violently pursued, as Don Pedro of Arragon
caused him to loose his head like a traytor: and yet afterwards, this Don Pedro dying,
hee declared him an Innocent, and to haue beene faithfull: saying, that hee had been
abused by his houshold seruants, who hated Cabrera, commanding that all his lands and
goods should bee restored to his Nephew, which had beene confiscated: In the meane
time the Innocent man was dead, and had suffered wrongfully.
The like was seene at Brussells, in the Councell of the troubles, who put to death during
their greatest executions, a poore innocent man that was a prisoner, who had neuer
beene called, heard, nor examined, so as some three or foure moneths after his death,
when they came to call him to bee examined, they found that hee had beene executed,
without any arraignment, or sentence giuen. Wherewith some of the Councellors
that were borne in the countrey, beeing troubled in conscience, the Councellor Vergas
a Spaniard, sayd vnto them: Trouble not your selues, it imports not, if he bee dead
an Innocent, his soule is the more happy, and his body is freed from all miseries.
But returning to that which followed in the towne of Saragoca, after the departure of
Perez. The King of Spaine, to bee reuenged for this tumult, gathered an armie together
vpon the frontiers of Castile, giuing it out that it was to bee sent into France, to
succour the League, of the which Don Alonso de Vergas was Generall, who hearing
that Perez was escaped, fell with all his troopes vppon the realme of Arragon, to punish
them of Saragoca. There was a petition presented against him and his armie, by
the whole body of the realme of Arragon, to the end that the Iustice Maior, according
to their ancient priuiledges, should take armes, to repulse the attempts of Don Alonso.
According to the which, by a decree of seuenteene, the Iustice with the whole realme,
fell to Armes, distributed the Offices of warre, leuied men, and brought Saint Georges
Standerd to field (an vsuall thing in such cases) and so marcht in good order out of
Saragoca, but with bad successe: for that the Captaines (traitors to their Country)
basely fearing the forces of Don Alonso, retiring themselues, abandoned their companies,
so as the armie of Arragon came to nothing, euery one slipping away, through
the treachery of a Maister Inquisitor, who aduertised the King how many men there
were, who were their Commanders and Captaines, with their names and surnames,
and the meanes how to defeate them.

To vnderstand the reasons of the Arragonois, to the end it may not be held a rebellion,
lightly vndertaken without cause, or an alteration without ground. It shall be good for
the better knowledge of the matter, to relate briefly, the estate, condition, and beginning
of the realme of Arragon.
Since the generall losse of Spaine, which hapned vnder King Roderigo, by the meanes
of Cont Iulian, for that he had defloured his daughter Caba. The Moores or Sarazins
held Spaine long, without either King or Lord. In the end the realme of Arragon freed
it selfe from the power of the Moores, and the Arragonois made themselues their owne
Maisters and Lords, not acknowledging any particular Prince, and without any Soueraignty
but their owne. So as beeing weary of their rest and liberty, they required (as
the children of Israell did sometimes to Samuel) to haue a King, and therein they demanded
the Popes aduice: who answered them as Samuel had done the Israelits. But seeing
they desired to haue a King, he did wish them to prescribe him lawes and conditions, and
ouer him a Soueraigne Iudge, with assistants, to bridle his ambition. The Arragonois
gaue credit to this Councell, and before they would choose them a King, they erected
the dignity and preheminence of El Iusticia of Arragon, which is a Soueraigne Iudge
aboue the King, with seuenteene Assistants. And they made a law which was called the
Lawe of manifestation, for the preseruation of the Vassals right, against the out-rages and
oppressions of the mighty, be hee King, Prince, or other Iudge. Which law, with other
Statutes and Ordonances, together with their Priuiledges, are to be seene Printed, vnder
the Kings royall authority, and haue continued many hundred yeares, to the honor and
reputation of their Kings, and especially of Don Ferdinand of Arragon, surnamed the
Catholicke, who would not giue eare (being come to the crown of Castile, by D. Isabella
his wife) to the bad councell which the Spaniards gaue him, tending to the abolishing of
the said priuiledges, saying: So long as the two ballances of the King and realme, shall be in
a iust Counterpese,Saying of Don Ferdinand King of Arragon. the king and realme shall continue and flourish together, but if one of the
Scales seeke to weigh downe the other, the one or the other will fall to ruine, or it may bee
both together. Moreouer the Arragonois made a law of vnion, consisting in two points
worthy the knowledge, for the cleering of this present discourse. The one is, that whensoeuer
the king shall breake their lawes, they may choose an other. For you must vnderstand
that they do not sweare vnto their Kings, but conditionally in these termes. Nes que valemos
tanto come vos, 'y vos tanto come nos, oz hazemo nuestro Rey y Sennor contal, que nos
gardeys nuestros fueros, y libertades, sy no, no. And hee must humble himselfe vpon his
knee, bare-headed, before the Soueraigne Iudge, which is El Iusticia, and sweare first, and
then the Arragonois after him.Manner of the King of Arragons othe. The second point of this vnion is, that the Princes and
Noblemen of the realme, may make leagues and confederations against their King in
case of oppression, or of breach of their priuiledges. And vpon these conditions they did
choose their first King, who was a Knight of Arragon, called Garci Ximenes, and after
him three or foure: But this election continued not long: for the King D. Pedro, called
with the Poignard, desiring to make the realme succesiue and hereditarie, insisted in an
assembly of the Estates, to disanull this law of election; the which in the end was granted,
by the foure members of the realme, reseruing all their other rights and priuiledges but
that: the which he did willingly accept, and after this Accord made (holding the Charter
of this Election in his hand) he drew out his Poynard and cut it in peeces, saying these
words. Que tal suero y fuero dy poder eligir Rey los vassallos, sangre de Rey auia de costar,
and withall stab'd himselfe through the hand: from which time the King was called Don
Pedro with the Poynard: as his effigie is to bee seene at this day, in the royall hall of the
deputation in the towne of Saragoca, whereas all the Kings his successors are, vnto Philip
the second last deceased. By vertue of the law of vnion, and of their priuiledges, the
Arragonnois tooke Armes this yeare 1592. prooceeding thus iustly in their businesse,
the chiefe Iustice causing the sentence to be insinuated to Don Alonso de Vargas, by two
Notaries and two Vshers: who hauing made their infinuation vnto him, vpon the penalty
of body and goods, they returned freely to Saragoca. Of which thier proceeding may
appeare by the Commission giuen to Don Iohn de la Nuca chosen Generall of the armie,
signed by El Iusticia, by the Abbot of Piedra, Lewis Nauarre, Ihon Lewis of Marcuello.

Don Iohn de Luna, Ieronimo de Oro, and others, and the Realme. Wherefore all things being
thus ordred according vnto law, and past by the Iustice, and Soueraignty, the Preachers
in their Pulpits, and the Priests in their Confessions exhorted the people to do it:
yea a Secretary of the Inquisition signed the resolution of the realme, as well grounded.
The Army of Arragon beeing thus dispersed, and come to nothing, as wee haue sayd,
before that Don Alonso entred into Saragoca, the King wrote goodly letters to diuerse
of the chiefe Noblemen of the Realme, as Don Alonso did in like manner, to giue some
coulour to his bloudy exploite, saying, that it was to goe into France, and swearing that
it was the least of his thoughts to doe them any harme: yea that hee was a better Arragonois
then any one of them.
Vpon these letters he was suffered to enter freely with his armie into Saragoca: hauing
lodged his men, hee began to imprison all men whom hee pleased, Noblemen, Knights,
Gentlemen, Lawyers, Marchants, and Bourgesses of all qualities: the Deputies of the
Realme and the Cleargie were least spared: there were also many Ladies, Gentlewomen,
and other women prisoners, and Lieutenants of Soueraigne Iustice, as Michel
Claueria, and Micer Spinosa, whom they forced to renownce their Offices, substituting
others, whom the King before for their offences had declared incapable, to the blemish
of his authoritie, their election beeing against all right and law. They did also
confiscate (contrary to the lawes of Arragon) not onely the goods of the husbands,
but also of the wiues of such as were absent. And aboue all the Soueraigne Iudge of
Arragon was taken, and within twenty houres lost his head, without any other sentence,
but of a little scrowle written with the Kings hand, in these termes, Hauing read
this, you shall presently apprehend Don Ihon de la Nuca, chiefe Iustice of Arragon, and let
mee haue newes of his death, as soone as of his Imprisonment. The which was done, notwithstanding
his appellations and Protestations, without the priuitie of any man,
vntill hee came vnto the Scaffold to bee executed, whereas many had gone before
him, and many followed after. Thus the Realme of Arragon thinking to preserue
their priuiledges and liberties, lost them, with the chiefe of the Nobility, and a great
number of men of good quality.
This yeare 1592. the King of Spaine hauing put many to death at Saragoca, for
that they had taken armes for the defence of their liberties, and burnt Antonio Perez
Image. The Estates of the Country hauing assembled at Tarracone, and giuen satisfaction
vnto the King, hee was content to send a generall pardon into the Prouince.
Wherevpon all Vargas Souldiers were drawne out of Saragoca, except some fewe
that were left to garde the Inquisition. The Turke beeing in Armes, and threatning
especially the house of Austria, the Catholicke King grew iealious, that by this diuersion
hee might bee much troubled in his warres of Flanders, where as the vnted Estates
were very strong, beeing assisted from other Princes: hee therefore sent Charles
Cigala to Constantinople, vnder coulour to visit his brother, but it was generally
thought, that his going was to saue his country from inuasion, but Cigala could not obtaine
what hee desired, for that the Turkes landing diuerse times, carryed away many
thousands of Christians, and committed great spoyles vpon the coasts of Calabria, and
Apulia, comming neere vnto Naples, as also in Sicile.
Newes beeing come into Spaine,Cont Fuentes sent into the Low countries. that the Duke of Parma was returned very sicke
from the Spawe, and that the Physitions despaired of his life: the Cont of Fuentes was
presently sent into the Lowe Countries, with Commission to command the armie after
his death, (the which some imputed to the Spaniards) whither he went in post, but the
Duke of Parma dyed before his arriuall in Arras, and was much lamented.
This yeare there beeing a Commission granted by the Queene of England to Sir
Walter Raleigh, for an expelition to the west Indies: he armed fourteene or fifteene good
ships of warre, whereof two were the Queenes, and beeing accompanied by a troope of
resolute Gentlemen, hee began to bee ready to goe from the West Countries, but hee
was so long stayed there by contrary windes, as the fittest season for Sayling was past,
his peoples mindes began to alter, and his victuals consumed. Wherevpon the Queene
called home Sir Walter Raleigh in Maye, commanding him to giue ouer his intended

voyage, and to leaue his charge to Sir Iohn Bourrough, and Sir Martin Frobisher: but hee
finding his honor ingaged, would not leaue the fleete beeing now vnder saile, but beeing
taken with a strange tempest on the 11. of May, and in danger to be swallowed vp in the
sea, he resolued to returne, and to leaue the charge to the aboue-named, giuing them directions
to diuide their fleet in two, one to lye vpon the South Cape of Spaine, and the
other to attend at the Ilands, which made the Admirall of Spaine to stay vpon that
coast, and to neglect the wafting of the Caracks. Sir Iohn Bourrough sayling towards the
Acores,Carrake called Santa Cruz set on fire. hee discouered a Carack called Santa Cruz, comming from the East Indies,
which getting neere the land, the Portugalls carried what goods they could out of her,
and set fire of the ship. There they vnderstood by certaine prisoners, of three other Carracks
that were comming from the Indies, which Sir Iohn, with his consorts, resolued to
attend. After sixe weekes patience, they discouered a huge Caracke called Madre de
Dios,Carack called Mombre de Dios, taken by the English. one of the greatest belonging to the Crowne of Portugall, which after a long and
furious fight, was in the end borded by the English; they found the hatches strewed
with dead carcases, and with wounded men languishing. Don Fernando de Mendoca
was commander of this Caracke, whom Sir Iohn Bourrough; of an honorable disposition
and pittying his estate, sent away freely with most of his followers to his Country. This
Caracke was esteemed to be of a thousand sixe hundred tuns, and did carry nine hundred
tuns in bulke of Marchandize, there were in her sixe or seauen hundred persons: her
chiefe commodities, besides Iewels, were Spices, Drugs, silks, China silkes, Callicoes, with
Pearle, Muske, Cyuet and Amber gris, with diuerse other commodities, the which at resonable
rates was valued at an hundreth and fifty thousand pounds starling. The losse
of these two Caracks brought D. Alphonso de Bacan, General with the Spanish fleet, in disgrace
with the King, who imputed it to his negligence.
In the yeare 1593. the King of Spaine sent the Duke of Feria into France,1593. to offer
all his forces to fauour the League,Duke of Feria sent to the league in France. and the election of a new King, beeing assembled
together at Paris to that end, where it beeing propounded, who should bee ealled to the
Crowne, the Duke of Feria did insist for the eldest daughter of Spaine, who he sayd
had most right, the realme falling to the Masculine line of Capet, the which hee maintained
for many defects might not pretend, so as the Infanta comming of the sister, who
was elder then Henry the third, shee should also bee preferred to the Crowne, and the
rather for that shee should bee marryed to some Prince in France, so as it should not
passe to a stranger, but this Prince should be chosen by the King of Spaine. This proposition
was distastfull to most of the assembly, who sayd that it was against their Salike law.
King Philip hauing conquered Portugall, which hee pretended to bee due vnto him
in the right of his mother, and expelled Don Anthonio, who was held base, hee gaue
the gouernment thereof to Cardinall Albertus of Austria, yonger sonne to the Emperour
Maximilian the second, a Prince endowed with many great vertues, and therefore
very acceptable to the Protugalls. In which gouernment hee did so carry himselfe, as
hee gaue great satisfaction both to the King and his subiects. Philip beeing now
growne old, and vnfitte for the gouernment of his realmes, his sonne Philip beeing
yet too young, hee called the Arch-duke Albert out of Portugall into Spaine,
who came vnto the King on the eleuenth day of September, hee beeing at the Monastery
of Saint Lawrence (commonly called Escuriall) where hee gaue him an honourable
reception. The King calling Albert vnto him, let him vnderstand with what
cares and toyle hee had for so many yeares gouerned his hereditary kingdomes, and
states, but beeing now broken with age, hee was no more fitte for command: hauing
hetherto by all meanes sought to procure the peace and quiet of his subiects, but he had
bin interrupted by the practises of some turbulent men, so as hee could not maintaine
peace in all his Prouinces. Hee was therefore greeued that hee could not deliuer vnto his
sonne a quiet estate, and the rather for that his sonne beeing yong of yeares, was not yet
fit to gouerne kingdomes, that his cousins wisedome and integritie had beene tryed vnto
him, the which he had hetherto vsed among the Portugals, knowing it to be such, as hee
durst safely commit the gouernment of all his other realmes to his faith.
Hauing now resolued (after so many labours past, for the glory of God, and the quiet

of his subiects) to giue ouer the gouernment, and to spend the remainder of his
dayes in contemplation, giuing God thankes for the prosperous course of his life, and
the happines of his Estates, retyring himselfe into some Religious place, and there pray
continually for his soules health: And to resigne vp the gouernment of his Realmes to
Philippe his sonne, and to Albert his cousin, that with their ioynt Councels and cares
they might gouerne his subiects, vntill his sonne grew to more yeares, and were capable
of the sole commaund. That hee would also adde vnto their Councels fiue of the cheife
Noble-men of the Kingdome, Spaniards borne, whose councell, helpe, and authority,
if need were, they should vse, but I doe not find that this resolution tooke effect.
Muley Mahomet sometimes King of Fez and Marrock,Muley Zecq bec^mes a Christian. was expelled by his vncle
Muley Moluc, who imploring ayde from Sebastian King of Portugall, they both dyed
in battell, as you haue heard. Mahomet had a sonne called Muley Xecq, who had
beene giuen in hostage with some Noblemen to Sebastan, who sent him to Mazagon.
After the battell hee was conuayed with his company into Spaine, where hee was
brought vppe vnder the protection of King Philippe, and this yeare beeing instructed
in the Christian Religion, hee became a Christian, and was Christned in that famous
Monastery of Saint Laurence (called Escuriall) with his couzin and other Cour^iars,
all making profession of the Gospell.
The Turke this yeare made all Italy to tremble,1594. for that Cigala beeing come forth
with an hundred and threescore Galleys and other vessells, it seemed at the first, that
hee had a desseyne to enter into the gulphe, but finding the Venetians to make great
preparation, they fell vppon the coast of Calabria, where they did much harme vntill
the comming of Prince Doria into those Seas,Turkes inuade Italy. who seeyng the Turke gone retyred
himselfe, but the Turkes hauing fortified their Fleete with more Gallyes, returned
againe and threatned Italy: Whereuppou Carlo Spinelli, by commandement
from the Viceroy of Naples, caused the Citty of Rhegium to bee abandoned with
some others vppon that coast.
Cigala comming to Rhegium, and finding their goods carried to some safer place,
^ee burnt it in disdaine, and threatned to passe farther into the countrey. The misery
which the poore people endured, and the cruelty which those Barbarians vsed
was exceeding great, the spoyles they made were valued at many hundred thousand
crownes: And for that the King of Spaine had need (if hee would defend his owne Estates,
and the honour of the holy Church from the Armes of Infidells) of great summes
of gold, he made request vnto the Pope, that the Cardinall and Archbishop of Toledo being
dead in Spaine, and hauing left a million of crownes to bee imployed in godly vses,
he would make declaration that the said summe might bee imployed in those godly and
important warres, wherein the Pope tooke deliberation, and did soone after satisfye the
King,Albert of Austria Archbishop of Toledo. confirming the Cardinall Albert of Austria in the succession of the said Archbishoprick,
hauing beene named by his Maiesty. But to treate more strictly with him of
many affayres importing Christendome, he sent Iohn Francisco Ald^brandini Ambassadour
into Spaine, who was receaued there with royall magnificence and great shewes of
honour and loue.
In the beginning of this yeare 1595.1595. the warre began to grow hotte in the Franche
Conty of Bourgundy, betwizt the French and the Spaniard, whether the King of Spaine
resolued to send the Constable of Castile,Constable of Castile sent vnto the Fr^nch Court. who was Gouernor of the Dutchie of Milan,
with 4500. souldiers of the Realme of Naples, and he gaue commission to Fernando de
Toledo, Lodowicke Melzi, to Alexander Carraciola, and to Alexander Gonzaga, either of
them to raise a troupe of horse, and that they should leauy a thousand foot in that estate,Protestation of the Spanish Ambass^dor at the absolution of the French King.
and three thousand in the Duchy of Vrbin.
The French King hauing left the religion wherein he had beene bred, and fallne to the
Romish Church, was after great sute and instance, absolued by the Pope with the accustomed
ceremonies. Before the doing whereof, the King of Spaines Ambassadour
made a protestation in the King his Masters name, that whatsoeuer the Pope
intended for to doe in the said businesses, should not any way preiudice his Masters
rights to the Realme of Nauarre, nor to the Duchy of Bourgondy, nor yet to the

great treasure hee had disbursed at the request of the Catholikes of France, whereof
hee meant to bee repaied, and that hee would not desist from armes, vntill that
Realme had satisfied him: which protestation being accepted by the Pope, the said
embassadours Secretarie caused a publike instrument to bee made with licence from
his Holinesse.Death of D. Antonio king of Portugall. And this yeare died D. Antonio of Portugall at Paris, which newes
were verie ioyfull to the king of Spaine, being freed from the apprehensions of dailie
troubles in that realme, by meanes of his pretensions.
The Archduke Ernestus of Austria being Gouernour in Flanders for the king of
Spaine, the earle of Fuentes commanded the armie by prouision vntill the comming
of a new gouernour, the king resoluing to send the Cardinall Albertus to succeed
his brother: vpon whose dispatch (whether it proceeded from the kings own disposition,
or a desire in him to make himselfe the more acceptable to the people of those Prouinces,
at his first comming) there were many Ships of the East Countries, and the
Netherlands, (which had beene staied in Spaine, to serue as men of warre, and to
waft home the Indian fleets) discharged in diuers Hauens and Ports:Ships of the vnited Prouinces, discharged in Spaine. And at Seuille
the Duke of Medina Sidonia, told the Merchants and Masters of ships, that
it was the kings pleasure and command, being mooued there unto by the Cardinal
of Austria, and that from thenceforth their ships should haue free passage into Spaine,
and haue pasports to goe and come if they would demaund it, hoping they would
in time acknowledge the kings gratious fauours, and submit themselues vnto their
naturall Prince: And the better to persuade the vnited Prouinces of the kings loue
and fauour towards them, hee set Philip of Nassau, Prince of Orange, and Earle of
Buren, at libertie, hauing beene long restrained in Spaine, which was thought to be
done at the instance of the Prince of Spaine, and of the Archduke, to the end hee
might haue him with him into the Low-Countries.
Experience hath often taught that armes are more fortunate,French king proclaimes war against the king of Spaine. and produce greater
effects in an enemies Countrie, than at home, and that there is no such triumph
as that which is fetcht farre off. The French held that all their combustions had bin
forged in Spaine, that the Iesuits had beene the chiefe workemen: The attempts against
the French kings person, by Iohn Chastell who had hurt him in the face, and other
their disciples, did verifie this opinion; Besides the French king, had by his letters
giuen the Estates of Arthois and Henaut to vnderstand, that if they did not desist
from relieuing his rebellious Leaguers, vpon the frontiers of Picardie, hee was
resolued to make warre against them, prefixing them a certaine time, to giue him
answere, which they neglected: whereupon the French king grounding the necessitie
of his armes, vpon these considerations, hee made a declaration at Paris, in Ianuary this
yere, by the which, for certaine reasons therein contained, he denounced war against the
king of Spaine and all the Low-countrie Prouinces vnder his obedience, as his enemies,
causing it to bee proclaimed in all the frontier Townes of his Realme.
After the publication hereof, there was the like proclamation made at Brussels,King of Spaine proclaimes war against the French. in
the name of the king of Spaine, against the French king (whome hee tearmed Prince
of Bearne) and against all the French that held his partie: the Leaguers were excepted,
whome hee called the good confederate French Catholikes, and he promised
to aide and assist them with all the meanes which God had giuen him, promising
the like to all the French, of what qualitie soeuer, that should within
two moneths after that proclamation forsake him, and giue good testimony that they
are no enemies to the Romish, Catholike, and Apostolike Religion, nor to the king
of Spaine. This Edict was made in March, and proclaimed in all the Low Country
townes vnder the kings obedience.
In the yeare one thousand fiue hundred ninetie and sixe,1596 the king of Spaine made
an edict,King of Spaine breakes with the Merchants, complaining that the reuenues of his crowne and the treasure which came
yearely from the Indies, were consumed by reason of his great charges, for the defence
of his Estates, and of all Christendome, imputing the cause to the great interest
which he paid for the exchange of money, and vpon other contracts made with
the Merchants in his Majesties name, so as in a manner all his receipts and reuenues were

ingaged to others, being without any treasure to supply his wants, for that the
Bankers (who had been accustomed to furnish him by exchange) made now some difficultie
to deale any farther, hauing in a manner all the reuenues of his Crowne in
their possession: for the preuenting of which inconuenience, hee found no better
meanes than to repaire the treasure, and to free it from the wrongs it hath suffered
by interests, which hee hath allowed in his contraction, to auoid greater daunger
which might grow by the want of meanes, to supply the necessities of the warre,
the which his meaning was to preuent by these meanes, being impossible to vse any
other vpon those occasions: wherefore (to cut off the said interests) his meaning was
to resume vnto himselfe all the assignements which hee had giuen vnto any Merchants
and Bankers, for what summes or contracts soeuer, which haue beene made
by his commandement, since the decree made by him the first of September, one
thousand fiue hundred seuentie and fiue, and the fift of December one thousand
fiue hundred seuentie and seuen, vnto the twentieth of Nouember this yeare one
thousand fiue hundred ninetie and sixe, which assignations hee suspended, so as the
Merchants might not receiue them, but the reuenues should be brought into his Cofers,
and all contracts for interest should cease; Confirming whatsoeuer had beene concluded
by his royall Councell in this behalfe, as done by his expresse commaundement.
This Edict being published,Merchants breake by reason of the Edict it bred a strange alteration among the Merchants in
Spaine, Italie, and the Low-Countries. The Cardinall Albertus hauing taken vp money
at Andwerp for the paiment of the armie, and sent his bils of exchange into
Spaine, they were not accepted, but sent backe againe and protested, which was a
blemish to his credit, and made many merchants to breake, imputing the cause vnto
the Edict.
The corruption of titles being brought out of Spaine into Italie,Titles forbidde^ in Italie. men honouring
one another in their speaking and writing with affected courtesies in such sort, as
they found not titles sufficient to satisfie their arrogant ambition, so as to tearme
meane men, most worthy or excellent (which was due to Soueraigne Princes) they
held it no flatterie, the which was growne so familiar among all sorts of people, as
euen base and obscure men did arrogate it: the king hauing made a prouision in
Spaine some yeares before for this abuse, this yeare Henry de Guzman Earle of Oliuares,
being Viceroy of Naples, did set downe an order for that realme, the which
was in some sort obserued in the Duchie of Milan; ordaining that in their letters
there should bee no title of courtesie giuen to any but onely the dignitie which
hee held, as to the Duke, Prince, Marquesse, Earle or Doctor, such a one, taking away
all superfluitie or suspition of Flatterie, as well within as without the said letters:
the which was rigorously obserued in the Realm of Naples. But the Court of Rome
and the Clergie men, disliking to receiue a law from any other than from the Pope,
would not suffer it to be obserued.
The King of Spaine being desirous to be reuenged of the spoiles which the English
made daily, as well in Spaine as in his other dominions, gathered all his sea-forces
together, in the beginning of this yeare one thousand fiue hundred ninetie and sixe,
appointing the Rendes-vous to bee at Seuille,Inundation of the riuer of Guadalquibir. but this sudden preparation was disturbed
by diuers accidents. The first was the strange swelling and ouerflowing of the
Riuer of Guadalquibir, to the great spoile of the neighbour Countrie, for passing ouer
her bankes, there were many persons drowned, with much cattel, and very many
buildings ouerthrowne, but the greatest losse was at Seuille, in which port there lying
many Ships of the Fleet, they were staied long from making of their preparations.
And in the meane time, whilest they proceeded slowly in this action, according
to the custome of that nation, who persuade themselues to doe great matters with
fame onely, and repose the chiefe of their most important enterprises, in tyring the
enemie, and consuming him at leysure, the English armie appeared vpon their coast, as
you shall ^eare.
The charge of the English fleet and armie was giuen to the Lord Charles Howard,
high Admirall of England (who at his returne from that seruice,Armie of English for Spaine. was by the Queenes

Maiestie made Earle of Nottingham) and to the Earle of Essex, being ioyned together
in Commission. Being vpon their going from the coast of England; they did publish in
print in seuerall languages, the true, iust, and vrgent reasons which had mooued her
Maiestie to vndertake the sending forth of so great an Nauie, with a full declaration of
her Majesties pleasure, and so they set saile from Plymouth vpon the third of Iune, this
yeare, the whole English fleet consisting of some hundred ships of all sorts, the which
was diuided into foure squadrons, of the which the Lord Admirall commaunded the
first, the Earle of Essex the second, the Lord Thomas Howard (now Earle of Suffolke)
the third, and Sir Walter Rawleigh the fourth.
On the tenth of Iune this fleet got sight of Caliz, or Cadiz, in Andalusia, but they kept
not the order appointed for their comming in, by reason of the mistaking of their masters
and their falling in the night with the West, sooner than they expected, which made
them stand vpon another boord, and had somewhat disordered their fleet. The
Lord Admiral (one of the Generals) was with the greatest part of the fleet ahead to the
Windward of the other Generall the Earle of Essex and his Squadron, the wind being
then at South; Sir Walter Rawleigh was by reason of some chase in the night to Leeward,
and a sterne.
The Spaniards which were to the number of fiftie and seuen saile,English fleet enters into Cadiz roade. rod vnder the
Towne of Caliz and the Gallies being seuenteene lay in the mouth of the Bay, to couer
the ships and to attend the landing of the English: The Lord Admirall came to an
anchor before the Southwest point of the Iland, called Saint Sebastians, the Earle of
Essex seeing the Gallies rowe towards the landing place which hee had chosen, bore
with them vntill hee made them leaue their course, and then looft vp, and came with his
squadron to an other anchor by the Lord Admiral, which the rest of the fleet seeing, came
all vnto them, only the Lord Thomas Howard in the Sea-honor anchored between them
and the shoare. The Generals called a Councell, where it was ioyntly agreed vpon by
them that their men should bee landed, and the Town presently attempted on the West
side, which was next to the anchoring, for which purpose the Earle of Essex Lord Generall,
Sir Francis Vere Lord Marshall, and sir Coniers Clifford Sergeant Maior, went to
draw together as many souldiers and Gentlemen as their boats could wel carrie at once:
which being done, and all their boates about the Lord Admirals ship, sir Walter Rawleigh
(who was but then arriued in the Due Repulse) came and protested against their landing,
holding the attempt to be dangerous, and the performance (as the wind blew and billowe
went) impossible, for indeed it was growne to a storme; whereupon it was resolued that
the souldiers should bee returned to their ships, and the Spanish fleet first assailed, according
to sir Walter Rawleighs aduice.
It was past noone before this later resolution was taken, and more than two
houres after before the Souldiers could bee carried backe vnto their Shippes,
some of their boates miscarrying before they could recouer their shippes: which
being done, my Lord Thomas Howard weighed anchor first, to giue the other ships scope
to cast about; then the rest of their principall ships, as they could get leaue of the smaller
Vessels which rodde close by them, who also put themselues vnder saile; but the
winde was so strong, and in such a place, as most of their ships had beene driuen
too farre to leeward, if they had not come to anchour, which the chiefe leaders
perceiuing, they came to a roade: Besides, the Sunne being not verie high, they
thought that the bringing in of so grea^ a fleet towards night, would so disorder
them, as the attempt should bee made to their great disaduantage. So as the first
day there was nothing executed by reason of these accidents. Onely, in the euening
from the Bulwarke called Saint Philip, from the Ships of warre which lay at Anchor,
and from the Gallies which did aduance a little towards them, some few Canon
shot were bestowed vpon the Due Repulse, who answered them with the like,
especially against the Gallies, when they approached, to make them know the English
could entertaine them, if they came on.
That night the gallies coasting by the shore, betwixt S. Mary Port and Rotta, came to obserue
what order was kept by the rereward of the English fleet, but they were soon turned

backe. On Munday earely in the morning, there was a Councell held aboord, the
Lord Admirals Shippe, where it was resolued to weigh anchor presently, and to
assaile the Spanish fleet, the which was accordingly performed, after this maner.
The Lord Thomas Howard, and Sir Walter Rawleigh (for so the Generall had appointed
it) bare right in the middest of the Chanell with the kings great ships
which retyred before them, scorning to bestowe a shot on the gallies, which discharged
their Canon as they passed by them. The Lord Marshall being in the Raine-bow,
looft vp the Gallies, which lay vp with their sternes close vnder the Towne, and
kept their prowes towards the Ships that should passe by them: The Rainebow was
a good while in fight, before that any other ship came vnto her, and was plyed
with shot both from the gallies and from the Towne.
The Earle seeing her so ouer-matcht, made haste vnto her, and so making the enemie
a fairer marke than the Rainebow (which was a farre lesser ship) eased her
of many blowes. Some other ships shot, but farther off, and to lesse purpose. This
incounter with the Gallies, was a verie great aduantage vnto the enemy, they hauing
so many to so fewe, for in effect these two ships aboue mentioned performed
this whole seruice. Besides, there were two Bulwarkes of the Towne on their side:
all which notwithstanding, the Gallies were forced to flie before them into the Baie,
two onely except, which Sir Iohn Wingfield, comming then vp in the Vangard, did keep
so in as they durst not looke out.
During the fight with the Gallies, the wind calmed, and the English fleet went
slowly ahead, most of the Spanish ships neuer staied vntill they came to Portreal
which is the furthest part of the Bay, the ships mooued themselues with their broad
sides towards the English, that they might fight to their greater aduantage. The English
masters of ships were generally of opinion, that they could not go neer without danger
of running on ground; the which did much crosse the forwardnesse of the chiefe
Commanders of the sormost ships, led by the Lord Thomas Howard, and Sir Walter
Rawleigh, whose desire being to draw as neere the enemy as they might, were notwithstanding
inforced to come to anchour without the reach of Musket shot, and to attend
the flo^d, where they fought with perpetuall volleys of the Canon, from sixe in the
morning to eleuen of the clocke: the ships that followed them neerest were commanded
by Sir Francis Vere, Lord Marshall, Sir George Carew, now Lord Carew, Viceadmirall
of Sir Walter Rawleighs Squadron, and Generall of the artillerie, by Sir Robert
Dudley, Viceadmirall of the Lord Admirals Squadron, by Sir Robert Southwell, Viceadmirall
of the Lord Thomas Squadron, by Sir Robert Crosse, the Earle of Sussex being
aboord him, and by Sir George G^fford. The Earle of Essex and the Lord Admirall
came vp an houre before the flood, hauing beene all that morning soundly battered
by the forts of Cadiz: And for that the Arke drew too much water for the narrownesse
of the Chanel, where those ships did ride, who also took vp the whole breadth
of the riuer, the Lord Admirall put himselfe into the Lord Thomas Howards ship.
When the flood beganne to swell,Spanish ships runne aground at Cadiz. the Lord Thomas and Sir Walter Rawleigh determined
to lay the Armadoes aboord with the Queenes ships, (for the hulkes
filled with Musketiers, which were promised, came not) but as soone as
Soto the Spanish Admirall perceiued that the said Leaders beganne to hoyse their
top-sailes, they presently cut their Cables by the halfe, and draue a shoare, sauing
as many of themselues as they could carrie at once in their boates; of the rest some
were slaine in the furie, and the rest taken to mercie.
The Admirall of the Spaniards called the Philip, a goodlie and a powerfull ship,
tooke fire before she could be entred, by an inch of a match fired, and laied in the mouth
of a barrell of powder in her gunner roome: But the Lord Thomas Howard and sir Walter
Rawlegh saued the Mathew and Andrew, Viceadmirall and Rereadmirall of the Spanish
fleet, the other ships were set on fire by certain Negros, who leapt into the riuer and
saued themselues by swimming.
The India^ fleet of merchants being about 40 saile, were gotten vp 4 English miles into
the riuer; for the redemption of which the K. officers in Cadiz offered the English 600

thousand pounds sterling: The Earle of Essex was often prest to haue them first taken
and then solde,Spanish ships fired by themselues. but hee beleeued that such as offered the composition had meant
bonafide to pay the money from which hee could not bee dissuaded, vntill he saw the
ships all in a flame, which the duke of Medina Sydonia commanded to bee done.
The number of the Spanish Fleet was fiftie seauen ships, foureteene of the kings
men of warre, ^and three great Fly-boats which brought the Treasure from Portricco;
the rest were Merchants, all faire ships, full of good ordnance, and richlyer
laden than euer any Fleet was that went to the West Indies. Here also I should remember,
that during the fight, the gallies and Fort of Pontall, plaied continually
vpon the English ships.
The English hauing obtained this great victorie by Gods especiall fauor, the earle
resolued to follow it with all possible expedition, and so immediately hee dispatcht
the Sergeant Maior to get as many Gentlemen and old souldiers into boates,English land at Cadiz. as might
well bee landed at once, which being performed, his Lordship and the Lord Marshall
went to discouer the landing, and finding it good, he put betwixt two and three
thousand men on land, returning the boates to fetch my Lord Admirall with his seconds.
These being put in battell, he commanded the Marshall to march directly with
his regiment to the other side of the Iland, which was halfe a mile from their landing,
his Lordship with the rest that were on shoare following him speedily. Beeing
come to the Southside; the Earle diuided his troupes equally, sending the one halfe
with Sir Coniers Clifford; sir Charles Blunt, and sir Thomas Gerrard, to breake downe a
bridge called El Ponte del Suasso, at a streit, that keepes the passage from the
maine; marching himselfe with the other halfe towards the Towne: the like directions
hee gaue for the seconds, to bee equally diuided, and sent these two waies. When
hee came within halfe a mile of the Towne, a cornet of horse, with some shot, made
offer to skirmish, but they were soone put to flight: when they came within musket
shot of the Towne, there sallyed forth great troupes both horse and foot, vnder fauor
of their wals, with their Cornets and Ensignes, which the earle discouering from
a little hill as they fell out of the towne, hee gaue direction to the formost of the troups
being some thirty pikes, and as many shot, to runne away as soone as the enemie offered
to charge them; the which they did, giuing the enemy courage to come farther on
than they first intended, but the English charged them so fast, as they had scarce time to
recouer the Port and shut it.
The Horsemen which sallied out of the ^owne, were called the Knights of shires: they
could not get into the Towne being so closely followed by the English foot; whereupon
they forsook their horses, and leapt ouer the wals at the west corner, by which the English
also entred. The English in pursuing the Spaniards staied not vntill they came to the
foot of their formost rampar, and then the Earle diuided his troupes equally, consisting
of twelue hundred men, keeping the one halfe with himselfe on the Southside of
the Port, and sending the Marshall with the rest to the Northside. The Earle of Essex,
on this side, with much ^doe found meanes for himselfe and some few others, to get vp,
where he saw on the one side a Parapet of stone almost inaccessible, for th^^ neither the
bulwa^ke nor any part of the Courtine was finished. There the English did first beate the
enemie from the Parapet, yet they lay open to another square bulwarke of stone, which
flanked them within a pikes length, but they did so beset the bulwarke with shot, as the enemie
did them little harme: Notwithstanding, considering that they must quit the place
for that their men lay vncouered, the earle sought for an entrance, which being found,
the leape downe being a pikes length,Cadiz entred by the English. hee commanded one E^^^s which stood next him,
being Lieutenant to the Earle of Sussex to enter, which after he and foure or fiue other
souldiers more had done, the like charge was giuen to Captaine Pooley, who carried the
Generals red Ensigne, whereupon sir Arthur Sauage, Captain of the Earles company,
with diuers* Gentlemen followers and seruants to his Lordship, took the same course.
In the mean time, whilest that thirtie or fortie were thus entred into the Towne, the
Lord Marshal who besides his own soldiers, had with him the generals gard of partizans,

forced the Port, which his Lordship espying, being not ten paces from it, hee presently
turned from the leape, and entred that way, carrying with him all the chiefe Aduenturers
of the armie, and worthy Sir Iohn Wingfield (who before had flaine a Commaunder
of the enemies with his pike, and was cast behind) hauing a shot in the thigh, but hauing
recouered one of the enemies horses, hee came vp presently to second them, not staying
for any dressing.
From the entrance of the English into the Towne, vntill they came vnto the Market
place, the enemie fought with them continually, and kept them play aboue halfe an
houre before they could recouer it, yet at the last hauing wonne the place from them,
they notwithstanding so flanked it, and kept their houses (which were built like castles)
as they slue many of the English, and among others that valiant gentleman
Sir Iohn Wingfield, who though vnarmed, offered himselfe continually to all daungers,
so as hee was shot in the head from the castle which did continually play vpon those
that made good this market place.
At length they got into the houses which annoyed them, and slue those they found
in them: And as the Lord Generall before it was darke cleered all thereabouts, but
the castle, or that which they call the vpper Towne, so the Lord Marshall cleered
all the other side towards the water, and brought those that were in the Fort and
Bulwarke of Saint Philip, to sue for mercie: which done, the Generals entred the
Towne-house, whither all the chiefe citizens came to kisse their feet.
The next morning, both the Castle and forts yeelded to their mercie, without any
other conditions. The poore and baser sort were dismist, and all women of qualitie
whatsoeuer. The Corrigidor deliuered his sword vnto the Generall, offering to bee his
prisoner, and to giue for himselfe and some others of good place twelue thousand ducats:
no man was slaine vpon cold bloud: it was held there were about two thousand
Spaniards slaine in the furie of the fight.
Besides the chiefe Commanders of the armie, who had giuen many proofs of their
valor and experience in martial affairs, there were many gallant gentlemen which serued
worthily in this action, whome in the end the Generall rewarded with the honour of
knight-hood. I may not forget to ^ake particular mention of Sir Samuel Bagnol who
receiued eight wounds with the pike, and sword, whome the Lord Generall (meeting
in the market place all bloudie) knighted, to the incouragement of all others, before
that either the castle was taken in, or the whole Towne wonne.
The towne was verie rich, and did much inrich the armie, but the worthiest men got
least, for they were fighting, whilest the baser sort intended nothing but pillage
and spoile. There was good store of brasse ordnance, and though no great, yet very happie
store of poulder; for the English hauing not aboue twelue hundred men, their
poulder was spent, and they were ouerlaied on all sides, with the number of the enemies
shot, who hurt and slue their men from the houses: when they had made them quit the
streets, they found by chance by the market place, such poulder as they had brought
for their owne defence, and the supply of their men that shold fight there, with the which
they serued their turnes, till their succours were entred and the Towne assured.
The Prouisions of Sea for the kings fleet,King of Spaines (...) at Cadiz. as mastes, pike-staues, deale-boards,
caske, and all kinde of shot, cables, anchors, wine, oyle, vinegar, rice, sugars,
and such like things, were of great value, and will not be supplied by the king of Spain
in many year^s. And as for his losse in shipping, the kings Officers of his nauie, who
were then taken prisoners, did protest with sighes and teares, that nineteene of the
ships which they had spoiled, with the S. Mathew and Saint Andrew, which they had
taken, were able to beat the greatest part of ships that the king hath in all the world. So
as laying together the ruining of the Kings Fleet, the enioying of some of his
great ships of warre, which before had neuer beene done; the burning of the Indian
fleet of Merchants, whose lading the prisoners confest to haue beene worth
eight Millions; the impeaching him to send that yeare to releeue his men at the
West-Indies, and so by consequence to receiue no treasure from thence the next
yeare; the ^aking of the Citie, wherein were foure thousand foot, and sixe hundred

horse of the chiefe caualiers of Andaluzia; the sacking of this place, from whence he is
to set out all his fleets for the West Indies, and the spoyle of all his prouisions there:
All this, I say, layed together, will proue one of the greatest blowes that euer
Spaine receiued. Yet all this was done in one day, and without any great losse; for in the
whole fleet there was not any man of note, but Sir Iohn Wingfield, slaine. At the assault
and winning of the towne many gentlemen were hurt, and some slaine; and
yet not many, considering the strength of the place, and the nature of the attempt.
As soone as the English fleet was entred into the road, and that the Spaniards had
discouered the Dutch squadron in the fight, immediately, both at Seuille, Saint Lucar,
and some other places, they did not onely arrest all such Dutch ships as dealt with them
friendly by way of trade and marchandise, but did confiscat their goods, and did imprison
the marchants and owners of the same, and, as it was reported, did intreat many of them
verie cruelly.
The English being masters of the towne of Cadiz, the two Generals had an especiall
care for the well-intreating of all religious persons, both men and women, whom they
caused to be freely transported ouer to port Sancta Maria, without any ransome or other
molestation; and, giuing the bishop of Cusco free passage without ransome, they
let him vnderstand, That they came not to deale with Church-men, or vnarmed men, and
men of peace, or with children; neither was it their intent to make this voyage for
gold, siluer, or any other riches: but that their onely comming was to meet with their
dishonourable practises, and many iniuries, and to deale with men of warre and valour,
for the defence of the true honour of England; and to let them vnderstand, that
whensoeuer they attempted any base and dishonourable practise against their Soueraigne
Queene and Mistresse, that it should be reuenged.
The day before the English departed from Cadiz, being the fift of Iulie, the citie was
burnt, the Ladies, Nunnes, and other women and children, being safely sent to Saint
Marieport, with their apparell and iewels, euerie man being forbidden to search them
vpon paine of death.
I haue thought good to annexe vnto the end of this relation, for a remembrance to
poste^^tie, the names of such as receiued the Order of Knighthood from the Generals,
as a testimonie of their well deseruing in this worthie action.

Sir Samuel ^^gnol.
Sir Arthure ^^uage.
The Earle of Sussex.
The Lord Burke.
Cont Lodowike.
Sir Willi^^ Howard.
Sir George De^ereux.
Sir Henrie Neuel.
Sir Edwin Rich.
Sir Richard Leuen.
Sir Peter Egomort.
Sir Anthonie Ashley.
Sir Henrie Leonard.
Sir Richard Leuison.
Sir Horatia Vere.
Sir Arth^re (...)*
Sir Miles Cor^et.
Sir Edward Conway.
Sir Oliuer L^mbert.
Sir Anthonie Cooke.
Sir Iohn Townsend.
Sir Christopher Heydon.Names of such as were knighted at Cadiz.
Sir Francis Popham.
Sir Philip Wood^o^se.
Sir Alexander Clifford.
Sir M^^rice Barkley.
Sir Charles Blunt.
Sir George Gifford.
Sir Robert Crosse.
Sir Iames Ese^dam^^e.
Sir (...) Leigh.
Sir Iohn Leigh, alias Lee.
Sir Richard Weston.
Sir Richard Wai^man.
Sir Iames Wotton.
Sir Richard Ruddal.
Sir Robert Mansel.
Sir William Mou^son.
Sir Iohn (...).
Sir Edward Bowes*
Sir (...) Druel.
Sir (...) Preston.
Sir Robert Remington.
Sir Iohn B^cke.
Sir Iohn Morgan.
Sir Iohn A^ridge.
Sir Iohn (...).
Sir Mathew Browne.
Sir Iohn Acton.
Sir Thomas Gates.
Sir Gi^^^e M^rricke.
Sir Thomas Smith.
Sir William Pooley.
Sir Thomas Palmer.
Sir Iohn Stafford.
Sir Robert Louel.
Sir Iohn Gilbert.
Sir William Har^ey.
Sir Iohn Gray.
D. Christopher prince of
Portugal.
Sir Iohn Vanderfo^^d* Admiral
of the Hollanders.
Sir Robert Dudley.
8 August.

Thus this triumphant English armie left Cadiz, hauing receiued from the duke of
Medina Sidonia nine and thirtie English prisoners, which had beene slaues in the Spaniards
hands: Which done, they past along the coast of Portugall, they tooke, spoyled,
and burnt Farol,Farol burnt by the English. they marcht into the countrey thereabouts; after which exploit they shaped
their course for England.
Hauing done this great affront to the king of Spaine, they left him full of rage, and desire
of reuenge:Fleet of Spaniards prepared against England whereupon, presently after the retreat of the English, he gaue commandement
to the Adelantado of Castille, to prepare a mightie fleet; wherein he imployed
great care and diligence, so as it was readie the same yeare. But this fleet had a farre different
successe to that of England. It consisted of fourescore ships, which went out of
Lisbone the eight of October 1596. They coasted along Gallicia, to goe and joyne
with the Generall of Biscaie, where they had leuied some troupes of souldiers: the Adelan^^do
comming to double cap S. Vincent in the night, it seemes he mistooke his reckoning,
and ^ell short of the cap, where they were taken with a cruell storme, in the
which fiue and fortie of their ships were cast away,Spanish fleet cast away. on Symon and I^des day, and the rest
were so shaken with the storme, as they had great difficultie to saue them: so as their enterprise
proued vaine that yeare.
This yere also they treated in Spaine of the canonizing of blessed S. Raymond,Canonization of S. R^ymond desired by the Spaniards. the which
was afterwards effected at Rome. They renewed their suit vnto the Pope, which had bin
made many yeares before to diuers of his predecessors. After that instance had bin made
vnto his Holinesse by the townes of the realme of Arragon, who had sent Paul Costabile,
Generall of the preaching Friers, of which Order S. Raymond had beene also Generall, the
Pope hauing pronounced, th^t they should passe on to perfect this businesse, the Archbishop
of Taracona came to Barcellona with two bishops, and the Proctor generall of S.
Dominicke, to reuiew Saint Raymonds ^odie: the which was done with great ceremonie,
and authenticall writings sent to Rome to prosecute the rest. About the same time Luca
Calnacanti, Chamberlaine to the Pope, arriued, being sent with two cardinals hats by
him, to Francis d' Auila, Archdeacon of Toledo, and to Ferdinand Nugnes de Gueuara,
President of the royall Councell, who had beene newly created cardinals, being exhorted
by his Holinesse to passe with all speed to Rome, as they did that Winter: so as in the
beginning of the next yeare they come into Italie, hauing a good opportunitie to passe
in those gallies which were come from Genoua; whith^r the duke of Maqueda should
also haue gone, being appointed by the King to be Viceroy of Sicile: but he was stayed
many monethes by some sinister accidents. And there arriued also Alphonso Gariglia, who
required a great aid of money for the prince of Transyluania; to maintaine the warre against
the Turke, who found the king (...) well (...), not with standing that hee was
inforced to maintaine warre in diuers places, to his exceeding great toyle and charge.
Yet he satisfied that princes desire with abountifull hand, and giue free libertie to the
Popes Agents, to buy a quantitie of come in his realmes, to (...) the state of the Church.
And then about the end of September, the Indian fleet arriued safely at Seuille, being
verie rich, the which did much comfort the Spaniards after the great losses they had

sustained by the English armie.1597 There was nothing did more afflict the minds of the
Spaniards,Spaniards incensed against the English. than their hatred and disdaine of the English, being not able to endure, not
onely to be troubled in their traffique to the Indies, and their rich fleets to be lay^d for,
piercing euen into the heart of America, but also to inuade the continent of Spaine
with a royall armie, and to land there by by force, incountring, spoyling, and burning
their ships euen in their ports.Preparation in Spaine for a new armie. Being therefore tormented with a desire of reuenge,
and grieued that the last yeares fleet, being ruined by tempest, could not effect what they
had designed, there was a new order giuen, that many galleons should bee armed, and
new troupes of souldiers should bee leuied, not onely in Spaine, but also in Italie.
The king therefore, touching matters of warre, gaue an extraordinarie authoritie to
the Cont Fuentes, who was newly returned from the gouernement of Flanders:
They caused all ships of foreine countries to be stayed within their ports, with an
intent to make vse of them in this armie: but the king falling verie sicke, this preparation
was somewhat stayed, they being doubtfull of his life, both in respect of his
great age, and the violence of his infirmitie. And so the souldiers which were leuied
for this seruice, were sent to lodge, some in Gallicia, and some in Biscaie, to bee fitly imbarked
when time should serue.
The important cause concerning Marchants and Bankers,Controuersie in Spaine touching the Bankers. was now in question in
Spaine, they hauing for many yeares furnished the king with money for his warres
in Flanders, and other places, a businesse which troubled all the Bankes of Europe,
as one depends vpon another, with their subalternall credits and interests. Wherefore
some princes were moued by an act of true bountie, to helpe their subjects that
were marchants, least they should faile in their credit. Besides the kings souldiers being,
by reason thereof, in great want, they fell to mutinies. In this businesse therefore of so
great importance, and wherein the king pretended to bee defrauded in diuers manners,
of many hundred thousands of crownes, this controuersie with the kings officers
was long and tedious, the marchants at the last beeing well content to come to
any reasonable agreement; the which at the length was made about the end of this
yere. And for that it had been discouered, that Girolamo Lomellino had sent great summes
of money into Fraunce, the which had beene verie prejudiciall vnto Spaine, and
forbidden, by reason of the ware which continued yet with France, he was subject to arigorous
punishment.
There fell out a great accident in the Venetian embassadours palace at Madrid, whose
name was Augustine Nani,Quarels in the Venetian embassadors house. a man of great judgement, and of a generous spirit, in
maintaining the dignitie of that charge which hee held neere the king: The Prouost
Marshall of the citie would haue apprehended one who had retired into his palace,
flying from the Sergeant which followed him, hoping hee should be safe there,
as in a place of franchise, according to the vse of Courts: the Prouost carrying himselfe
too imperiously (as such people are accustomed to doe) a gentleman of the
embassadours, of the house of Badoero, and his Secretarie, comming at this noyse,
could not endure it; so as from great words they fell to deeds, and the Prouosts wand
was broken (the which they are accustomed to carrie, as a marke of their authoritie)
with other accidents; so as most of the embassadours familie came running at the noyse:
whereupon the kings officers complained. But matters were afterwards tempered by
the king, with the equitie and respect which ought to bee had to the accident and
person. Yet the State of Venice, being willing to take away all causes of distast, that
might grow, made a speedie election of a new embassadour, which was Francis Soranzo;
but hee past not into Spaine vntill the next yeare, all shadowes of dislike being in
the meane time vanished away, taking all occasions to shew mutuall kindnesse betwixt
them and the embassadour Naui, who was extraordinarily fauoured by the king and
prince; and at his departure hee was made a knight, and honoured with rich presents.
They were verie carefull this yeare in Spaine, to preuent the English, least they should
haue some new opportunitie to annoy them, as they had done at Cadiz; which citie

and castle they did fortifie better, with all other places vpon the coast, the earle of Fuentes
lying continually towards the sea with great forces, and hauing good garrisons in
the coast townes, hee sent his horsemen to runne along the coast, that they might bee
free from feare.
And for that the king of Spaine,Mariage of the prince of Spain published. by the continuall indisposition of his bodie, the great
trouble of his mind, hauing such a world of weightie affaires, could not hope for any long
life, he sought to prouide for the future gouernement of his subiects. Wherefore he did
publish the future mariage of his sonne D. Philip vnto the eldest daughter of Ferdinand
Archduke of Austria, whom some call Gregoria Massimiliana, others Marie. But whilest
they made preparation for the solemnitie of this mariage, and sent to the Pope for
dispensations, as well for this, as for the future mariage betwixt the Archduke Albert,
and the Infanta D. Isabella, they had newes that the sayd princesse was suddenly
dead, hauing left the greatnesse of this world, to attaine vnto a better life in
heauen.
The fortunat successe of the English the last yeare at Cadiz,Preparation for the island voiage. hauing affronted the
king of Spaine at his owne doores, gaue them courage to make new attempts this yeare,
and to send forth a goodlie fleet to sea, vnder the commaund of the earle of Essex, who
was both Admirall at sea, and Generall of the land forces. This fleet consisted of an
hundred and twentie saile, whereof there were threescore men of warre, the rest were
victuallers, and ships for transportation of souldiers, and to attend the English fleet.
The Estates of the vnited Prouinces sent ten tall flie-boates vnder the commaund of
Monsieur de Duniuord. This fleet was victualled for three monethes, with large allowance,
with a supplie of apparell for the mariners and souldiers. It was diuided into three
squadrons: the Admirals squadron, the Lord Thomas Howards squadron, who was Vice-admirall,
and Sir Walter Rawleighs squadron, being Rere-admirall. The Netherland flie-boats
were commaunded by their owne Admirall. There were six thousand souldiers appointed
for the land seruice, with ten peeces of ordnance for the field and batterie, with
all necessarie prouisions. And there were in this fleet about fiue hundred voluntaries,
of knights and gentlemen. The chiefe Commaunders of these land forces, were,
the Earle of Essex Generall, the Lord Montioy his Lieutenant generall, Sir Francis
Vere Marshall of the field, Sir George Carew Master of the ordnance, Sir Ferdinando
Gorge, Sergeant Major of the armie, Sir Christopher Blunt Colonell generall
of the foot, with all other officers necessarie in such an action. In all this great
fleet there were not aboue eighteene or twentie ships of her Majesties royall Nauie,
the names of which, and of the Captaines that commaunded in them, I
leaue to a particular discourse written of this voyage, by a worthie knight, who
was an eye witnesse, and an actor in it; the which I hope hee will suffer to come to
the presse.
This goodlie armie being readie, it seemed they had three seuerall designes, to defeat
the king of Spaines fleet,Designes of the English fleet. commaunded by D. Martin de Padiglia, earle of S. Gadea, and
Adelantado Major of Castille, if they met it at sea, or to ruine it in the harbour of Farol,
if they found it there; and to take all fleets of treasure, or any East or West Indian
fleets they should find at sea, in the way to Spaine: and lastly, that they would take
the island of the Terceres, which they held to bee an action of great importance.
With this resolution they put to sea with this gallant fleet; but neither of these
enterprises succeeded: for bending their course directly for Farol, they were incountred
with verie stormie weather, and contrarie windes, so as the whole fleet
was scattered, and many of the shippes in verie great daunger, a great part of the
fleet beeing forced to put backe againe into Plymouth. The shippe wherein the
Generall was, had a verie daungerous leake, and her mastes crackt in diuers places;
yet hee held it out as long as possibly hee could, till in the end her vpper
workes gaue way, and her maine beames did teare, so as they looked hourely when
the Oretoppe would fall, and the ordnance sinke downe into the Keele. Whereupon
hee was forced to put backe to Plymouth, where hee found a great part of

the fleet. There they repaired their shippes, and the earle tooke another, his owne
being made vnseruiceable: But they were kept in by continuall stormes and contrarie
windes, vntill their three monethes victuals was in a manner spent, and the sicknesse
growne great in the flie boats which carried the land armie. Whereupon the Generall
had order to discharge his land forces, all but a thousand old souldiers which had beene
drawne out of the Low Countries; so as they were made vnable to land any forces at
Farol. After which there was a project made by the earle, to send in certaine ships of
fire, and to bume the king of Spaines fleet as it should lye in the harbour, without any
daunger to the queenes ships. Which counsell being allowed of at Court, they put the
second time to sea. But some of good judgement in the fleet, held this exploit vnfeasable,
they hauing not sufficient forces to performe it; neither could they attempt it
without apparent daunger, as indeed it succeeded not* for that the Saint Mathew, one
of the chiefe ships which should haue beene imployed in that action, had lost her foremast,
and was put backe into England, as they pretended: So as hauing no meanes to
doe any seruice vpon the fleet at Farol, they concluded for the intercepting of the Indian
fleet, and defeating of the Adelantado, if he did put to sea: for there was no meanes
to take in the island of Tercera, their land forces being discharged. Whereupon they
shaped their course for the islands, where they layed wait for the Indian fleet; but they
escaped them, and got into Tercera road. What the reasons of the missing of this Indian
fleet were, and what was else done at the islands by this armie, I leaue to an ample relation
of him who was an eye witnesse, and did well obserue it. And so hauing failed in all
their designes, this fleet returned home into England.
The Spaniards did in like manner arme.Spaniards preparation at sea. There was the regiment of Alexander de
Monti, consisting of 15 companies, imbarked at Naples, the which had like to haue beene
cast away in a storme vpon the coast of Romania. In the end they came to Genoua, and
there joyned with the troupes of Gambalaita, all which were transported into Spaine in
Dorias gallies, passing from Barcelona to Cadiz, where a part of the fleet lay: there they
imbarked their land forces in certaine galleons, being six thousand Italians, going towards
the Groine, with an intent (being joyned with the Adelantado, and the rest of the
fleet) to make some attempt vpon England. But on the eight of September they had so
cruell a storme, as they were scattered from their Admirall, and in exceeding great daunger,
whereof some were cast away. A galleon, wherein Alexander de Monti was, and
some of his companies, hauing lost her maine mast, was driuen to the Canaries, and after
that to the coast of Africke, hauing lost his pilot with most of his mariners: there he
ran her on ground, and recouered Mazagon, where he furnished himselfe of all that hee
wanted; and then he past towards the strait, meeting with an English ship, which fought
long with him; but in the end he tooke her: Then joyning with D. Pedro de Toledo, with
some other vessels, they scoured the coast of Barbarie, securing the coasts of Spaine, and
in the end they came to winter in Saint Marie port. The rest of this Spanish fleet, after this
cruell storme, for the most part, recouered Farol. Thus both fleets this yeare, without any
fruits, put themselues to the hazard of the sea, and receiued great losses.
The warres hauing continued long betwixt France and Spaine,Mediation for a peace betwixt France and Spaine. many princes desired
to see the miseries of Christendome at an end. Pope Clement the eight as much affecting
this generall peace as any of his predecessors* considering the great miseries which the
diuisions of the French and Spaniards did cause, and that the Turke made his profit thereof,
and had incroached farre into Christendome, hee resolued to reconcile these two
kings of Spaine and France. Father Bonau^enture Calatagirone, a Si^ilian borne, Generall
of the Franciscanes (and who afterwards was made Patriarke of Constantinople) was
sent by him into Spaine, vnder colour to visit the Conuents of his Order; but in effect
it was to sound king Philip, whether he had any inclination to a peace with France: where
hee found all things well disposed, and the Spaniards desirous to change the doubtfull
euents of a troublesome warre, with the assured and more profitable effects of peace;
his old age, his son young, whom he desired to marie, and to leaue him his Estates quiet,
his eldest daughter, to whom he would giue the Low Counties, marying her to cardinall
Albert of Austria, who like new Lords should haue need of the loue and good

neighbourhood of a French king,1698 the French being vnited, and their ciuile warres ended,
they were likely to transport the warre into his countries, hauing taken Amiens by
force, euen in view of his armie. All these considerations made the king of Spaine incline
to a peace, not onely with the French, but with the Queene of England and the
vnited Prouinces of the Netherlands. Calatagirone being returned to Rome, assured
the Pope that hee had found a disposition and desire of peace in king Philip, and
that he was wearie of the warres. So the Pope continuing in this good desire, sent this
Franciscan into France, to persuade the king to peace and friendship with the king of
Spaine. Alexander cardinall of Florence, his Holinesse Legat in France, vnderstanding
the Popes pleasure, together with Calatagirone, persuaded the king to yeeld vnto a peace.
And on the other side, by the exhortations of the Patriarke Caietan, his Holinesse Nuntio
at Madrid, the king of Spaine referred the whole treatie of the said peace to his nephew
cardinall Albert.
Whilest that Calatagirone went to Brussels, to solicite the cardinall to send the deputies
to Veruins, the French king aduertised all his allies, to the end they might be comprehended
in this accord with the Spaniard, if they thought good. The queene of
England (who had more annoyed the Spaniard than all the princes of Christendome)
refused to be comprehended in the accord, and so did the Estates of the vnited Prouinces,
who sent their embassadours to the French king, to dissuade him from a peace with the
Spaniard. The king of Spaine did greatly desire a peace with them, and sought it by
the meanes of his kinsmen and allies, who, at his request, sent their embassadours to that
end into England,Queene of England and Estates of the Low Countries refuse a peace with the Spaniard. and the vnited Prouinces, but without effect. The king of Spaine
hearing of all their aunswers, and being out of hope of a peace with the English and
Hollanders, caused them to proceed in the treatie with the French: whereupon the deputies
of either king came to Veruins: Who hauing long disputed, and being often readie
to breake off, almost in despaire, in the end a peace was concluded, in Iune this yeare
1598.Peace betwixt Spaine and France. The deputies for the French king were, Monsieur de Bellieure, Counsellor of
State, and Monsieur de Syllery, Counsellour also of State, and President of the Court
of Parliament at Paris: And for the Catholike king, Iohn Richardot, knight, President of
his priuie Councell, Iohn Baptista Taxis, Commaunder de los Santos, of the Order of Saint
Iames, and of his Councell of State and warre, and Lewis Verreichen knight, chiefe Secretarie
and Treasorer of the Charters of the said Councell of State: who according to their
Commissions concluded in the name of the said kings.
That the treatie of peace made at Castle Cambresis,Contents of the articles of the peace. in the yeare 1559, betwixt the
kings of France and Spaine, should be newly confirmed and obserued.
That all hostilitie and quarels should cease, with promise not to annoy nor prejudice
one another.
That their subjects should haue free traffique.
That all places taken since the treatie of Castle Cambresis, should bee restored of either
part within two monethes.
That the said kings and the Infanta of Spaine, reserued vnto themselues all the rights,
actions, and pretensions, by reason of the said realms, countries, or seigniories, whereunto
they or their predecessors haue not expresly renounced, to make their pursuit by some
friendlie course, or by justice, and not by armes.
The force and life of king Philip began to decline,Cession of the L^w Countries to the Infanta of Spaine. which he foreseeing, hee was desirous
to effect the promise which he had made to the Archduke Albert, his nephew, and
if the mariage betwixt him and the Infanta Isabella his daughter were not consummated,
yet they might be assured by the cession of the prouinces, which he meant to make in fauour
of it. Whereupon, the sixt of May, he caused to be read at Madrid (in the presence of
prince Philip his only son, who was then about 20 yeres old, of D. Gomes d' Auila, marques
of Vellada, Lord Steward of the princes house, D. Christopher de Mora, earle of Castell, Roderigo,
great Commaunder of the Alcantara, D. Iohn d' Idiaques, great Commaunder of
Leon, all three Counsellours of State, and Nicholas Damant, knight, President and
Chauncellour of Brabant, with la L^o, Secretarie of the affaires of the Low Countries)
the contract, by the which he did institute the future spouses, and their heires, of what

of what sexe soeuer,1598 soueraigne Lords of all the Prouinces of the Low-countries,
of the franche countie of Bourgondie, and of the count^e of Charolois; with condition
that the donation and cession should be void, and of no force, in case the marriage
were not accomplished. That the eldest of the lawfull children issuing of this marriage,
should be preferred before the younger,Articles of the cessi^n. and the male the female, iointly in all the Prouinces,
without any diuision: That for want of lawfull heires it should returne to the
Crowne of Spaine: And that they should not alienate any part thereof without the
consent of the heires and successors of the king of Spaine. That the Princesse, heire
of the Netherlands, being a maiden or widow, should marrie the king of Spaine, or
the prince his Sonne; and if shee haue neither will nor power to doe it with the Popes
dispensation, shee shall not take any aliance but with the consent of the kings of Spain:
And so of the heirs and descendents of the future Spouses. That al negotiation and traffik
to the East and West Indies shall bee forbidden them and their subiects. That
the Archduke suruiuing the Infanta, hee should hold those Countries during his life.
That hauing children, their portions should bee assigned them, vntill that the elder
after the decease of the father should take possession of the whole. That onely the
Catholike, Apostolike and Romish religion should bee maintained in the said Prouinces,
and in case of contrauention by them or their descendents, they should lose
their rights to the said Countries.
Prince Philip did consequently ratifie this donation,Donation ratefied by Prince Philip. more (as some thought) to
please the king his father, than for any good liking hee had of it, for she depriued
him of many goodlie and rich Prouinces: And the Infanta his Sister hauing accepted
the transaction, sent her fathers and bothers letters Patents to the Gouernours
and Councels of the Prouinces, with their letters which promised all assistance for
the warre, and her owne which contained a declaration of this accord. Thus the
Archduke, as the Historie saith, married a great Princesse, a troublesome quarrell, and a
long sute, all in one day. From which time shee did write vnto him, as a wi^e doth
vnto her husband, taking vpon her the titles of all those Countries and Prouinces, and
sending him a procuration to take possession in her name. The empresse, mother to
Albertus, and sister to the king of Spaine, receiued the promise of marriage for her
Sonne, and did also make a promise in the name of the Archduke Albert.
The king of Spaine would moreouer shew,King of Spaine makes a new contract for the paiment of his debts. that in giuing his daughter the Infanta to
the Archduke, hee would not abandon them for want of money to continue the
warre against the vnited Prouinces: hee made a new contract with Camillo, Soniolla, Maluenda
and Grimaldi, to whome hee did reassigne and confirme the reuenues of Spaine,
and reuoked the edict which had beene made at Pardo, vpon condition that for an ouerplus
and new loane, they should furnish him with seuen millions and two hundred
thousand ducats, paying euerie month two hundred and fifty thousand ducats to the
Archduk Albert, to supply the charges of the low countrie warres, and that for the space of
eighteen monthes, the first paiment whereof should be due the last of Ianuarie, in the said
yeare 1598, the whole summe for the Low countries amounting to foure millions and a
halfe. The rest should be paied in Spaine, or where hee should command, after the rate
of an hundred and fiftie thousand ducats monthly, for eighteene monthes together: both
which parties amount to 7200000 ducats.
The king of Spaine sent in the beginning of this yere 4 thousand Spaniards,Spaniards sent into the Low-Countries. Besognes,
into the Low countries, to fortifie the Archduke Albert, whoe as it seemes did not greatly
trust the Wallons. D. Sancho de Leua was their cheife commaunder ouer foure Colonels:
they came by sea in 40 ships, the lesser got safely into Callice for that the Estates
ships had bin forced by fowle weather to weigh a^^hor, yet they took one of the greatest;
in the which was Alonso Sa^ches of Villareal with 150 Spaniards, and made foure more
to runne on ground to saue the soldiers.
The States of the vnited Prouinces,Vnited Prouinces saile vnto the Indies. finding the number of their shipping to bee
great, and that they wanted imployment for them, not daring to traffik into Spaine, where
their ships and goods were daily arrested, and their men imprisoned, whereby in
time their Nauigation would decay, they resolued to seeke their fortunes at the East

and West Indies, whether the Spaniards would neuer allow them to goe, whereupon
they gaue leaue, and assisted certaine priuat Merchants, to goe and seeke trade at
the East Indies, and in those Ilands whereas the Portugals had no commaund, so
as this yeare there went to the number of eightie saile out: of Holland and Zealand,
towards the East and West Indies, Bresill, Castell de Mine, to the coast of Afrike,
and Guinee, whose successe was diuers. Many of these vnder the charge of Baltazar
Moucheron, had commandement from Prince Maurice and the State* to meet at the
Iland del Principe. Iulian of Cleerhagen as Generall in the absence of Moucheron, and
Gerard Stribos as Admirall, parted in March with fiue Ships, one hundred and fifty
Souldiers, and two hundred Mariners, who arriued somewhat late in August at the
said Iland: where Cleerhagen found a ship, in the which a Nephew of Moucherons commanded,
who being well knowne in the Iland by reason of his trading there, was
a meanes that the Generall became Master of it without any opposition, for hee
drew the Gouernour and chiefe Officers of the place to come aboard, where they
made them good cheare. After which the Generall acquainted them with his Commission,Surprise of the Iland del pri^cipe.
and to what end hee was come. The Ilanders seeing themselues surprised, seemed
content, and yeelded to their wils: then, hauing taken an oath to Cleerhagen,
they all landed, whereas the Generall in Moucherons name was proclaimed Generall
of the Iland.
Three daies after the taking of the oath, the Portugals and Ilanders conspired against
the Hollanders, and came suddenly with great fury to charge Moucherons men, but
they were repulst and scattered in the Iland; but vpon proclamation of a pardon they
returned, and submitted themselues againe to the Hollanders; whereupon there was a
new accord made betwixt them, but it continued not aboue sixe weekes, by reason
of Cleerhagens disordered actions, who did not obscrue the course that was prescribed
him, neither was hee carefull to build the sorts which had beene drawne, hauing
good meanes. The Portugals and Ilanders seeing his carelesnesse, made a new attempt
against him, which being discouered vnto the Hollanders, they seazed vpon the Padre
Vicario, meaning to execute him, but as Francis Fort with the Iudge Steuen Quaresmo,
went to visit this Vicarios house, they were slaine by his slaues, which caused a new tumult,
whereupon the Vicario was condemned and hanged with one of his confederates.
This death made them send to D. Antonio de Meneses Gouernour of the Iland of Saint
Thomas for succours, who a month after sent the Gouernour of Castell de Mine with
fiue hundred souldiers, by whose persuasion they were resolued to make warre against
Moucherons men.
The Generall Cleerhagen fell into disgrace with his Companie, and died of greefe: Stribos
the Admirall succeeded him, and dyed also with ouer-toiling himselfe in the fortifications.
Whereupon the Hollanders erected a Councell of foure to gouerne the estate of
their affaires in the Iland: but after a months sufferance, their Souldiers being somewhat
wasted, they began to faint and to be out of hope of succours, so as they should not bee
able to maintaine themselues against so many enemies. Whereupon they abandoned the
Iland, and setting their fort on fire, they imbarked, there comming supplies of men and
victuals vnto them from Moucheron within fifteene daies after, but it was too late: and so
the Iland was soone wonne and as soone lost.
This yeare in the Spring the Spaniards began to apprehend some new attempt of the
English vpon their coast,C^^st of Spaine (...) by the English. for that those Seas were ful of English men of warre: yea, there
was a fleet set forth by the Earle of Cumberland, which after it had co^mitted some spoile
about Cascais, lay many daies in the mouth of the Riuer of Lisbone, keeping in the galleons
of Portugal, which lay ready to go to the East-Indies, but it was without any fruits,
the West-Indian fleet being safely arriued at Seuille, after that it had beene scattered by a
storme neere vnto the Terceres.
The treasure which came in this Indian fleet gaue the kings ministers meanes to prouide
more commodiously for the great affaires of so many kingdomes, and to continue
the war, which hee mainteined in diuers places. Wherefore they leuied new men to send
into the Low-Countries, and others to man certaine vessels which were sent forth to bridle

the attempts of the Turkes vpon the coast of Spaine, and Afrike: They were fiue and
twenty gallies vnder the charge of D. Pedro de Toledo, whereof some were of Spaine,
and some of Naples: there were two regiments of Italians in them, the one was commanded
by Alexander de Monti, the other by Cesare d' Euolt; but hee dying before at the
Groine, they were both then commanded by Monti. These gallies hauing not met with
any Pyrats at sea, past into Barbarie, where they landed a good number of their men; with
the which Monti did presently march, and set vpon a towne, the which was taken by scalado,Alexander de Monti surpris^th a towne in Barbarie.
where breaking open the ports, and drawing in all his men, it was sackt and then burnt, taking
making slaues, with great store of wealth: yet this could not be so soon executed, but
many horsemen Moores, came posting thither from the neighbour places, so as de Monti
was forced to make an orderly retreat, putting his men into squadrons and the rereward
skirmishing still with the enemy, wherein they all in generall shewed such valour, as this
actio^ was more esteemed, althogh they lost some men, then the winning and spoiling of the
town without any losse. The Colonel de Monti was still in the rereward, who with great
iudgement and valour gouerned the retreat vntil they were all imbarked, being so fauored
by the gallies ordna^ce, as the Moorish horsemen, being many in nu^ber, were forced to
retyre with great losse. The gallies after they had run along that coast, and made the Ba^barians
feele the spoils which they co^mitted vpon the weaker parts of Spain, they were called
home to lie in gard in the streit of Gibraltar, to hinder the enemies attempts. But the
English fleet aboue me^tioned hauing left the riuer of Lisbone, took many Easterling* and
other ships carrying victuals and other commodities into Spain, which being that yere verie
scant of corn,(...) which was then brought vnto them from other countries, and taken at sea,
it bred a great scarcitie. Whilest that Lisbone was prest with this extremity, by great hap
there was a Galeon of Tuscany got in, being laden with come and other commodities fit
to relieue their wants. Yet the dearth of corn increased, notwithstanding that the Hollanders
being greedy of gain did often attempt to bring some, and so they did in Sicile and other
places. Some held that this dearth grew through the want of men to till the ground
(whereunto that nation is nothing inclined) hauing been also constrained to send foorth
great troups of men to the wars of France and Fla^ders; besides others which went daily by
thousands out of that realm vpon diuers occasions. They did also aleage another reason of
(...) ^carcity, for that some yeres before Corne had bin set at an vnder rate, so as strangers
had no care to bring in any, neither did the countrie men much care for tillage.
During the great dearth of corn, Spaine felt a general ioy for the peace which had been
concluded with France, the which was proclaimed at Madrid in the end of Iune, and it
was increased with a priuat content by the mariage of the duke of Alcala,Marriage of the duke of Alcala. with the daughter
of Christopher de Mora, being honored with the presence of the Prince D. Philip, and many
Grandes of the court. And soon after were celebrated the mariages of two of the Marquesse
of Pozzas daughters, the one vnto the eldest son of the duke of Sessa, who was then
embassador at Rome, and the other vnto the heire of Cordoua: but the ioy was much greater
when the future mariage of Prince Philip with Marguerit of Austria, and of the Infanta
D. Isabella, with the Archduke Albertus were published. Whilest that k. Philip ends as hee
had begun his raign with the wars of the Low countries, behold many touches of the miseries
and pouertie whereunto humanitie is subiect,King Philip grows towards his end. made him remember that hee was a
man. He could not feele that contentment in his soule, like vnto the first man of Greece in
his time, who dying, held himself happy, for that neuer any Athenian had mourned by his
occasion: yet at the least he hath this consolation, that after the expence of so much mony,
and the shedding of so much bloud, hauing with so great rigour and bitternesse pursued
the ruin, and hastned the destinies of the goodliest estate of Europe, he sees the two first monarchs
of Christendome vnited by a firm bond, and co^mon peace, and his children ready to
enter into allyances; which content him. He now feeles that his houre is come, and that he
must leaue the ambitions of this world, and that the flesh striues in vaine against
the spirit, when as the one must part company from the other. Wherefore carrying
alwaies a great deuotion to the Monasterie of Saint Laurence, and being much affected
to his most sumptuous and incomparable Palace of the Escuriall, 7 leagues from Madrid,
his sicknes increasing daily, after the resignation of the Low countries, to his daughter D.

Isabella, he would needs be carried thither, to seek a safe rampar, against the assaults which
an intestine warre was readie to giue him vpon the troublesome dissolution of the soule
and bodie. He, whom Histories obserue to haue beene greater than any one of his house,
who without danger sitting in his Cabinet, hath disposed of more famous actions than any
of his predecessors, finds now that the Soueraign Creator hath made the poorest cottager
equal to the greatest king in many respects. He hath giuen them the earth for their
abode, for they nurse and common mother, the same beginning of creation, one common
heauen, one sunne, one Moone, the aire and water common; the soules of one and other
haue one nature; they come all into the world naked alike, and all haue one issue out of
this life. He finds now that death feares no gards; that he knocks as familiarly at Princes
Palaces, as at the cottages of poore Shepheards, hee laies hold of them, when as teares
preuaile not, armes are of no force, praiers cannot moue him, nor presents corrupt him,
the Phisitions art cannot stay him, nor drugs and receits preuent his power: Yea, that
sometimes he takes them away when they haue not leasure to deliuer their last will. Finally
after this end they must all run one course, when as their bodies shall putrifie alike.
He had surmounted the crosses of fortune, and great accidents in his time, but hee
could find no preseruatiue, to make him insensible of greefe. The gout, a feuer, a filthy
Phthiriasis, an apostume on his right leg, foure other, wonderfull foule and stinking, on
his breast, an infinit number of lice, breeding of that corrupt and stinking matter, and dispersing
themselues ouer his whole bodie, gaue him to vnderstand, that nature could make a
wretched Anatomie of his bodie, as well as of the meanest of his subjects. Being come
to the Escuriall, and his paines increasing, hee prepared himselfe for death, and after hee
had receiued the Sacrament, hee desired to see D. Garcia of Loyola solemnly consecrated
Archbishop of Toledo, by the Popes Legat, it being resigned vnto him by the Archduke
Albert.
His feuer and infirmities increasing in the beginning of September, hee called for
D. Philip his sonne, and the Infanta Isabella his daughter; where in the presence of the
Archbishop of Toledo and some others, he shewed his body vnto the Prince, and said vnto
him, Behold prince the greatnesse of this world, see this wretched carcasse, whereas all human
help auailes nothing. He then caused a brasen coffin to be brought, and a deths head to bee
set vpon a cupbord with a Crowne of gold by it. He then commanded D. Lewis de (...)
a gentleman of his Chamber to fetch a small Casket, wherein there was a rich Iewell, the
which he gaue vnto his daughter in the Princes presence, saying, This Iewell was your mothers,
keep it in remembrance of her; And forthwith he drew out a paper which he gaue vnto
the Prince saying, That it was an Inst^uction how he should gouerne his estate. After which, he
drew forth a whip, at the end whereof appeared some markes of bloud, and holding it vp
he said, that it was bloud of his bloud, although it were not his own bloud, but the emperor
his fathers who had vsed it: which done hee disposed of the order of his funerals. After
which, in the presence of the Popes Nuntio, he recommended the Sea of Rome, the
Pope, and the Catholike Apostolike and Romish Religion to his children, desiring the
Nuntio to giue him absolution of his sinnes, and to blesse his children. He did recommend
the Infanta vnto the Prince his Son, and the good estate of her Countries. He did not remember
the children of D. Catherina duchesse of Sauoy his other d^ughter, to whom before
she died he had bequeathed for a reme^brance the picture of our Lady of Lorette. He
was so resolute and ready to die, as his Confessor did wish that hee might die of that disease,
and in that estate, least that his recouerie should alter that good and happy disposition.
The continuall feuer, whereof he had languished three yeres, and the violent torments
of the gout, had prepared him for death, long before he was ready to take him. He gaue
no eare to any discourse but touching his departure. A gentleman of his chamber seeing
him to haue some intermission of his pains, aduised him to remoue into some other chamber
that was more chearefull, the Physitians warranting that hee might liue two
yeares longer; Giue (said hee) this picture of our Ladie, to the Infanta, it was the
Empresse my Mothers, and I haue worne it fifty yeares: He spake of his departure, as of
a royall entrie into goodliest Cities vnder his obedience; and of his funeral, as of a Coronation.
I will (said hee) haue this Crucifix hung at my neck, and resting vpon my breast: I

will haue that in my hand with the which my father dyed. Hold a candle of Mont
Sarrat readie, and giue it me when I am in the Agonie. Goe (said hee) to two
Religious men, and measure my fathers Herse, obserue how hee is laid, I will be
so, and with no more ceremonie than the poorest Monke in this Monasterie. They
that were about him, spake of his constancie, as Saint Augustin did of the admirable
resolution of a holy Spaniard. The violence of his paine was great, but the force
of his courage was greater, the one suffered, and the other sung, the flesh suffered
and the spirit spake. Nothing liued more in him than a feeling of his sinnes, the
which toucht him so neere, as after that they had made an incision in his knee, and
the Prince his Sonne asking him if he felt not the paine of his greene wound, I feele (said
the king) the wounds of my sinnes much more.
Approaching towards his end, hee commaunded that the Marquesse of Mondejar
should bee set at libertie, but restrained from comming to court; and that the wife
of Anthony Perez (sometimes his Secretarie) should bee set at libertie, vpon condition
that hee should retire himselfe into some Monasterie. Hee receiued the extreme
vnctions from the Archbishop of Toledo, after that hee had demaunded the manner of
the administration thereof, for that hee had neuer seene it giuen. Hee had resolued
to send the Prince and the Infanta ^o Madrid, for that they should not bee present at
the pitifull spectacle of the ruine of his bodie, but hee changed his opinion, and
would haue the Prince present when they gaue him the extreme vnction: after which
hee commanded them to leaue him alone with his Sonne,King Philips last speech vnto his Sonne. to whome hee spake
these words: I was desirous my son you shold assist at this last actio^, to the end you shold
not liue in ignorance, as I haue done, how this holy Sacrament is administred, and that you
might see the end of kings, and whereunto their Crownes and Scepters are reduced.
Death is readie to snatch the Crowne from my head, and to set it vpon yours.
Therein I recommend two things vnto you; the one is, that you remaine alwaies obedient
vnto the Church; the other that you doe justice to your subiects. The time will
come when this Crowne shall fall from your head as it doth now from mine: you
are young, I haue beene so, my daies are numbred and are ended, God keepes the
accompt of yours, and they shall likewise end. They say that hee did enioyne him,
with passion, to make warre against Heretikes, and to entertaine peace with France.
The Prince thinking that his end approached, demaunded the golden key of the
Cabinet from D. Christopher de Mora, meaning to grace the Marquesse of Denia his
fauourite therewith: but hee desired the Prince to pardon him, saying that hee
might not leaue it whilest the king was liuing, but by his expresse commandement:
whereat the Prince was offended.
D. Christopher complained hereof vnto the king, who neither commended the demaund
being too sudden, nor allowed of his refusall, commanding D. Christopher
to carrie it vnto the Prince, and to craue his pardon: who returning to visit his father,
D. Christopher de Mora kneeling downe, (...) the key and deliuered it vnto him;
the which the Prince tooke and gaue to the Marquesse of Denia: And as the prince
and the Infanta stood before his bed, hee said vnto them, I recommend vnto you D.
Christopher de Mora, the best seruant I euer had, with all my other seruants: And so
giuing them his last farewell, and imbracing them, his speech fayled him* continuing
two daies in that estate vntill hee died, being seuenty and one yeares old, and hauing
raigned fifty.
He was borne at Vailledolit the fiue and twentieth of Aprill,Birth and ^^ature of the king of Spaine. in the yeare one thousand
fiue hundred twenty and six, and dyed the thirteenth of September 1598. He was but
little of stature, yet of a pleasing aspect, but no goodlie man by reason of his great nether
lip, which is hereditarie in the house of Austria, otherwise he was faire of complexion, rather
resembling a Fleming than a Spaniard: of so found a constitution of body, as he was
sildome or neuer sicke. He was sometimes troubled with faintings: and did neuer eat any
fish: he was of a constant resolution, and of a great spirit, apprehending presently the ends
of things, and foreseeing them with an admirable wisdome and iudgement.
Pope Clement the eight, hearing newes of his death, assembled the Consistorie,

where after audience giuen vnto the Cardinalls, hee told them in a graue speech
full of passion:Popes iudgment vpon the death of king Philip. That if euer the holy Sea had cause of greefe and affliction, it was
for the death of that Prince, the Church hauing lost a great Protector, and her
persecutors a mightie enemie. That his whole life had beene nothing but a warfa^e
against infidelities, heresies, and errors. That two things did comfort them in this
losse: the one, that being dead with an admirable conformitie in the will of God, an
incredible patience in his paines, and an vnchangeable constancie in his Religion, he
held him rewarded in heauen with immortall glorie: the other, that hee had left a
Sonne which made them hope that it was rather a resurrection of the father than
a succession of the Sonne. In the end hee recommended them both to their praiers,
paying thereby for what the one had done, and what the other offered to doe by his
letters for the good of the Church.
To speake of his vertues:Vertues of king Philip. it is said that all good Princes may bee written in a ring.
Philip had great vertues, it were a rare thing to haue all. The seedes of such princes as
haue no defects are in heauen. Hee was great in pietie, Religion, justice, liberalitie and
constancy.His pietie. As for his pietie and religion, hee hath beene heard to say, that if the prince
his Sonne became an Here^ike, or a Schismaticke, hee would bring fagots himselfe to
burne him. He alwaies protested that his designes in warre, and his exercises in peace did
onely tend to the aduancement of Religion. The last words he pronounced with his last
gaspe, were, That he died a Catholike. He respected the Pope as hee that carried the keies
of heauen in his hand, the prince of the Church, and Gods Lieutenant generall ouer
mens soules. The Popes respected him as the chiefe supporter of the peace and
vnion of the Church: Pi^^ 5. did so terme him when they made the league against the
Turke: and his successour Gregorie 13 answered him that caused his health to be prayed
for at Rome, My life imports the Church little, the which after me may haue a better
Pope: Recommend the king of Spaines health vnto God, for it is necessarie for all Christendome.
And he himselfe held his assistance necessarie for the affaires of Christians; for
being sicke, and the Phisitian doubting to let him bloud by reason of his weakenesse, Feare
not (said he) to let me bloud,Speech of the king of Spaine. the estate of Gods Church permits not that I should die of this disease,
nor of this bloud letting. Euerie man knowes in what credit hee was in the Consistorie, to
haue his intention approued, and likewise in the Conclaue for the election of Popes.
Hee held Rome by the l^aire and the throat,This is spoken for the pensions of Cardinals which are at the deuotion of Spaine. being in his power to famish it, refusing the
commodities which they may draw at need out of his estates which inuiron it.
As he honoured the Pope, so did hee much esteeme the Prelates of the Church, and
had a great care to preferre men of vertue and merit to ecclesiasticall dignities. There
was a great controuersie betwixt the archbishop of Valencia, and the Viceroy, to know
to whome they should first present the Pax and the Censor: the which hee ended,
commanding that hee that presented vnto his Maiestie, should giue it first vnto the archbishop,
thinking that the honor that he did vnto Gods Ministers was an infinit glory vnto
him, and that a prince should affect no other commendation, than the care and zeale of
Religion, when it is without dissembling or hypocrisie. Hee did witnesse his zeale and
passion in the seeking out of many r^likes of Saints, especially to haue the body of
Saint Eugenius Bishop of Toledo,His curiositie to find out ^elikes hauing to that end sent embassadors expresly to
king Charles the ninth, and to the Queene Mother, who granted it, contrarie to
the aduice of the Cardinall of Lorraine, Abbot of Saint Denis: hee went to receiue
it at Toledo, and caused it to bee conducted to the Escuriall. How much did he spend
for the canonizing of Frier Diego of Alcala of the order of Saint Francis, and of Frier Raymond
of Pegnafort a Iacobin, famous among learned men, for that he gathered the decre^ales
into one bodie, and throughout all Spaine, for that hee past like another Elizeus
vpon his cloake from Majorca to Barcelona, and that which is very rare in our age, refused
the Archbishopricke of Tarragone. Wee find not any now that hide themselues
in caues from spirituall dignities, or that out off their nose and eares to make themselues
incapable of church preferments, which requires sound bodies and sanctified
soules. No affaires could interrupt him in the course of his deuotion, and we in the
relations of Antoni^ Perez that hee did often referre the care of businesse to another

day, when he was preparing of his conscience, or among his Monkes at the Escuriall. He
went bare headed in the procession of the Sacrament, and being on that day at Cordoua,
some one did aduertise him,En este dia no haze mal ^t Sol. that the Sunne was offensiue: to whom he aunswered, That
the Sunne that day would doe him no harme. Being a religious prince, he loued no new religions.
He neuer receiued the Capuchi^s. They of his house haue built many colledges
of Iesuites in diuers places, at Vienna in Austria, at Tumant in Hungarie, at Prague in
Bohemia, at Hal, at Grats, at Munch, at Inspruke, and he alone of his house is dead without
any memorie of his bountie towards them. Speaking against that great multitude
of religions, and the increase of regular Orders, hee said, That they should reduce the
new to the auncient, and maintaine those in the first integritie of their institution, and that
it was to be feared the world would abound more in religious Orders than in pietie. Hee
vsed them of Saint Dominicke in his confessions, and in his other deuotions the Ieronimits,
to whom he gaue that rich temple of the Escuriall. He did so respect Dominicke de
Cha^es, his Confessor, as he caused him to be visited in his cell by the President of Castille,
when he was in doubt of any point of conscience or of penance.
He had a Councell of conscience for the direction of his enterprises.Councell of conscience. This Councell
hath often drawne him out of many difficulties, and hath freed him from the bond of his
promises. The historie of Portugall doth furnish a memorable example. The duke of
Ossuna, and D. Christopher de Mora, had promised mountaines of gold to them that
should be opposit to D. Antonio, and should fauour the kings right to the Crowne of
Portugall. He being expelled, these men demaunded the effects of those promises, and
that their bills should be discharged. The king commaunded that all should bee sent to
the table of conscience.Aduice of the king of Spaines Councell of conscience. The Iudges payed them with this sentence: Seeing that king
Philip is heire to the realme of Portugall, the petitioners could not compound for his
right for money, gifts, or promises, and haue deserued death, for that they did not willingly
yeeld it vnto him: If the realme did belong to Antonio, they could not then deliuer
it: And therefore king Philip is no way bound to performe those promises which his
embassadors and agents had made vnto the petitioners: But vsing his clemencie and mercie,
he freed them from the paine of death, which they had vpon this occasion deserued.
As for his justice,King of Spain^ a seuere iusticer the example of his son is sufficient to shew his rigor. It is true, that in
many actio^s he hath proceeded more by his absolute power than by the ordinarie course.
These great motions cannot alwayes be ruled by the ordinarie formes, nor subiect themselues
to the judgement of reason, nor to humane discourse. Yet hee protested, being
neere his end, That he had not done wrong nor injustice to any one, but through ignorance,
or false impression. It is an act of justice in a prince, to suffer them to tell him of
the vnjust actions of his gouernement. It is true, that it cannot be tearmed an act of justice,
to haue made his creditors so often to loose that which they had lent him, nor to reduce
the 18 millions of gold, which he did owe the Genouois, to 12.
His liberalitie hath appeared in recompensing the merits of many of his seruants.His liberalitie. He
made his Schoolemaster Primat of the Church of Spaine, as his father had aduanced his
vnto the Popedom. There are few such princes now, that vse such requitals. There are no
more Alexanders,That is 480000 crownes. who gaue eight hundred talents to his Schoolemaster Arislotle.
Kings haue long hands, but few haue them so large after this proportion. The king of
Spaine did neuer leaue any goodlie action either of learning, justice, or warre, without
reward. Hee did not onely doe good vnto the good, to make them better, but also to
the bad, least they should grow worse. But he did neuer aduance them hee loued to fauours
disproportionable to their condition: He did much for Ruy Gomes, for the loue of
his wife the princesse of Eboly: Yet this liberalitie did neuer make a passage for him to
great affaires. He was verie circumspect in the distinction of great charges, especially of
such as concerned the administration of justice, whereon, as Plato said, depends the safetie
and ruine of an Estate. And although that the earle of Chinchon, being bred vp with
him in his youth, should haue expected more than any other, yet he obtained nothing
but what he held fit for his qualitie.Honours ruine them that deserue them not. He was woont to say, That all stomackes were not fit

to disgest great fortunes, and that ill meat did not corrupt sooner, and turne to bad humors,
than honour in a soule without merit.
As for his constancie against afflictions,(...) for tune could neuer shake him. In two diuers
accidents, happening at two diuers times, he shewed the constancie of his mind, and the
equalitie of his affections; neither puffing him vp insolently in prosperitie, nor deiecting
himselfe basely in aduersitie. When the post brought him newes of the victorie of Lepanto,His great moderation in prosperitie.
he thought to see him much transported with joy, but hee made no shew of any
alteration; and hauing vnderstood the order and successe of the battell, hee spake these
words coldly, D. Iohn hath hazarded much. Now, when another post did bring him newes
of the losse of that great nauie at sea, thinking it would haue plunged him into a gulph
of cares and perturbations, at the report of so fatall an accident, hee was not a
whit mooued;His constancie in aduersitie. saying onely, That hee had sent it against men, and not against the
windes and waues. Vulgar spirits are transported with choler at euerie crosse accident,
this vnmatchable losse doth not trouble this prince, who continued his deuotion
in his Oratorie. Some other would haue torne his haire, and haue whipt the
Ocean, as Xerxes did. The duke of Medina Sidonia, Generall of this armie, sending
to know his pleasure, if hee would haue him come and giue an account of his charge, he
answered, That hee should first goe home to his house, to refresh and rest himselfe before
he came to Court.
It were fit we should see the backside of this Medaile,Vices of the K. of Spaine. and speake something of the errours
and vices of this prince, as well as of his vertues, seeing it is fit to speake all for
examples sake; yet it is not good to trouble the rest of the dead. Nicons image ouerthrew
him that strooke it with a staffe: A dead stone did reuenge the injurie that was
done vnto a dead man. It is sufficient to say, That as this prince was commended for
many great vertues, so hee was blamed, in his youth, of great dissolution to voluptuousnesse,
and a violent propension to crueltie. These two vices doe seldome abandon
one another: Euerie voluptuous prince is cruell, if necessitie constraine him. This
plague doth infect and blemish the glorie of vertues, how bright soeuer they be in the
life of a prince. Victorinus might haue beene compared to the best Emperours, yea hee
should surpasse Traian in bountie, Antonine in clemencie, Nerua in grauitie, Vespasian in
sparing of his treasure, Pertinax and Seuerus in the integritie of his life, and in the seueritie
of militarie discipline: but all these vertues were so quencht by voluptuousnesse, as
no man durst speake vnto him. The king of Spaine hath put many to death in the excesse
and first fits of his choler.King of Spaine (...) and distrustfull. He was as suspitious, distrustfull, and cruell, as euer any
was. He did not allow the prince his sonne to speake with the Infanta his daughter,
but by permission, and in the presence of their gouernors. The jealousie of Soueraigne
power makes no distinction of person, nor spareth not his owne bloud, as appeared by
his owne sonne: and Sultan Solyman caused his sonne Mustafa to bee strangled, for that
the Ianizaries made great acclamations of joy at his returne from the warres of
Persia.
Some write of him, That, besides the aboue named vices, he was fearefull, doubtfull,
close, and a dissembler, ambitious, and proud beyond the condition of man, and nothing
religious of his word in matters of Estate; the duke of Vilhermosa, and the marquesse
of Fuentes, are good witnesses; he put them to death after that he had pardoned
them the reuolt of Arragon. And those words which he spake in his last instruction to
his sonne, speaking of the Low Countries, doe verifie it; It is true (said hee) I haue giuen
them to your sister, but it imports not; you haue an hundred ^^asions, which you may vse in time.
His ambition appeared, in that he affected the Empire by all possible meanes, which
not able to obtaine, he sought the title of Emperour of Spaine: yea some write, That he
was resolued to goe vnto the Indies, to take vpon him the title of Emperour of America.
After all his ambitious proiects against Africke, his attempts against England and Ireland,
and his intelligences with the Turkes, Barbarians, and Persians, whom hee hath
sought to diuide, and to make vse of, euen against Christian princes, yet in the end he was
forced to confesse, That all the power and pompe of this world was meere vanitie.

He had foure wiues, but he was vnfortunat in the first, the which was Marie princesse
of Portugall,His wiues and children. who bare him one sonne, whose name was Charles; but his life was short
and vnfortunat, and his end violent, being charged by the Inquisition to haue thought
ill of the Faith, and to haue had intelligence with Chastillion Admirall of France, and
with the prince of Orange touching the Low Countries. His second wife was Marie
queene of England, by whom hee had no issue. His third was Elizabeth of France
(surnamed by the Spaniards, the Queene of Peace) who brought him two daughters,
the Infanta D. Isabella Clara Eugenia, now Archduchesse of Austria, and Ladie of the
Low Countries, and the Infanta D. Catherina Michelle, who was duchesse of Sauoy. His
fourth wife was Anne of Austria, daughter to the Emperour Maximilian, and his owne
neece, by whome he had three sonnes and one daughter, of the which, at his death, there
remained onely the prince, who was then called Charles Laurence, but at his comming to
the Crowne he was surnamed Philip the third.
He ended his dayes with an act of wisedome worthie of his long experience. Princes
cannot enter into their realmes by a better port, than the loue of their subjects. If their fathers
be dead, desired, and lamented, they must doe some great matter to mollifie this
sorrow. Painters are no more bound to represent the true lineaments of the face, than
princes are to represent their fathers vertues, whose liuelie images they are. Before his
death hee made an Edict which could not be pleasing vnto his subiects, who began to
murmure, and it seemed that they would not be so satisfied, if they proceeded to execution.Wisedome of the King of Spaine.
It was not made for that the king of Spaine had any desire to haue it executed
and obserued, but to the end he might giue the prince his sonne a good occasion to win
the peoples hearts; for he sayed presently, that hee would neuer allow of the execution
of that Edict, and that he would breake his head that should first speake it; the which hee
spake so lowd, as euerie man thought himselfe happie to liue vnder the command of such
a prince, who would proue better than his father.
We haue formerly made mention of a paper which the king drew out of a casket, and
deliuered to his sonne, the which contained this instruction following.

My sonne,Instruction of the King of Spaine to his Sonne. I haue beene euer carefull to leaue you your Estate setled and in peace; but
neither the many yeares which I haue liued, nor the assistance of princes my allies, could
euer purchase it. I confesse that I haue spent in lesse than thirtie three yeares, fiue hundred
ninetie and foure millions of ducats, all which haue bred me nothing but cares and troubles.
It is true, I conquered Portugall, but as France did easily escape me, so may this be
wrested from me. I would to God I had followed the aduice of the Emperour Charles,
my deceased father, of famous memorie, or at the least that you would beleeue and follow
mine. I should then beare my crosses more willingly, and should die with more content,
leauing you in this vallie of miseries. Behold then what I leaue you for an euerlasting
restament, besides so many kingdoms and Estates, that you may see, as in a glasse, after
what maner you shall gouerne your selfe after my death.
Be alwayes verie watchfull of the alteration and change of States, to make your profit
thereby according to occurrents. Haue a vigilant eye ouer them that are most familiar
with you in councell. You haue two meanes to entertaine your realmes of Spaine, the
one, the present gouernement, the other, the trade to the East and West Indies. As for the
gouernement, you must either relie vpon the nobilitie, or vpon the Clergie. If you leane
vnto the Church-men, keepe the other in awe, as I haue done; but if you fortifie your
selfe with the nobilitie, shorten the reuenues of the Clergie as much as you may. If you
seeke to countenance them alike, they will consume you, and trouble your realms, whereof
you shall neuer see a finall conclusion.Consideration of Forraine Princes. If you will make good vse of the nobilitie, my aduice
is, that you keep good correspondencie with the Low Countries, for they are friends
to the, French English, and some princes of Germanie: therein you can haue little assistance
from Italie, Poland, Sueden, Denmark, or Scotland. The king of Scotland is poore,
Denmarke drawes his reuenues from foreine nations, Sueden is euer in faction, and not
well situated, the Polonians are alwaies masters of their kings, Italie, although it bee rich,
yet is it far off, and the princes are of diuers humors: On the other side, the Low Countries
are populous, rich in shipping, constant in labour, diligent in search, hardie to vndertake,

and willing to endure. It is true, I haue giuen these prouinces to your sister, but it
imports not, there are an hundred euasions whereof in time you may make your profit:
The chiefe are, that you keepe your selfe alwaies gardian to her children, and that there be
no alteration concerning religion: for these two points taken away, you are quite depriued
of those countries: And then will some other princes present themselues, and bind
them vnto them by some meanes, which may proue your ruine. If you thinke to fortifie
your selfe against this by the Clergie, you shall purchase many enemies: I haue tried: yet
keepe good correspondencie with the Popes,Aduice touching the Pope. be bountifull and kind vnto them; entertain
such cardinals as they fauour most, and labour to beare a sway in the Conclaue. Keepe
friendship with the bishops of Germanie, but commit not the distribution of their pensions
to the Emperor. Let them know you, they will serue you the more willingly, and will
receiue your presents more thankfully. Draw not any neere vnto you that are of base condition,
neither respect the nobilitie and commons alike: for, seeing I must now speake the
truth, their pride is great, they are verie rich, they must haue what they desire, they will be
burthensome vnto you, and in the end will be your masters.
Serue your selfe then with such as are of the noblest families, and aduance them to preferments
of great reuenues: the common sort are not so needfull, for they will procure
you a thousand discontents, which will consume you. Beleeue not any of them, if
they be not of qualitie. Free your selfe from English spies, and French pensions. Imploy
some of the noblemen of the Low Countries confidently, whom you shall haue bound
vnto you by fealtie.Councel touching the Indies. As for the Nauigation of the East and West Indies, therein consists
the strength of the kingdome of Spaine, and the meanes to curbe Italie; from the which
you shall with much difficultie restraine France and England: their power is great, they
haue many mariners, the seas are spatious, their marchants too wealthie, their subiects too
greedie of gaine, and their seruants too faithfull.
I haue excluded the Low Countries, but I feare, in time, mens humors may change; and
therefore you must often change your ministers at the West Indies. Such as you call
home make them of your Councel for the Indies, and so, in my opinion, you shal neuer be
circumuented, but both the one and the other will acquaint you with the gaine, aspiring
to more honour. See how the English seeke to depriue you of that commoditie: they are
mightie at sea both in men and shipping. As for the French, I doe not much feare them.
Fortifie your selfe with them of the Low Countries (although they be partly heretikes,
and would continue so) with this prouiso, That they shall freely sell their marchandise in
Spaine and Italie, paying the kings customes, and other dueties. And in taking pasports to
saile to the East and West Indies, let them put in caution, and take an oath to discharge their
goods in Spaine at the returne of their ships, vpon paine of punishment if they infringe
this order: the which I think they will willingly offer to obserue. By this means the riches
of the Indies and Spaine shall haue free commerce with the Low Countries, whereby
both France and England shall be disappointed.
My son, I could prescribe you greater designes for the conquering of kingdoms, but you
shal find in my studie such aduertisements and discourses as haue bin giuen me: commaund
Christopher de Mora to deliuer you the key presently, lest those secrets shold fal into some
strangers hands. I did cause some briefs of those instructions to be burnt the 7 of September;
I doubt all are not supprest, be carefull to seeke for them. I haue this day added, if you
can, win Antonio Perez, that he may serue you in Italie, or in some other of your Estates,
but suffer him not to returne into Spaine, nor to go into the Low Countries. Touching
your mariage, the instructions are in the custodie of the Secretarie la Loo. Read this often
that is written with mine owne hand. Haue a watchful eye ouer your most secret counsellors,
acquaint your selfe with cyphers, discontent not your Secretaries, keep them alwaies
imployed, be it about matters of importance or otherwise; make triall of them rather by
your enemies than by your friends. If you discouer your secrets to any familiar friend,
keepe alwaies the most important within your owne bosome.

The king of Spaine fearing that in his life time the mariage of his daughter with the
Archduke Albert would not be consummated,Archduke Albert go^s into Spaine. and that after his death the Infanta Isabella
would like better of the donation than the mariage, hee tied her vnto it with strict

conditions, desiring aboue all things, that she should liue vnder the protection of the
Crowne of Spaine, whereunto this new alliance did particularly bind her. Whereupon
the Archduke gaue order for the gouernement of the Low Countries, and prepared
himselfe to goe into Spaine, to marie the Infanta. But the king of Spaine, before
his death, had concluded a mariage betwixt prince Philip his son, and Marguerite daughter
to the Archduke of Austria of Gratz, being younger sister vnto Marie (who had bin
promised vnto the prince, but dyed before the consummation of the mariage:) Wherefore
the Archduke Albert had commaundement to goe and receiue the said ladie Marguerite
at Gratz, and to conduct her into Spaine. Being readie to goe on his journey,
hee receiued newes of the death of the king of Spaine; yet hee went on his journey,
and passing by the countrey of Treues, the Palatinat, and the duchie of Wirtemberg, into
the limits of Bauaria, he came into the countie of Tyrol, being receiued in all places
with great pompe and presents,He meetes with the future Queene of Spaine. and his traine discharged. In this countie hee met with
the ladie Marguerite of Austria, and Marie of Bauaria, her mother, neere vnto the place
whereas the Emperour Charles the fift, and his brother Ferdinand king of Romans, met,
in remembrance of which happie enteruiew there was a table of brasse hung vp for a monument,
and is yet to be seene; which table doth represent them as they imbraced one another
This ladie was attended on by 500 gentlemen of high Hungarie, whereas the
Archduke her father makes his chiefe residence.
Hauing joyned their troupes, being about two thousand horse, and three thousand
fiue hundred foot, they past by Bolsene, and came to Trent the nine and twentieth of October,
where they spent some dayes, to visit the reliques of Saints. Then entring into the
territories of Venice, which was neere, they were honourably receiued by two Senators,
at a village called Delce,Venetians def^ay the charge of the future Queene of Spaine. vpon the riuer of Adde, where there was a bridge made by commaundement
of the State, for them to passe ouer. They went on by small journeyes
through the Venetians countrey, who defrayed the charges of them and their whole
traine ten dayes together.
Hauing past Verona, they entred the duke of Mantouas country, who came in post with
ten noblemen to Ostia (a small village vpon the riuer of Po) to salute the queene;Duke of Ma^toua entertaines* the Queene of Spaine. where
there were many boats made readie, among other there was a nuptiall barge, verie sumptuously
made, and couered with tapistrie of siluer, the which was diuided into chambers,
halls, and cabinets. The future queene, her mother, the Archduke Albert, with some noblemen
and ladies, entred this barge, where they found the tables readie furnished with
all exquisit meats. The rest of the traine past the riuer in three great boats, vnto the other
side, whereas Rouere stands, a towne belonging to the duke of Mantoua, from thence
going downe the riuer they were carried to Ferrara, whereas the Pope was, with many
Cardinals (whither he came after the composition of Faence, with D. Caesar of Este.)
The Pope being certified of the queenes comming neere the towne,Pope sendes a present to the Queene of Spaine. hee presently
sent forth two Cardinals Legats, which were, Aldobrandin and Saint Clement, with a
great number of Prelats and gentlemen. Hauing gone three miles, they receiued the
queene verie honourably, at a place called the islands, euen as she landed, in the name of
the Apostolike Sea, and of the Pope, presenting vnto her, in his name, a rich caroch, wherof
all the yron-worke was gilt, being drawne by six white horses, in the which the queen,
her mother, and the Archduke, entred into Ferrara.
Without the citie gates the duke of Sessa,Present sent by the King of Spaine to his Queene. embassador for the king of Spaine, presented
vnto her, in his masters name, a litter couered with cloth of gold, and richly appointed,
both in the yron-worke, which was of siluer and gilt, as of all other royall furniture,
hauing two white mules, and the muleters, in the like liuerie, and withall a corroch with
six pied horses,Arriuall of the Queene of Spaine into Ferrara. and two coach-men clad in cloth of gold, which made a glistering shew.
At the port called Angels gate, shee was receiued by two other Cardinals, Sforce
and Montalto, and conducted into a house artificially made, where shee was seated
in a royall throne, where she staied vntill the rest of the Cardinals came to visit and receiue
her.
After this reception the queene was mounted vpon a white horse, and ^he princesse her
mother vpon the like (which the Pope had sent them) and in that maner she entred the city,

being late, vnder a canopie of cloth of siluer, and betwixt the two Cardinals which
had receiued her at the port. There were a great number of coaches and wagons
which went before with much baggage; then followed two companies of horse,
hauing mourning weeds vpon their armes, by reason of the late death of the king
of Spaine: after whom followed a troupe of courteors on horsebacke, then two other
companies of horse sent from the Pope to receiue the Queene, followed by
such as serued the Cardinals, and other noblemen: After whom came a great number
of gentlemen and noblemen, verie gallantly appointed. Such as carried maces
of siluer (which is the marke of a Cardinall) being mounted vpon mules, with solemne
ornaments, marcht before the companie of Cardinals, who were attired in violet, which
is their accustomed habit to mourne in.
The Queene went betwixt the two Cardinals Sforce and Montalto, hauing her
Dutch gards about her, and her mother, with the Archduke Albertus following her:
After whom followed the great Constable, gouernour of Milan, the duke of Aumale,
the prince of Orange, the earles of Egmont, Gand, Barlamont, and Ligny, with many
other lords and ladies of great state, and a great number of carroches and coaches
full of ladies and gentwolemen. In this order they came to the Emperours embassadours
lodging, passing vnder many triumphant Arches that were set vp in euerie
street.
The king of Spaines spouse being come vnto the palace,Entrie of the Queene of Spaine into the Popes Palace. shee mounted vp betwixt
two images of the two Apostles Saint Peter and Saint Paul, princes of the Church, which
were set at the staires foot, and then she retired her selfe into a chamber, joyning vnto the
which was the sacred Consistorie, where the Pope was set in his Pontificall throne,
with his whole colledge of Cardinals, where she stayed vntill the Oration was ended,
which was pronounced by Bernardin Lescot of Milan, in prayse of the house of Austria,
and of the happie arriuall of the said future Queene: After which, she with her mother
and the Archduke, were brought in, and suffered to kisse his Holinesse feet: who receiued
them graciously, and gaue them his blessing. After which the said future Queene
was conducted to her cabinet, which was prepared for her after a royall maner. The
next day, hauing assisted at a Masse which the Pope himselfe did say, the Queene, her mother,
and the Archduke, were feasted at the Popes owne table. But the Sunday, being
the fifteenth of Nouember, was the day appointed for the celebration of the mariage,
at which time they all left off their mourning weeds, which they had worne for the
death of the king of Spaine,Mariage of the King of Spaine. and put on their nuptiall robes, where both princes and
princesses, and the whole Court, shewed themselues so rich and sumptuous, euerie
one seeking to note his familie by the inuention of his liueries, as the like had neuer been
seene in Ferrara.
On the day appointed for this great ceremonie, the Pope went before to the Cathedrall
church, being set in his throne with his Pontificall robes and diadem, readie to say
Masse. The Queen being attired all in white, after a royall manner, and glistering with
pearles and pretious stones of inestimable value, being followed by her mother, the
Archduke, and all the princes, noblemen, and ladies, was so conducted as a bride vnto the
same church, by the Cardinals of Santiquatro and Farnese, the which glistered, being
hung with cloth of siluer.
The Queene being set in a throne of cloth of gold, vnder a cloth of Estate of the same,
and her mother with her, the Archduke being also set in one of the same, the Pope began
the Masse. After the Canticle had beene song, the Queene was conducted neere vnto
the Pope, by the said Cardinals, with her mother, and a great troupe of ladies, and in
like manner the Archduke approached, being followed by the princes and noblemen.
The king of Spaines procuration directed to the Archduke, being read, the Pope did
consummate the mariage, betwixt Philip the third, king of Spaine, in the person of Albert,
his vncle, deputed by him to that end, and appearing in his name, on the one part,
and Queene Marg^erite, being present, on the other. She being conducted backe vnto
the throne, there was an acclamation of all the princes, congratulating the mariage with
wishes of all happinesse.

The Archduke staied still before the Pope,1599 vntill that the duke of Sessa came with the
like procuration from the Infanta D. Isabella Clara Eugenia:(...) which commission being read,
the said Infanta was maried by her Proctor to the Archduke Albert, by the Popes hands.
Masse being ended, the Pope caused the maried queene to approach neere the altar, to
whom he presented a consecrated rose all of gold, the which his Holinesse doth commonly
giue to queenes and princesses, as a sword and a hat hath beene vsually sent by Popes
to the chiefe princes of Christendome. After which all the citie of Ferrara was full of
feasts and joy, for the solemnization of this mariage. All places, streets, waies, and houses,
both publike and priuat, did ring with acclamations of joy, the citie was full of maskes
and dauncings, and there was nothing omitted that might in any sort giue delight and
contentment.
Hauing passed those few dayes which they remained at Ferrara in great joy and feasting,
they made preparation to goe to Mantoua. The duke attended them at Rouere, hauing
sent foure companies of men at armes before, who conducted the queene to Gouberne
(which is a castle situated vpon the riuer of Mince:)The queene of Spaines entrie into Mantoua. there the queene going into
the Bucentaure, which was a verie stately gallie, she was carried downe the riuer within a
mile of Mantoua; where landing, she was entertained by the princes, and then entred the
citie in a Carrosse with her mother, being honoured with pleasing sights in all places as
she past. The palace wherein she was to lodge, was royally appointed; but the Sunday
after her arriuall there was a tragicall commedie represented vnto her beyond all admiration.
The duke of Mantoua entertained the queene so royally, as besides the rich presents
which he gaue, he defraied 5000 foot and 4000 horse for the space of nine daies together.
The queene,Entrie into Milan. her mother, and the Archduke, going from Mantoua past by Cremona to
Milan. It were tedious to make repetitions of all the honours that were there done vnto
the queene. And for that Milan is now held by the king of Spaine, they resolued to stay
there, and to attend the kings good pleasure, being vnfit to passe into Spaine during the
Winter season, where the duke of Sauoy came to visit the queene with a gallant traine.
The greatest Monarches of the world are forced to giue time to time, and to refer vnto
it the accomplishment of their desires: Their power (be it neuer so absolute) cannot make
the seasons subiect to their wils, neither aduance nor keepe them backe according to the
commoditie of their designes. If this could haue beene effected, the queene of Spaine had
not staied so long in Italie,Queene of Spaine imbarks for Spaine. the desire she had to see the king D. Philip 3, would haue giuen
her wings to flie from Milan to Vailledolit: but the vnseasonable Winter made her to
stay vntil the Spring, from whence they went to Genoua, where they imbarked in the beginning
of March: they past to Sauone, where, for the discommoditie of the sea, they were
forced to stay some dayes, at the end whereof they went along the shore by Monaco and
Villa-franca, and came to Nice in the countie of Terra-noua, which at this day the duke of
Sauoy holds, but in former times was belonging to the countie of Prouence. After which
they came and cast anker in the port of Marseilles, where they rested to ease the queene.
The duke of Sauoy had entertained and feasted her verie royally: neither did the duke of
Guise (who was the kings Lieutenant in Prouence) omit any thing, being so commanded
by the king;Lands at Mars^illes. where he refresht the gallies with victuals and all other necessaries. The
queene would not land but onely to heare masse in a tent which was pitcht vpon the
key, in forme of a chappell. The Archduke landed there with two gallies, and went to
visit the reliques of S. Victor, and other venerable reliques: which done, hee returned presently
vnto the queene, and so they parted from Castle I^z in a cleere and calme day, but
there followed a present storme, the which had cast them vpon the sands, whereas the riuer
of Rhosne dischargeth it selfe into the sea, if the wisedome and foresight of Doria had
not preuented it. He knew the place and the danger, and doubting of the inconstancie
of the weather, he would not passe without the aduice of the mariners, who were all
doubtfull in their opinions. Prouidence is alwayes better than repentance. In this supension
of judgement a mariner passing by, wisht them not to proceed, for in lesse than
three houres they should haue a contrarie wind which would carrie them directly to the
daunger, which they would willingly auoyd. Doria beleeued him, against the opinion
of some, and the shewes of the weather, being loath to attend vntill he were forced to

take some daungerous resolution. Wherefore he retired his gallies into a place of safetie,
and the storme did arise sooner than the mariner had told them. They thought at
Marseilles that all had beene lost; and their beliefe had not beene vaine, if Doria had not
giuen credit to that which the best aduised could not beleeue. The daunger being past,
they continued their voyage along the coast of Cattelonia, they saluted Barcelona, and
came to the port of Rode, they surmounted the Promontorie of the Moone, and came
to Alfaques, which is at the strait of Gibraltar, on Africke side, and in the end they put
in at the port of Binaros,Queene of Spaine arriues at Binaros. in the realme of Valencia: from whence the queene sent prince
Dorias sonne to the Catholike king, to aduertise him of her happie voyage, and safe arriuall.
The last of March they came to S. Mathew, wheras the marquesse of Denia came to
salute the queene, in the behalfe of the king her husband, and to acquaint her with his
Majesties speciall intentions. Passing from thence to Gabanes, and Villa-reall, they
went and stayed at Moluiedro, a village built of the ruines of Sagunt, an auncient towne
allied to the Romans. The Archduke Albertus tooke post there, and went with all speed
to kisse the kings hands, and to visit the Infanta, his spouse: from whence hee past to
Madrid, to see the Empresse, his mother, where hee stayed foure dayes, and then returned
to Valencia.
The king in the meane time burning with an amorous desire to see his new queen, came
in a disguised habit like one of his noblemen, making his pretence to be sent from the king
to kisse her hands; but he was discouered by the princesses and ladies which then attended
the queene, where he was receiued with an incredible joy and content to them all.
In the meane time they made wonderfull preparation at Valencia,Magnificence at Valencia at the king of Spain^ mariage for the celebration
of these mariages, all which being readie, on the seuenteenth day of Aprill the queene
made her entrie into Valencia, with so goodly a traine of princes and noblemen there assembled,
as the glistering of their glorious and sumptuous apparel, the varietie of colours,
and the shining of the gold, did dazle the eyes of the beholders. Before this royall assemblie
there marcht fiue companies of men at armes, after whom followed thirtie kettle
drummes on horsebacke, with trumpets, clairons, and hautbois, which did sound continually:
then came the courteors in troupe, without any precedence or prerogatiue of rank:
among which there were foure hundred young noblemen like vnto pages of honour, gallantly
attired, attended on by their pages and footmen, some hauing six, others eight,
some ten, yea twentie, twentie foure, twentie six, and more, attired in their liueries of diuers
colours, richly appointed. There were moreouer 700 knights of honor in the queens
colours, which were white and crimzon gilt, the ground satten. Then there followed
foure knights, carrying royall maces; after whom followed the Stewards of the queenes
house, and then sixteene of the Grandos of Spaine. Next marched the heraulds with
their cassockes richly imbrodered with the kings armes: after whom went the Lord Steward
and the Master of the horse: and last of all came the queene on horsebacke, vnder a
canopie of cloth of gold, the which was carried by twentie of the chiefe nobles of Valencia,
and the reines of her bridle, being of silke and gold, were held by the greatest lords of
that kingdome. The queenes gowne was of cloth of gold, the ground siluer, very richly
imbrodered with pearle and precious stones, so as there could be no more added. The
queenes mother and the Archduke Albert followed with the queenes cabinet, and a
great number of princes and noblemen, and to finish their nuptiall pompe, the princesses
and ladies came last of all in their carroches and coaches. Some thought that there were
spent in this nuptiall pompe three millions of ducats.
The queene hauing entred the port, where there was a stately triumphant Arch made,
shee was led vnto the church, which was hung with cloth of tissue. The high altar was
royally appointed, before the which there was an Oratorie erected, couered with cloth
of gold, able to containe three persons: there was also another which might hold fiue,
which was seene by them all, and was verie commodious to kneele in: thither
the queene went, after that shee had kist the Crosse, which was wonderfully inriched
with reliques, being presented vnto her by the Patriarke, who was Archbishop of
Valencia.
The Catholike king came downe into the church with his sister the Infanta, by a priuie

way, which was made of purpose, where the Popes Nuncio (the solemnitie of the
ceremonie being ended) demaunded of the king first, and then of the Archduke, if
they did ratifie the mariages which had beene contracted before by their embassadours,
and celebrated by the Pope: Which either of them confirming, they all went vp vnto
the altar, where kneeling downe, they assisted at the last blessing of their mariage. The
prayers being ended, they went from the church vnto the palace, where the nuptiall feast
was made with all the pompe and state that could be deuised. Two dayes after the king
made three knights of the Golden fleece, which were, the Archduke Albert, the
Constable of Castille, and Prince Doria. For the space of eight dayes there were all
sports and fights that mans wit could inuent. There was a Theatre built, able to containe
threescore thousand persons, fit to behold all king of sports, as baiting of the bull, Ioco
di Canna, after the African manner, tilts, turneyes, and all other exercises wherein the
Spaniards delight.
This nuptiall pompe being ended,King of Spaine settles his Court at Vailledolet. the king and queene went to Vailledolit, wheras the
king setled his Court, after the example of Charles the fift, his grandfather, and not at
Madrid, which, after the death of king Philip the second, was abandoned. The king,
after his mariage, gaue himselfe wholly to the exercises of peace, and left the managing
of affaires to his Councell, retiring himselfe in a manner from the sight of all the Grandos
of Spaine, being loath to see, or to be seene of any, but of the marquesse of Denia,
whom he made duke of Lerma. Since that this prince tooke the scepter in hand, he hath
made them change th^^ conceits they had of him, and hath shewed more vigour
than they did attribute vnto him. That which he wants by reason of his youth, abounds
in his Councell, to whom he commits the conduct of his Estates. A prince must be wise,
or else gouerne himselfe by them that are wise. They did not like that he should wholly
giue himselfe to the duke of Lerma. The Grandos of Spaine could not endure this
vnequall distribution of the kings fauours, vpon one onely obiect, and were grieued,
that this common Sunne should haue no light but for two eyes; that this fountaine
should haue no water, but to quench one mans thirst: which made them to grow into
great discontents, and the rather, for that his wife was made chiefe Ladie of honour
to the queene, wherewith the greatest house in Spaine would haue thought it selfe
much honoured, being impossible that so great and sudden preferments should not be
enuied and maligned.Fauors of princes full of enui^ Hence grew complaints and murmuring, wherein the best wits imploied
their tongues and pennes to write freely. This discontentment was seene in all the
sorts that malecontents could discouer it. They made images to speake at the kings
comming to the Crowne, and at the entrie which hee made at Madrid, they set vp Iupiters
statue,Diuisu^ Imperium cum Ioue Caesar habet. carrying a globe of the world vpon his shoulders, and discharging the one
halfe vpon king Philips, with an inscription, That the Empire was diuided betwixt Iupiter
and Caesar: they found in strange caracters, and an vnknowne hand, at the foot of Iupiters
image,Pasquins. these words; This is the duke of Lerma. They also made Pasquin to speake. The king
of Spaine made request vnto the Pope, to grant him the tenthes of the Clergie-liuings,
besides that which his predecessors had beene accustomed to take: The feare they had the
Pope would not grant it, made them to write this on the palace gates at Vailledolit: An
vnking Pope, an innocent King, and an insolent Duke. They made counterfeit letters, both
without name and subiect, hauing nothing but a superscription. The king comming one
day from walking, he found vpon his table a letter fealed vp, with this direction: To king
Philip the third of that name, king of Spaine, being now at the seruice or deuotion of the duke
of Lerma: The post which brought it had not returned without an answer, if hee had
stayed* The king, who knew that there is nothing makes such brutes vanish sooner than
contempt, nor that reuiues them more than a feeling and apprehension, laught at it, and
turning to the duke of Lerma, said, See here what they say of vs.
They spake vpon stages, and in publicke Scenes. They made a Tragedie at Vailledolit:
the actors were the King, the Constable of Castille, the Duke of Lerma, and the people:
The Argument was the complaints and insolencie of the duke of Lerma: the
Catastrophe, the duke of Lermas death, who was torne in peeces by the furious multitude.

They made fooles to speake, who are about kings onely to tell truth, and to make wise
men, which dare not speake it, to blush. A jeaster passing betwixt the king and the duke of
Lerma, justled him in such sort as he made the duke to stagger, and said vnto him, Stand
fast, for if thou fallest thou wilt neuer rise again. The king taking the word, answered presently,
We will then fall both together. The Grandes, who smiled at the jeasters speech,
were much amazed at the kings answer. All Spaine admires his fortune. The most happie
hold, that who so will be fortunat, must bee borne vnder the same Planet. But no man
knowes how long this happinesse will continue: And in the end the great fauors of princes
are prejudiciall and ruinous to their fauourites. One sayes, That we must approach
neere vnto kings, as vnto fire, neither standing too farre off, least we take cold, nor approching
too neere, for feare of burning. This fauour is a fire, as it shines, it burnes. Courteots
flie vnto it, and burne themselues like Butterflies. Hee is not wise that vseth it as a
fountaine, and drinkes as much as he can, for the thirst that is past, for the present, and that
which is to come: but he is wise that drinks of these fauors as dogs do of the riuer of Nol,
passing and running, least they be deuoured of Crocodiles by enuie and jealousie.
The Archduke hauing brought the kings wife into Spaine,Archdukes passe for Flanders. and receiued the Infanta his
wife, to conduct her into Flanders, and to take possession with her of those countries, which
the king had giuen her in dowrie, hauing taken leaue of the king, queene, and empresse,
his mother, he took his way towards the sea, which was so fauorable vnto them, as imbarking
at Barcelona the seuenth of Iune, they arriued in 18 daies at Genoua, where they remained
the rest of that moneth in prince Dorias palace. From thence they past to Pauia,
where the duke of Parma came to see them. Then they came to Milan; thither the Pope
sent cardinall Dietestain to visit them, who presented a sword vnto the Archduke, in his
Holinesse name, and a rose of gold to the Infanta: and so they past on their journey
through the Grisons countrey.
At the conclusion of the peace of Veruins,Treaty at Boullen betwixt the deputies of England and Spaine. betwixt the French and the Spanish, the
queene of England was not comprehended in that treatie. The king of Spaine desired to
enter into a particular treatie with her, the French king being willing to further this good
motion, offered the towne of Boullen for their Commissioners to meet at: whither they
came, but it was of no effect, by reason of the precedence, which neither would yeeld to
other: for the English refusing to yeeld to the deputies of Spaine, they returned without
any fruits of this meeting, neither was there any one of them but thought it vnreasonable
to purchase a peace with so great a disaduantage to his masters seruice.
The king of Spaine being at peace with France,King of Spaine complaines that the French serue his ^^mies. he thought him much wronged, and the
the treatie infringed, that the French went to serue the vnited Estates: wherfore he gaue
command^ment to his embassador in France, to make complaint vnto the French king,
That contrarie to the conditions of the treatie of Veruins, and contrarie to the publike
faith, the French went to serue prince Maurice, and by the fauor of their arms did countenance
the vnited prouinces of the Netherlands in their rebellion: that a friendship in
words without effects, was more prejudiciall, a peace which doth not obserue the conditions,
was more hurtfull vnto him, than the acts of open war. The French king desiring to
obserue the articles of the treatie sincerely, and without any just exception, disauowed all
his subiects which caried armes in that qualitie, co^manding them to returne home within
six weeks, vpon paine of confiscation of body and goods, forbidding all others to goe thither
to that intent: yet hee grew jealous, for that there was an armie newly imbarked in
Portugal, which made him suspect some designe either against France or England: wherupon
he commanded his seruants to stand vpon their gard.
This yere the marquisat of Saluces was in question betwixt the French K. and the duke
of Sauoy,King of Spaine demands the Duke of Sauo^ children. who in his proceedings seemed so discontented with the Spaniards, for sundrie
reasons, and made them so jealous of him, as the Councell of Spaine demaunded the
prince his eldest son, and his eldest daughter, vnder a colour of bringing them vp after a
royall manner, in the Court of Spaine, whereas they might one day hope to raigne. The
(...) was much discontented herewith, seeing that it proceeded rather from suspition
than affection; yet by the aduice of his Councell, hee gaue the king of Spaine to
vnderstand, That hee could not lodge his children better, being the true cyment of perfect

friendship, yet he resolued to send one to make his excuse, pretending, That the estate
of his affaires would not suffer him to send them at that instant, nor to prouide them a train
and things necessary for their voyage. But the king of Spaine, to preuent all excuses, gaue
order that money should be prouided at Milan, persuading the duke to send the cont la
Motte as gouernour to the prince. But hauing the money, he kept his children still, saying,
That the ayre of Spaine would not agree with his children, and that their indisposition
and young yeares, would not suffer him to expose them to so long and daungerous a
voyage. At which refusall the king of Spaine was much discontented.
The Estates of the vnited Prouinces not content to make head against the forces of
Spaine within their countrey,Successe of the Estates army at the Canaries. they sent forth a goodlie fleet, in the which were aboue
8000 souldiers and mariners, with all other necessarie prouisions for such a preparation.
They set saile on the 25 day of May, hauing for Generall Peter vander Does, and went to
affront the Spaniards at their owne doores. On the eleuenth of Iune comming neere the
Groine, they met with two small boats, which were sent forth to discouer them: in one
of them they found a Spaniard, by whom they vnderstood, that they had beene aduertised
of their comming vpon that coast, where they stood vpon their gard, and that in the
Groine there were foure thousand foot, and some horse: which made the Generall (hauing
called all the captaines to counsell) to thinke it not expedient to attempt any thing
in those parts. Which made them to hoise sails, and to bend their course towards Cap S.
Vincent: so passing the islands of Lancerote, Allegeance, and Forte-auenture, they discouered
the great island of the Canaries, whereas the Generall vander Does came with his
whole fleet before the towne of Alegoena, the 26 day of Iune, where he cast anker vnder
the great castle, which is on the Northwest part of the towne; and causing those ships to
approach which had the greatest ordnance, he began in like maner to batter the castle of
Gratiosa. The Spaniards and islanders hauing three peeces of ordnance, resolued to hinder
their landing, after some great shot from the castle, which did much annoy the Hollanders.
In the meane time the Generall put part of his armie into boats, to row to land,
but not able to come vnto the shore, for want of water, he leapt first into the sea vp to the
girdle, being followed by all the rest, who marched resolutely to land, notwithstanding all
the attempts of the Spaniards and islanders, who kept their ground, and desended the
landing verie valiantly: yet the Hollanders forced them, not without some losse of their
men. At this charge the Spaniards lost some fortie men, before they would quit the
place: among others the gouernour (being on horsebacke) had a leg shot off with a great
peece. The Generall of the Hollanders was hurt in the leg with a pike, and had three
light hurts on the bodie, and if one of his souldiers had not slaine the Spaniard which incountred
him, he had beene in daunger of his life. The islanders leauing their artillerie
fled to the towne with their lame gouernour, and the Hollanders landed at their ease.
They of the castle of Gratiosa seeing foure and twentie companies of Hollanders landed,
and put in battell, and their colours flying, there came three mariners running from
towards the castle, who told the Generall, That they of the castle would yeeld, if they
might haue their liues and goods saued: whither hee presently went with some captaines,Castle of Gratiosa yeelded to the Hollanders.
to whose mercie the place was yeelded, they leauing their armes, nine peeces
of brasse ordnance, and six of yron, with all the prouision and munitien. There
were eight and fiftie prisoners, all the rest hauing beene slaine by the canon, all which he
sent home in a Spanish ship which the fleet had taken, reseruing onely three of the chiefe
for his better instruction.
The Hollanders meaning the next day to besiege Alegoena, they were much annoyed
by the canon of another castle which was neere vnto the towne, so as being forced to fetch
their canon to batter it, they spent foure houres, the great ordnance playing of either
side: in the end they within the castle being beaten from their defences, their ordnance
dismounted, and their men slaine, the Generall hauing also set one of the towne gates on
fire; which they of the towne, castle, and a mountaine which shot with some great ordnance,Towne and castle of Alegoena abandoned.
seeing, they abandoned both towne, castle, hill, and artillerie, and fled to rockes and
caues in the mountaines, carrying their plate, jewels, and the richest of their mouables
with them, with their wiues and children.

After this the Generall caused some ladders to bee brought,1599 with the which they entred
the towne, finding no opposition. His men ran directly to the castle, where the
Spaniards, at their retreat, had left a mine, with a match burning, the which tooke fire
before the Hollanders were entred, so as it did them no harme. They found fiue peeces
of ordnance in the place, the which, with all the rest of the bootie which they found,
was carried into the Admirals ship, as the Estates had commaunded. The towne and
castle being taken, the Generall put his men in battell, as if hee would muster them, in a
plaine within the towne. The souldiers brought a Flessinguer vnto him, whom they
had drawne out of prison: whereupon the Generall went vnto the prisons, and freed
some six and thirtie persons, who told him, that the inhabitants flying away, they had
carried two prisoners with them, the one an English man, the other a Dutch, who
were condemned by the Inquisition to bee burnt. Towards night the whole armie
was quartered, and lodged within the towne, except such as were appointed to bee
in gard towards the mountaines, whereas the islanders did sometimes shew themselues
in great troupes. The towne was spoyled of all that remained, the best beeing
carried away; and then the Generall caused a proclamation to bee made, That
no man should appropriate any goods vnto himselfe, for such was the will of the
Estates.
On the nine and twentieth of Iune some mariners went vp into the mountaines to get
some bootie,Estates men slaine in the mountaines. but the islanders intercepted them, and slue some twentie. Towards
euening the Generall sent three hundred men to a small castle, halfe a league from the
towne, but the garrison seeing them approach abandoned it presently, and fled to the
mountaines; whereas the Estates men found three peeces of ordnance, and leauing a
squadron there, the rest returned to the towne. The last of Iune the Generall commaunded
that the wine, oyle, and all other goods, should bee imbarked. The Spaniards
that were in the mountaines did often make offer to treat, but the Generall hearing
their first demaunds, which hee held impertinent, dismist them, and would giue them
no more audience. The Hollanders being master of the towne, the Generall caused
the bells, artillerie, munition, and all other commodities which the islanders had left
behind them, to be shipt, and then he sent two thousand to charge them that were fled
into the mountaines, who at the first made head, and fought valiantly; where, although the
Spaniards had great aduantage, yet they retired into the mountaines, where the Hollanders
not knowing the passages, durst not pursue them, but returned to the towne with
the losse of seuentie men, and one sea captaine.
The next day the Generall blew vp the castle of the towne,Alcgoena burnt by the Hollanders. and burnt all the churches
and religious houses, both within and without it: then, being readie to make his retreat,
he drew forth his men in battell, and caused the towne to be fired: Then they marcht to
Gratiosa, some halfe mile from the towne (which castle they also blew vp) where their
boats attended them to carrie them aboord. They were no soon^r imbarked, but the
islanders came running from the mountaines to quench the fire. The Generall being at
sea, hee called all the captaines to councell, asking their aduice what was to bee done,
and to informe himselfe of the situation of other islands in those parts. At this time
there came certaine Spaniards to the shore, which desired a parley. Whereupon the
Generall sent forth a boat to fetch them: Their comming was onely for those prisoners
which had beene taken in the castle of Gratiosa, whose ransomes being payed,
they were let goe.
Leauing this island, within few daies after the fleet discouered the island of Gomora,
one of the Canaries,Gomora taken by the Hollanders. whereas they landed without any resistance, the Spaniards and islanders
being fled to the mountaines and caues, as they had done from Alegoena. The Hollanders
hauing taken Gomora, and seeing the islanders flie to the mountaines, there were
foure companies, which landed first, pursued them, to cut off their passage: but being ignorant
of the passages, they were charged by the Spaniards, who slue 80 of their men.
The Generall hauing caused the ordnance, bells, wine, and such other commodities as he
found there, to be imbarked, he se^ fire of the towne, which the islanders came running
downe to quench, as they had done at Alegoena.

Behold how these two Ilands of the great Canarie and Gomora, which in a hundred
yeares had not seene any enemies, were spoyled and burnt by the States armie, the which
diuided it selfe into two parts fiue; and twenty ships were sent homeward with the spoile
they had taken, vnder the command of the Admirall Iohn Gheenbrantsen, who arriued
scatteringly about the middest of September. The Generall Vander Does bent his course
with thirty and sixe ships towards the Iland of Saint Thome, which is vpon the coast of
Guinee, directly vnder the Equinoctiall line. This Iland is inhabited with naturall Portugals,Saint Thome taken by the Hollanders.
and abounds with Sugars, which is their greatest trade: whereof they became
Masters vpon their first approach, without any resistance or losse. But the Hollanders
being more accustomed to the cold blasts of the Northerne Region, than to the violent
heat of the burning Zone, they were not long Masters thereof, but there fell a contagious
sicknesse among them, wherof they died in very great torments. The Generall seeing
this, caused them to imbarke the spoile with Francisco de Meneses, Gouernour of the
said Iland, his prisoner: but this infection did not leaue them being at Sea, for they dyed
in so great numbers, as the Generall Vander Does, and all the Captains but two or three,
with three parts of the Mariners and Souldiers had no other Sepulchres but the Sea, so as
they had scarce men to gouerne their ships, yet in the end they got home fafely by one
and one.
In the beginning of this yeare began the Iubile at Rome,1600 which although it doth not
directly concerne this Historie of Spaine,Iubile at Rome. yet haue I presumed to make a little digression
to relate the maner of this ceremony. This action of Iubile was in old time so rare, as
few men might see it twise in their times. Bonifa^e 8 ordained first of all that it should be
celebrated at Rome euerie hundred yeares, and made it to be past in forme of a law, which
before was done but by deuotion. Clement 6 a bridged it to fiftie, to reduce it to the prefixed
time of the ceremoniall law, which yeare all debts and iniuries were abolished, and the
trumpets and comets did sound lowder than of custome. Vrban 6 had another consideration:
Our Sauiour had liued thirty and three yeres in the world, and therefore he wold
that men reuerencing the yeare which fell out at the end of that space, should sanctifie it
with the celebratio^ of the Iubile. Paul 2 finding the time yet too long, diuided the hu^dred
into foure parts, that as the Buls are proclaimed at the foure corners of Rome, and bind
the^ that pretend to obtaine the pardons which are granted in this reuolution of yeres, to
visit the foure principall Churches, so the foure parts of the world should bee inuited to
frequent this Iubile, so called of the Hebrew word Iobel, which signifies a Rammes
home, for that it was published that yeare by the sound of the Cornet with reioycing. It
doth commonly begin on New yeares eue, with a solemne procession, in the which the
Pope, the Cardinals, the Embassadors of Christian Princes, the Prelates, Clergie and Officers
of the citie of Rome, march according to their ranks, with a world of people, vnto
the doore called Holy, which finding walled vp, and neuer open but the yeare of Iubile,
they put a candle into one of the Popes hands, and a little siluer hammer into the other,
with the which hauing strooke thrice vpon the wall, it is presently beaten downe by men
appointed to that purpose, whereupon the people carrie away the peeces with great
prease and deuotion.
Clement had presidents for the deferring of this day Iulio 3 began his Iubile in the yere
1550, on S. Mathias day, for that the Sea had been void vntill then. The importune paine
of the gout shold haue made Clement delay this ceremony: but the concourse of people
was greater at Rome than had bin in the memory of man: the Pilgrimes were exceeding
poore, and a longer stay wold haue bin very hurtfull vnto them. Which inuited the Pope
not to frustrate their expectation: wherefore hee was carried in a chaire according to the
custome, and gaue his first blessing to this worke the first day of the yeare.
The French king hauing long expected restitution of the Marquisate of Salusses, which
the duke of Sauoy detained from him,Spaniard apprehends the French kings taking of Sauoy or some recompence, was forced to seek it by arms:
whereupon he came in person with an army into Sauoy, and tooke the chiefe places of
strength. The earle of Fuentes Gouernor of Milan fortified the duke with foure thousand
Spaniards. The Ministers of Spaine murmured much at the French kings approaching
so neare Italie, saying, that the Marquisate of Salusses was the pretext, but Milan

or Naples was the true cause of this warre.1601 Italie was in alarme, who thought that the
idlenesse of the French at home would make them trouble their neighbours: The Pope
feares that these first sparkles will set all their neighbours on fire: The duke of S^ssa, king
Philips embassador at Rome pr^sses him; hee cries out of the miseries and calamities which
the continuance of this warre would cause; hee doth intreat, beseech, and coniure the
Pope to send Cardinall Aldobrandin his nephew to the most Christian king to quench
the fire of this great diuision, and to exhort them to come vnto the effects of the treatie
of Paris: which the Pope did willingly yeeld vnto.
After an accord made betwixt the French king and the duke of Sauoy,Spanish forces keep Christendome in alarme all things seemed
quiet, but suddenly both Italie and France were in alarme, hauing intelligence that
both the duke of Sauoy, and the Earle of Fuentes, kept their forces together, and increased
them daily, and that they had some great designe which could not be yet descouered,
they threatned many, to strike but one, but no man knew where the chance
would fall: that all the Princes of Christendome had cause to doubt him, and that the
king of Spaine would make himselfe fearefull by armes in the beginning of his raign: but
they knew not whether his designe was against Asia, Afrike or Europe. Men spake diuersly
of this preparation; In France some said that the king of Spaine would reuiue the
pretensions of his Grand-father, Charles the fift, against the Venetians: others said, and
with some reason, as the issue will verifie, that hee threatned to enter the estates of the
great duke of Tuscany, with this mightie army, if he deliuered not into his hands that man
which for some yeares had qualified himself, D. Sebastian the true and lawfull king of Portugall,
who being banished from Venice vpon this occasion, had beene staied at Florence
as hee past, thinking to imbarke at Liuorne to get to Marseilles, and so come vnto
the king during the warre of Sauoy. The Venetians gaue order for their Gulphe, and
did thinke to demaund Frances de Bonnes Lord of Des Digueres from the French king,
to be their leader, if they were inuaded; to the end that as France had lately furnished
the Emperour with a Lieutenant General, and Malta with a great Master against the Infidels,
it might also supply them with a great Captaine against the Spaniards, if hee did
attempt to trouble the quiet of their estate.
At Rome it was bruted that Geneua was in danger, and that the Marquesse of Aix
was sent thither to intreate the Pope to blesse the enterprise, and to fortifie it with his
meanes. In England they thought that some great men had some practises in Castille;
and the yeares following will shew that their jealousie was not vaine. The Flemings said
that it was to make king Philip to be declared king of Romans: but it were not conuenient
to breed new factions among the Princes of Germany, when as the Turke was so powerfull
in Hungarie.
All these erred in their iudgements, time had discouered that this great armie which
so troubled mens affections, was entertained for an enterprise which they had vpon Marseilles,
but one of them which should haue deliuered the Towne to the Earle of Fuentes,
discouered it to the duke of Guise, and so they were disappointed.
During the stay of this army in Italie,Gentleman of Venice executed. a Venetian Gentleman of the house of Donati,
appointed to be gouernour of Creme, was conuicted to haue intelligence with the Spaniard,
and publikely executed; hee testified that this army had many and diuers designes
at one instant, of the which if any one had succeeded, it may be they had not lost their time
and paines at sea, as they did at land. But seeing all their designes proue vain both in Italie
and Prouence, the army imbarked at Vada, in the State of Genoua, in two troupes, the
one vnder the commaund of D. Iohn Andrew Doria, and the other vnder Charles Doria his
Son, and so they bent their course towards the Turkes, being in all seuenty gallies, to the
which the Pope, the king of Spaine, the great duke of Tuscanie, the duke of Sauoy, and
the great Master of Malta had contributed. The Venetians would not infringe the peace
they had with the great Turke, and yet they prouided for all things necessarie for their defence,
both by sea and land, if any did quarrell with them.
The enterprise was iust and worthy of the first stratagems of a Prince, who desires to
begin his raigne by some worthy act;Enterprise iust but not blest of heauen. the opportunity of doing well being so fauourable,
as if Christendome could haue made her profit by the diuision which was then

in Mahomets estate, by the mutinies of the Ianisaries, and the reuolts in Asia, they
might in shew haue aduanced the accomplishment of that prophecy, whereof the
Turkes doe not speake but with sighes, That by the common armes of the Christians
they shall be rooted from the face of the earth.
This armie being imbarked they came, in the beginning of Iuly, to Naples to make
prouision of great store of armes, and a good number of Petards, which made the
world thinke that hee would both arme some of the Turkes subiects, which were ready
to reuolt, and that he had intelligence in some place to surprise it suddenly. And for
that footmen are alwaies weake if they bee not seconded by some horse, they made prouision
also of fifteene hundred, or two thousand armors for horsemen.
The Venetians seeing them bend their course towards Messina, entred into new apprehensions,
that if they attempted any thing in Albania they should bee troubled in their
gulphe, but being come to Trepany, which is the promontarie of Sicile next to Afrike,
they were freed from this feare. Hauing past the Ilands of Baleares, they then thought
it was for Alger. But Cigala of Sicile was come from Constantinople with fifty gallies to
crosse his designes, and to watch him vpon his retreat, being loth to fight at one instant
against the Christians and against the Moores, their slaues and rebels; for it was
giuen out that the Christian army should be assisted with eight or ten thousand Moores,
and some Christians. Wherefore Cigala had drawne all them that dwelt along the Seacoast,
and might fauour this army into the Towne, and did shut vp aboue tenne thousand
slaues in caues, tyed with double chaines, and straitly garded.
There was great hope of good successe of this enterprise; and the Spaniards said,
that the King would giue good testimony of his affection to Christendome.
Prince Doria the better to fauour this designe, had intreated the great Master of
Malta, in the king of Spaines name, to send some gallies to spoile in the Leuant
seas, and to make a diuersion of the Turkes forces, and to aduertise him of their course.
They were verie fortunate in the designe, for passing into Morea with fiue gallies, Beauregard
a French knight had commandement to set a Petard to the gate of Chasteauneuf,Chasteauneuf in Morea taken by the knights of Malta.
which the Turkes call Passana, and in the meane time some other knights should
attempt it by Scalado on the other side. As nothing is easie to cowards, so the valiant
find nothing difficult: where they entred with such furie, as they forced the second
Port, and yet it was valiantly defended by seuen or eight hundred Turkes, where
they tooke many slaues, cloyed their ordnance, spoyled and burnt the Town and countrie
about it, and returned with speed.
The Sea armie of Spaine recouered the coast of Afrike, but both men at land,
and windes at Sea were banded against it. God would not blesse this enterprise although
it were iust and holie, the reasons remaine in the Register of his justice and
infinit wisdome: against the which wee may not murmure, as the Romanes did against
the conduct and gouernment of their gods, when as they saw that Pompey,
doing nothing according vnto justice, was fauoured with their assistence; and when
as he fought for their laws and countrie, yea for the gods themselues, he was most vnfortunate.
Prince Doria seeing that both heauen, earth, and sea did crosse his designes,
resolued to retire and not attempt any thing.
The Prince of Parma did serue as a voluntarie in this army* who grieuing to see
this great armie returne without any imployment, desiring rather to erre in iudgement
than in the greatnesse of his courage, told Prince Doria, That hee should not
suffer so goodlie an armie to returne without some attempt,Prince of Parmas speech to Prince Doria. the which had done
nothing but incense a mightie enemy, who to bee reuenged of a dead enterprise
ready for execution,Prince Dorias answere (...) would seeke to annoy the king of Spaine in all his estates. To
whome the old man made this presen^ answere; I know my charge* my head is
growne white in learning this experience. Your excellencie is accomptable vnto the
king my lord but for your pike onely, and I for a whole army, wherein although
I haue beene vnfortunate, yet will I not that other parts belonging to my charge,
as courage, authoritie and experience shall faile mee, or that any shall obiect vnto
me that I haue erred therein. A gallant and worthy answere, to tech a yong Prince (how

great soeuer hee bee in an armie) that hee must onely studie to obey, and not to
lead and commaund which was the Generalls charge.
So Prince Doria hauing discharged his armie went towards Genoua, chosing rather
to giue them cause to speake disgracefully of his retreat, than to haue attempted
an impossible enterprise in vaine. The Popes Gallies attended the Prince of
Parma at Barcelona, who was gone into Spaine to kisse the king of Spaines
hands. Those of the great duke of Tuscany went to Genoua, and from thence to Liuorne.
Most of the Souldiers came and lodged in the duchie of Milan, to the vtter ruine of
the Countrie.Policie of the earle of Fuentes. But the Earle of Fuentes, who neuer forceth the people when hee
can persuade them, found an inuention to make this burthen sweet and supportable.
Hee sought to drawe their commerce by water from Milan to Pauia, and caused
them to digge Trenches, to bring the Riuers together which are betwixt those
Townes.
The people seeing commodities that might well recompence their losses with
aduantage, seasoned the remembrance of their present harme, with the hope of so
great a good. Many haue attempted the like, but in vaine, who in the end haue
beene forced to giue ouer the worke, and to leaue the world as it was made.
The Emperour Charlemaigne, sought to ioyne the Riuer of Rhin to the Danowe,
and the Morelle to the Rhin, to the end the French might traffike by water throughout
all Europe, and to this end hee caused great and deepe Trenches to bee made,
but finding lets, not fore-seene nor thought off, they remained vnprofitable and filled
of themselues.
And the Earle of Fuentes incounters great difficulties in this designe, which did
frustrate their worke, and renewed the peoples complaints, when as they sawe
themselues surcharged with the ruines of this last Ship-wracke, and that the Souldiers
which came from the armie of Alger, liued in Lombardie at discretion and without
discretion: wherefore to giue the Millanois some ease, hee entreated the duke
of Sauoy to lodge the Regiment of Barbo, in the Marquisate of Salusses, but knowing
how difficult a thing it is to make the Spaniard leaue his lodging, he excused himselfe
vpon the ruine and miserie of his estates.
In the end the king of Spaines Commissaries cast those companies of Italians
that were in Alexandria, they wrapt vp their colours, disarmed them, and left
them in a manner naked,Ten shillings sterling. giuing to euerie one but fiue liuers of that Countrie
money; the King of Spaine hauing no meanes to doe better, his Treasure beeing much
wasted in the charges of this last sea armie, being also to furnish money for the Suisses and
Germanes.
This yeare the Queene of Spaine was brought in bed of her first Childe, the
which although it were a Daughter,Infanta of Spain borne. yet were the Spaniard as full of ioy as the
French were for their new borne Daulphin, saying they had rather their Queene
should beginne with a Daughter than with a Sonne, least they should fall into those
difficulties which jealousie and ambition doe breede, when as the Sonne growes
vp so soone and solicits his father to be gone, when as their ages are in a manner
confounded, the one being in the flower, the other in the season of fruites, the
which is fittest for gouernement; and that the desire to succeede may not trouble
the order of Nature, which makes the one repent that they are fathers, and shewes
the other vnworthy to be children.
This Daughter was borne on Saint Maurice day, the second of September, and was
afterwards Christned Anna Maria Mauricetta.
There fell out an accident this Summer,Outrage done vnto Rochpot embassador in Spaine. which had like to haue drawne the
two great Monarchs of Christendome into armes. The Maiestie of kings is so interessed
in the wrong which is done vnto their Embassadours, as there is nothing more
sensible, nor a iuster subiect to quarrell with them that doe the wrong: And this
pretext is so nice, as the Prince which suffers the wrong vnpunished, is no lesse culpable
than they that doe it.

This accident did trouble the mindes of many, and transported their imaginations
beyond the Pyrenees, if hee who quencht the last combustions of France, had
not speedily cast water vpon this new fire which began to kindle. A nephew of the
earle of Rochepots, embassadour in Spaine for the French king, bathing himselfe at
night with some other Gentlemen after the manner of the French: certaine Spaniards
looking on them, vsed some iesting speeches, which were as suddenly answered,
wherewith the Spaniards being mooued: cast the French mens clothes into the water,
the French attired themselues with all speed, and from words they fell to swords,
in which conflict there were some Spanish Gentlemen slaine, and some hurt. The
kinsmen of the dead made complaint vnto the king of Spaine, who commanded his
officers to doe justice as the cause required. And they, not remembring that the name
of an embassador is inuiolable, euen among enemies, forced the doores of his lodging
without any respect, and drew forth his Nephew, and some other Gentlemen to prison.
The French king, being aduertised of this affront, was much offended, and demanded
satisfaction from the king of Spaine, else hee should not take him for his friend,
and withall hee called home his embassadour, forbidding all his subiects to traffike
into Spaine and Portugall, vpon paine of corporall punishment, and the losse of
goods, protesting to bee reuenged if reason were not done him by some mild course:
whereupon hee went presently towards the fronteers and came to Calais.Traffike forbidden into Spaine The iniury
done vnto Rochepot, the defence of traffike, and the kings approach, made all men
thinke that this goodlie Sunne of peace, which began but to spred his beames ouer
both realmes, would be soone ecclipsed, at the least it would bee ouer-cast with
clouds, from whence would grow many great and ruinous stormes.
The Archduke tooke an alarme at the kings approach, being then at the seege of
Ostend: wherefore hee sent the Earle of Sora to beseech his Majestie not to suffer
his enemies to preuaile against him, and presume to find a support in him,Archduke iealous of the French king. which
would be of dangerous consequence for all other people that would shake off the
yoake of obedience, and an odious example to princes from whome they should
receiue a law.
And for that many thought the king would imbrace this occasion of the seege of
Ostend, whereby it seemed he should haue good meanes to enter into Artois, withour
any opposition, he sent the duke of Esguillon to assure the archduke that he had
no other designe but to maintaine peace with all his neighbours; that his comming to
Calais,French king sends to the Archduke. was to view and to prouide for that which should bee necessarie to assure the
frontiers against all dangers. That he desired peace, yet would not endure a wrong: And
as he did hope, the king of Spain would do him reason for the affront done vnto his embassador,
so he would not seeke any reuenge vntill it were denied him. But the Pope fearing
that this violence offered to the French embassador, would not passe without some
reuenge, and that it might kindle a warre betwixt these two great kings, hee sent into
Spaine for the prisoners, the which were sent vnto him, and hee presently deliuered them
into the hands of Mounsieur de Bethunes, embassador for the French king at Rome: and so
the peace was continued.
I must now make some mention of a wonder or miracle in Spain, wherof the Spaniards
brag much, but I leaue it to the iudicious Reader to beleeue what he please: it is a bell in
Arragon,Bell in Arragon miraculous. which they say, doth sometimes ring without any mans help, and therefore they
cal it, The miraculous bell.
Neere vnto the riuer of Ebro, whereas in old time was a colony of Romans,
called Curia Celsa, from whence they broght goodly vessels of Alabaster, as Titus Liuius
and others doe witnesse, there is a place, the ruines wherof shew that there hath
been a great town which is now demanteled, and did stretch from Villila vnto a place called
Celsa, which keeps stil the old name though it bee corrupted.
Neere Villila there is a little hil, on the top whereof there is a little church dedicated to S.
Nicholas, where among other things there is a square stone of alabaster, very ancient, on

the which there are many personages cut in stone, kneeling before a Bell, which hangs
in a Tower of that steeple. But now the Church hath a Tower vnderpropt with three
pillers, in the which there hangs two bels, one a little one, which cals the neighbours
daily to diuine seruice, and the greater is commonly called by them the miraculous Bel,
the which is ten spannes about, and there is printed on it on two places. The picture of
Christ crucified, with that of the Virgin Mary and Saint Iohn, the one towards the East
and the other towards the West; and in like manner two crosses, one towards the South,
and the other towards the North, and about it there are Letters grauen which containe
this Sibilline prophesie: Christus Rex venit in pace, Deus homo factus est. This bell by
ancient tradition, as they affirme, hath often sounded of it selfe, and hath foretold strange
and vnexpected euents.
This yeare one thousand sixe hundred and one, on the thirteenth day of Iune, this bell
did found without the helpe of man, and without any shaking, the knepple striking sometimes
on one side alone, and sometimes on both sides of the bell; at the first it gaue fixe
stroakes, then nine, and afterwards twelue, fifteene, and in the end thirty stroakes, continuing
striking after this manner for the space of two houres; and the greatest blowes
were for the most part giuen towards the East, and towards the South: and diuers daies
following it strooke sundrie times in the presence of the Curate of the place, and of an
infinite number of people, vntill Saturday the sixeteenth of that moneth: So as the
bruit of this noueltie was spred ouer the whole Countrie, and in the end it came
vnto Sarragossa the chiefe Towne of the Realme of Arragon, whereas D. Garcia of
Villiapando, Lord of Quinto and Villila, was at that time, who hearing these news
went with his wife, and daughters, and many others of good accompt, presently to Villila,
being desirous to see that with their eyes which had beene reported: and for
that after their arriuall the bell stood still some daies, they held themselues very vnfortunate,
that they came not in time, fearing it would sound no more.
But the next day which was Thursday, being Corpus Christ^ day, about sixe of
the clocke in the morning, when they were ready to goe in procession, it beganne
to sound very lowd, and so continued diuers times, vntill the day after Saint Iohn
Baptists day, that it stayed for a time, and afterwards as if the clapper had beene
guided by ones hand, it gaue twenty great stroakes towards the East verie melodiously,
and so it ceased.
They say that they haue autentike testimonies in their Annales, that this bell did
found of it selfe, when as Alfonso the fift, king of Arragon, went into Italie, to
take possession of the Realme of Naples; and when as the Emperour Charles the fift,
died: In like maner when as D. Sebastian king of Portugall went into Afrike; and
when as king Philip the second was extreamely sicke at Badajos, at which time his
wife Queene Anne dyed; from which time vntill now it had neuer sounded.
This Bell did sound (as I haue said) when as D. Sebasti^n went into Afrike, and the
Portugals (who alwaies produce some Prophesies,) assure that this bell did sound this
yeare for the returne of their king D. Sebastian.
The accident of a man which termed himselfe D. Sebastian, sometime king of
Portugall,D. Sebastian king of Portugall. is so common throughout all Christendome, as there is not any Nation
but talkes of him, yet diuersly: The verification thereof would not onely giue pleasure
and profit, but would rauish many of them with admiration, who beleeue him
to be so, as well as the others, who hold him to bee an Impostor, or a Magitian:
And with all it might serue for an example, as well to those that are now or shall
come heereafter, in matter of wilfull and malitious incredulitie, as well as in too indiscreet
and light beleefe.
The Spaniards in this beleefe are contrarie to the Portugalls, for they hold him
for an Impostor. Some among them say, that he is a Calabrois, borne at Tauerne:
others maintaine that he is Monke,Opinion of the Spaniards of D. Sebastian. which had renounced his order: And others hold
that it is one Mark Tulle Catizon, born in a town of Apulia, and that he hath a wife liuing at
Messina, being induced by some Portugalls enemies to the Spaniards, who by this pretext

would seeke the deliuerie of the realm: of Portugall, which they say, is held by the
violence of the Kings of Castille: That it is most certaine the king D. Sebastian was slaine
at the battell in Afrike: That he being dead, his bodie was knowne and redeemed by
king Philip the second for a hundred thousand crownes. Others say, that the Moores deliuered
it without any money, by reason of the accord made betwixt Muley Molut, and
king Philip: it is true that king Philip did solicite them for it by reason of his pretensions.
That hee was honourably interred at Belem by Lisbone. That foure kings, accompting
the election of D. Antonio, haue raigned since his death. That it is not likely that king
Sebastian should haue continued two and twentie yeres a prisoner, and a wanderer about
the world, and not haue a desire, nor find any means to make himselfe to be knowne for
him who this Impostor saies he is. Moreouer, the miserable estate wherein this affronter
hath long liued among poore people, and in the end was seene in Italie before hee saied
who hee was, hauing not written vnto any of the Princes of Christendome. That hee
could not answer pertinently to all the demands made vnto him by the Seigniory of Venice,
who had deliberately examined him both in prison and at liberty. And that he had
not all the markes which the deceased king D. Sebastian had. That the king D. Sebastian
was flaxen haired, and this Impostor is blacke. That he doth not speake good Portugall.
That in all Ages there haue beene some seene to resemble one an other in countenaunce,
to be of the like stature, and to haue like markes. That it is not now alone that there haue
beene such Impostors which said they were the king D. Sebastian; yea a Mason borne in
the Iland of Tercere, was so impudent as to affirme himselfe to be the same, who was followed
by some Portugalls armed, and if he had entred into Lisbo^e on Assention day,
as he had resolued, and had written vnto the Gouernour, he had been receiued by all the
Portugalls for their king D. Sebastian: but others say* that onely some pesants of the countrey
followed him, and that he had written vnto the cardinall Albert to leaue Portugall;
but being taken and knowne for an Impostor, he was hanged. That also in a Prouince of
Portugall called Beira, a certain Portugall of base condition maintained himself to be the
king D. Sebastian: the which was giuen out to be so true, as Albert Cardinall of Austria
then Viceroy of Portugall, was resolued (as the Portugalls themselues say) to retire
himselfe into Castille; yet by the aduice of the fiue Gouernors of Portugall, which gouerned
the realme ioyntly with him, he sent to captaine Gill de Mesa (who at this day is
one of the French Kings chamber) to go and apprehend him with his companie of two
hundred men, and to bring him with honour and respect: for if haply hee were the
same whom he vaunted himselfe to be, hee would deliuer vp into his hands the scepter
and crowne of the kings of Portugall, with his realmes. Gill de Mesa went into the prouince
of Beira, and came to the towne of Pena macor, where he tooke him easily, and
carried him to Lisbone, who being knowne for an impostor, he was publiquely whipt
and sent to the gallies; which Impostor liued of late yeeres, and was called Sebastian in
derision, who was not hanged notwithstanding, for that in his processe hee was not
found charged with any other crimes than with that of his intention: But one who termed
himselfe Bishop of La gard was hanged, for that hee had persuaded this man: And
as for the cardinall Albert, he would not retire, but when-as the King D. Antonio came
into Portugall with his sea armie. That there haue not onely beene such Impostors, who
termed themselues to be the king D. Sebastian; but that lately in Castille, there was a pie
baker at Madrigal, who gaue it out secretly, that he was D. Charles prince of Spain, whom
king Philip his father had put to death twenty yeeres before, who beeing knowne for an
abuser was hanged: Others say, that this pie baker termed himselfe king Sebastian, being
incited thereunto by Michel de los Sanctos an Augustine Frier, Preacher to Queene Katherine,
who was hanged in his religious habite. That in like maner other ages had
furnished the like Impostors which had taken vpon them the name of Kings and Princes.
The Portugalls on the other side maintaine, that this is their true king by many and
sundry great markes, which he carries like vnto those of the true Sebastian, wherein they
are the better confirmed,Portugalls opinion touching D. Sebastian. for that the Spaniards (say they) ground onely vpon simple,
common, and light presumptions, the which doe in no sort ballance so many marks and

reasons which justifie this to be the true king: And moreouer, that the Spaniards, who
say that he is a Calabrois, a Monke, or M^rs Tulle Catizon of Apulia, haue not yet produced
any apparent proofes of his life and means whom they call an Impostor. The which
they may so easily doe, by the authoritie and absolute power which they haue in those
Prouinces, as the Portugalls doe not receiue their negatiue, but for a me^re slander: but
on the other side they repeat the life of D. Sebastian from his birth, vnto his comming to
Saint Lucar of Barameda, with many prophecies, signes, and predictions: the which we
haue added, that it may serue as an example to posteritie.
D. Sebastian (as you haue heard) was the onely sonne and after birth of the Prince D.
Iohn sonne to the king D. Iohn the third,Birth of D. Sebastian king of Portugall. who died yong, leauing D. Ioane of Austria, princesse
of Castille, and daughter to the Emperour Charles the fift with child, who was deliuered
of D. Sebastian on Saint Sebastians day, eighteene dayes after the fathers death, who
as it seemes was in a maner wrested out of the hands of God, by the great prayers which
were made generally throughout the realme of Portugall, to the end the crowne should
not be left without lawful heires males in the succession of great Alphonso the first king of
Portugall. They were induced here unto by the predictions and reuelations which had
beene giuen to the said Alphonso the first founder of the said realme: by the which it was
promised them of God, To warrant his posteritie in such sort as it should not faile vpon the
earth, yet, at the sixteenth descent from him, it should haue great tribulations and afflictions.
By this Oracle it appeareth it was spoken of his birth, for the which also the Portugals
made such praiers, and shewed such deuotion, for that they feared to fall vnder the Spaniards
yoake, who are their naturall enemies: either for that the Portugalles had in olde
time their beginning from the French, as the name doth shew, for that the French comming
into those parts did inhabite that countrey, and gaue it their name; or else for that
the Spaniards beeing enuious of their prosperities, seeking alwayes to raigne ouer them,
are become their enemies without cause.
The king D. Sebastian being ouerthrowne at the battell of Alcaserquibir in Afrike, the
Spaniards say that some noblemen of Portugall which followed him, seeing all lost, aduised
him to retire, but he answered that he had rather die, and so thrust into the middest
of his enemies, where some noblemen entred with him, where they beleeue he died,
whose bodie they say was buried at Belem.
But the Portugalls say, that they did neuer beleeue that it was D. Sebastians bodie, or
that he was dead, but that he imbarqued (as you shall heare) and that he went into Algarue,
and put himselfe into a monasterie of Ieronomits, or according vnto some, of S.
Francis, whom they called los Descalgos, or the bare footed, and there hee caused his
wounds to bee cured; the which they say had beene verified by a seruant to Cardinall
Henrie the Kings vncle, who was a Church^man and trusty to his master, and brought an
Act signed by the Gardian and monks of the said monastery of Ieronomits: this seruants
name was Manuel Antonez: But cardinall Henrie, who was acknowledged king, did not
then speake, neither did the said Manuell Antonez: the which (as they say) was afterwards
the cause of great miseries in Portugall: for the cardinall dying, notwithstanding that the
Portugalls did after him choose D. Antonio a prince of Portugall for their lawful king, yet
the king of Castille seazed vpon the Realme, and held it by force. Afterwards the said
Manuel Antonez reuealed this Act, seeing that in the yeere 1598, it was said that D. Sebastian
was recouered; who beeing sent for by king Philip, hee went vnto him, but
no man knew what was become of him, some said he was dead.
The Portugalls beleeue,How the Portugalls beleeue that D. Sebastian saued himselfe from the battell. that the king D. Sebastian seeing the battel lost, that hee was
in daunger to b^ taken, but that defending himselfe valiantly, hee slew some which
sought to take him, and hid himselfe amongst the dead carkasses vntill night, at which
time hee went towards the sea, where the rest of his armie lay in the roade. There hee
met with the Duke of Auero Christopher de Tauora his great fauourite, the Earle of Redonde,
and other noblemen, with whom he imbarqued, and went into Algarue, as you
haue heard, sending his shippes away: where hee resolued with the said noblemen to
wander ouer all Europe, Afrike, and Asia, into Ethiopia to Prete Ian, and into Persia,
where he was in battells against the Turke, and receiued many wounds.

Beeing wearie of running, and tired with the vanitie of the world, hee came vnto
an Hermitage, where hee continued vntill hee had visions and reuelations both to himselfe,
and to an Hermite with whom hee liued: so as after many delayes he left him:
which was in the yeare 1597. And that being in Sicile he sent letters into Portugall, by
Marc Tullio Catizoni a Sicilian, who neuer returned, and was neuer seen since. That king
Sebastian after hee had attended him long, parted from Sicile, with an intent to manifest
himselfe vnto the Pope. But there fell out an other accident, his seruants robbed him,
and ranne away, so as he remained naked and without meanes, being forced to begge vp
and downe Italie: and in the end hee came to Venice in Iune 1598, hauing but one gazette,
which is not a peny of our English mony: being there, he got into a Cooks house,
and lodged in a poore cockel oft or garrer, the Cookes name was Francisco, borne in Cypres,
who (being but a poore man and charged with wife and many children) entertained
him aswell as he could, for the vertues and good parts which he seemed to haue, being
continually at his prayers.
Within few dayes he was discouered by the Portugals to be D. Sebastian king of Portugall,
whereupon some of them carried him to Padoua, whether it were vpon hope to
be aduanced by him, or otherwise, so as there was a great bruite of him. The Embassador
of Spaine made his complaints, and the Seigniorie sent to the gouernors of Padoua
to chase away this man, who called himselfe D. Sebastian king of Portugall, within 3 daies
out of their towne. This sentence being signified vnto him, touched him so neere as hee
fell sicke. Being recouered, he resolued to go in person to Venice to yeeld an accompt
of himselfe. He presents himselfe vnto the Senate, relates the historie of his life, his rout
in Afrike, his retreit into Calabria, his resolution neuer to haue shewed himselfe in anie
place of knowledge for the shame of his disgrace, and the punishment of his rashnesse, if
the Spirit of God had not inspired him with another will, and giuen him a certaine assurance
to make him known for him that he was borne. He added moreouer, that among
all the soueraigne Estates of Europe, he would not haue recourse to any, but to the common
weale of Venice, to iudge the truth of his condition. And for a proofe, hee remembred
vnto them with all circumstances, the Embassadors which they had in former times
sent vnto him, the answers and dispatches which they had brought backe from him, and
the difficulties that were of either side. The Senate caused their records to be searcht,
and found them conformable to his words. They questioned with him, with great wisedome
and iudgement, of many other matters of importance; whereunto hee answered
so pertinently, as many held him to be the true king D. Sebastian, and others tooke him to
bee a magitian, for that no other but himselfe could be informed of such secret matters,
without the spirit of Pithon.
Then grew there a great rumour in Venice, the people fauoured him with their wishes
and praiers, euery man desired to see him seated againe in his throne. But hee had a
violent enemie, the Embassadour of Spaine, who maintained for his master, that hee was
an impostor, charging him moreouer, with many horrible and detestable crimes (which
beeing prooued could not haue deserued lesse than fire) he made himselfe partie against
him,D. Sebastian imprisoned at Venice. and got him to be committed. Beeing in prison, the Senat deputed Iudges to make
his processe, who vsed all diligence to informe vpon the crimes imputed vnto him by his
aduerse partie, but they found him innocent. They examined him eight and twentie
times, at all the which he shewed such an vndaunted courage and countenance, as he seemed
rather capable to iudge the Iudges, than to vndergoe their censures. In the end, imagining
that their demands were more curious than iust, and that they fauoured the
greedinesse of the Spaniard more than the truth of his cause, hee would not answer any
more, but did insist vpon his first request, That they would let him be seene vnto the Portugals,
and to such strangers as had knowne him before he past into Afrike, and if he were
a counterfeit, hee was in their hands to doe that iustice on him which an impostor deserued.
This Seductor (said the Embassadour of Spaine) is borne in Apulia,Reasons of the Embassadors accusing D. Sebastian. and married at
Messina, we haue the depositions of his wife, that his name Mareo Tullio Catizoni; that he
had beene procured and instructed by certaine Portugals, enemies to the Estate of Spaine,

who vnder this pretext would stirre vp a rebellion, which they call a deliuerie or restoring
of the realme of Portugall: what Prince of Christendome would deale in the affaires of
this affronter? The qualitie of those persons whom hee hath followed since the time
that he hath wickedly taken vpon him the name of D. Sebastian* doth it not sufficiently
prooue that he is a man of a bad life? Hee hath some markes which D. Sebastian had on
his bodie when he liued, but most of them are counterfeited by art. The King Sebastian
was flaxen haired, and this impostor is blacke; neither doth he speake good Portugal. By
these and many other reasons he concluded, that the prisoner should vndergoe the same
punishment which they had suffered which were culpable of the same crime, during the
raignes of the last king and gouernours of Portugall.
The Portugals defended him with as great animositie as the Spaniards accused him
with passion:Portugals defend him. they maintained that their king D. Sebastian beeing grieued, that through
the violence of his courage he had made Afrike the sepulchre of so many thousands of
men, who might haue done more profitable seruice vnto Christendome; and beeing ashamed
after so great a losse, had wandred vp and downe the world, vntill that the diuining
prouidence had forced him to manifest himselfe. His aduenture was no stranger,
nor more incredible than that of William 5 duke of Aquitaine, who hauing maintained the
Antipope Leon surnamed Anaclet, against Innocent 2, who was lawfull Pope; notwithstanding
that Saint Bernard had exhorted him not to countenance a Schisme in the Church,
against the seruice of God: the said duke hauing displaced the Bishops of Poicters and
Lymogcs, and aduanced others, of his owne authoritie, beeing toucht with remorce,
and a desire of penance, he left his Estates, to lead a solitarie life like some poore man:
with this designe he reconciled himslfe vnto the Pope, and by his aduice went to Ierusalem,
with a Secretarie of his called Albert; there he liued nine yeares in great abstinence.
At his returne to Rome, he thought to haue taken partie in the warres which were then
in Italie, but knowing that this aduice was a temptation of the deuill, he returned to Ierusalem,
and afterwards came backe into Italie, where he built diuers monasteries, and in the
end died, in the yeare 1154.
If this prince had had a meaning to returne and take possession of his Estates,
should he haue found the like inhumanitie among the princes and common weales of
Christendome? should he haue had such toyle to verifie the true qualitie of his person?
The Portugals did neuer beleeue that their king D. Sebastian was slaine at the Battell
of Alcasar. If they would haue the people beleeue it, they should haue caused his
body to be viewed by such as were interessed, and that knew him, for that they had beene
brought vp with him, and the markes which he carries on his person: and not to poore
prisoners taken in the warres, to whom vnder promise of libertie, they might drawe what
depositions they pleased. There is nothing more easie than to suppose a bodie, to put it
into a beere, to interre it royally, and to proclaime, This is the body of the deceased D.
Sebastian king of Portugall.
As for impostors which haue qualified themselues with his name, haue found any
beleefe, but with the simple, and people of no sort? Haue we not abandoned them as
soone as euer their falshood was discouered? The Mason of Tercere, was he not hanged
by a publike consent? That other raskall of Pegnamacor, who did for a time trouble
Cardinall Albert, and the fiue gouernours of Portugall, was hee not declared a seducer,
publikely whipt, and sent to the galleys.
But what credit may be giuen to the depositions of a silly woman, who for a peece
of money will sing any note you please? wee haue witnesses to whom shee voluntarily
declared, that shee came to Venice against her will: That shee is the wife of Marco
Tullio Catizoni, but had not seene him since hee parted, with many letters to goe into
Portugall. Wee knowe moreouer, that hee distributed the greatest part of them, and
that hee died at Lisbone, attending the returne of some that were absent, to deliuer them
to their owne hands. The king D. Sebastian had during his raigne more intelligence
with this Seigniorie, than with all other Estates of Christendome: and therefore
had rather addresse himselfe vnto them to bee relieued in the iustice of his cause. The
afflictions and miseries which haue opprest him since hee began to discouer himselfe,

haue forced him to accept of that which is allowed the most infortunate in a strange countrey:
to receiue courtesies, and to bind himselfe indifferently to all men for their good
deeds. They haue examined his life exactly, and theirs whok he hath frequented: could
they conuict him of any crime? of any vice? if it bee not a crime or vice to spend many
daies of the weeke in fasting with bread and water, in continuall prayers, and in giuing
vnto the poore the remainder of the almes which had been giuen him. The Spaniards
which say that he is a Calabrois, a Monke which hath quit his Order, and which call him
Marco Tullio Catizoni, should they not rather desire that he should be brought forth vnto
vs, to examine him, to see him, to heare him, and to know him? If hee bee a seducer,
and if we be impostors, what meanes shall wee haue with him to auoyd the punishment
which the Lawes inflict in such cases? Wee know the markes and characters which Nature,
not without some great miserie, hath set vpon the bodie of the king D. Sebastian;
Let vs see this prisoner, if he carries them, it is a great presumption for many other signes
which we haue: if there be art, we wil be the first that shal cire out against the abuser. And
vntill this be done we cannot take the Spaniards negatiue, who are the vsurpers of Portugall,
but for a meere slander.
If the king Don Sebastian hath changed the colour of his haire since his youth,
what maruaile is it? Is it not ordinarie, that a flaxen haire turnes blacke with age?
But moreouer, doe not wee know, that if any one that is as white as snowe, passe the
Equinoctiall line, if he make a voyage to Guimey, to Saint Thome, or to some other
part of Ethiopia; if hee stay some yeares in Barbarie, hee will become blacke as
pitch, and the whiter a man is, the sooner he growes blacke. Wee haue a familiar example
in the person of Don Christopher Prince of Portugall: From his youth vntill
the age of eighteene, that hee past out of England into Barbarie; wee haue seene him
white as milke, faire, and of a cleere complexion; but hauing liued at Marroc little aboue
three yeares, hee grewe so blacke, as at his returne we did not know him. Hee is
yet liuing, and no whiter than when hee returned out of Barbarie. If little aboue
three yeares had such power to breed so strange an alteration in Don Christopher, what
might aboue twentie yeares doe in the king Don Sebastian? Neither may we find it
strange, if conuersing with so many Nations, differing in language, he hath forgotten
something of the true and naturall pronunciation of ours. Thus our enemies grounding
onely vpon simple and light presumptions, cannot ouerthrowe so many certaine markes
and reasons which iustifie this man to bee the true and lawfull Don Sebastian king of
Portugall.
The Venetians would gladly their prisoner were gone to seeke justice elsewhere,
for they found no lawfull subiect to condemne him, and they could not openly giue
him meanes to escape, but they must incense the king of Spaine. The greatest part of
their Senat found great likelihoods that he should be the same, others knew not what to
say, neither durst they intreat him as a king. They therefore gaue the Portugals to vnderstand
by the Archbishop of Spalato,Venetians demand an attestation of the Portugals. who knew him particularly, and had kept him
sometime in his house, That they should bring vnto them the true and naturall markes
of the king Don Sebastian well verified, without the which they might not see him; for
that hauing so great a desire to free themselues from the Castillans commaund, if need
were they would maintaine a Negro to be the king Don Sebastian.
Doctor Sampayo a Iacobin goes to Lisbone, from whence he returnes to Venice
with a Chanon, and brings an instrument made by an Apostolike Notarie, containing
all the markes testified by many others, and beseecheth the Seigniorie to confront
them, and to vnderstand the truth. They answered, that the reason of Estate did not
allow them to enquire whether he were a king, or not, vnlesse they were required in his
fauour by the kings and princes of Christendom. After this the Portugals went to begge
fauour in France, Germanie, England, with the Estates of the vnited Prouinces, and
else-where. In the end Don Christopher younger sonne to the deceased Don Antonio
king of Portugal by Election, who died at Paris, beeing come to Venice with letters
from the Estates and prince Maurice, obtained audience, and deliuered that which hee
pretended in writing. The Counsell assembled foure seuerall daies for the prisoners affaires,

and conclusions beeing taken the 16 of December, 1600, he was called vnto the
Senat at ten of the clocke at night, where there did assist aboue 200 of the chiefe men of
that State; where the same iniunction which had beene made vnto him by the Podesta
of Padoua, in the yeare 1598, was againe intimated vnto him by foure Deputies
of the Seigniorie, all standing vp bare headed, with great respect: where they pronounced
this sentence vnto him, and he still couered, if we shall beleeue the Portugals.
Going forth of the Senat many presented themselues to accompanie him to his lodging,
but he would not suffer them. The Portugals which were at Venice, D. Christopher,
D. Iohn de Castro, Diego Manuel, Roderigo Marques, Sebastian Figueyra, Francisco Antonio,
Sampayo and Chrysostome Monkes, with many others, whereof some had seene him often
in Portugal, and since in Barbarie after the defeat, protest that at the first sight of him they
were much amazed, for that they saw him differ so much in age and haire; but hauing
well obserued his countenance, his forehead, his eies; his nose, his lippe of Austria, that is
to say, greater than the ordinarie, the which most of the Princes of that house haue (from
whence he was descended by his grandmother Catherine, sister to the Emperour Charles
the fift, and by his mother Ioane daughter to the said Emperour) his stature, his speech, his
writing, all the visible markes of his bodie, whereby they did know him infallibly; the left
parts, as his arme, hand, leg, and foot, shorter than the right; his wart vpon the little toe
of the right foot, which was almost like vnto a sixt toe, the moles of his face and hands,
his hurt vpon his right brow and head, the place where he wanted a tooth in his right jawe
beneath, the which Sebastian Nero his Chirurgion had once pulled out: all which markes,
with many other, did rauish them with wonderful admiration, and forced them to confesse
that he was their true and naturall king, who was miraculously preserued for the restoring
of Portugal, and for the benefit of Christendome, and they liue yet in this expectation.
Sampayo a Doctor and professour of Diuinitie at Tolousa, and a Iacobin by profession,
to giue an indubitable beleefe to this new manifestation, and to make the world thinke
that it were Atheisme not to beleeue it, writing to Paris, presumed to deliuer these
words: I assure you that Iesus Christ is no more the sonne of the true and eternall God,
whom I call to witnesse,Presumption of Doctor Sampayo. than this is D. Sebastian our true and naturall king and Lord. A
bold speech, although it were an vndoubted truth, confest by all the world; the comparison
is vnlawfull, the which I doubt cannot be made without blasphemie, seeing there is
no proportion betwixt the Creator and the Creature.
Beeing at libertie, the Portugals which were at Venice besought him to speake vnto
them, to the end they might see if his speech would giue them as much knowledge of his
qualitie as his countenance had done, not being able to iudge of the inward many by the
outward parts: whereupon he spake vnto them after the Portugal manner, proudly and royally,
telling the^ what he was, and what his life had bin since his ouerthrow in Afrike, which
forced teares from him in speaking, and from them in hearing. Being thus resolued, they
were much troubled how they should saue him from the ambushes of the Spaniards, for
they were aduertised that the Embassadour of Castille laid wait for him at euery passage.
The duke of Sauoy and the Earle of Fuentes had the like charge. The Archbishop of Spalato
offred to conduct him safely in his Caroche vnto the frontiers of Germany, but they
would not trust him, and yet they knew not what to resolue: some would carry him to Lions,
where they treated of a peace with the duke of Sauoy: whereas when they saw any
troup of horse a far off, they ran to meet them, with acclamations, hoping to see D. Sebastian
king of Portugal, and thereupon built goodly castles in Spaine. Others desired he should
rather passe by Florence, to imbarke at Liuorne, and so get to Marseilles. But as euery one
in particular sought to haue the honour to preserue the king, their obstinate disagreement
spoiled all. They made choice of the worst, and followed the aduice of Sampayo, who
was a turbulent and cholericke man: they attire him like a monke of the Order of S. Dominike,
and imbarke him in a gondole in the night, from whence he goes to Padoua: there he
changed his habit for a cloake and a rapier,D. Sebastian staied prisoner at Florence. and so went to Florence, whereas the duke caused
him to be stayed, by the aduice of the Archbishop of Pisa, where he kept him vntil the
23 of Aprill.
The king of Spaine beeing aduertised that hee was at Florence, prest the great duke

to deliuer him vnto the Viceroy of Naples, and to his entreaties he addes threats. But
why should he deliuer him,King of Spaine demands D. Sebastian. seeing that the Venetians seeme rather by their sentence to
giue their prisoner means to seeke justice elsewhere, than to take knowledge of his cause?
Shall he violate the law of nations, in deliuering him that trusted vnto his protection?
Being thus in suspence betwixt the feare of threats, and the reason of deniall, they represent
vnto him a great armie, at the king of Spaine deuotion, the which affrights all
Italie, and threatens his estates. He desires rather to auoid the storme, than to incense a
mightie Prince,He is deliuered to the Viceroy of Naples. and to draw a warre vpon him, the end whereof must needs be ruinous.
Whereupon he sent him to Orbirello, where some, appointed by the Viceroy, receiued
him, and conducted him safely to Naples.
Seeing himselfe in the Castillans power, and that he had nothing free but theayre and
his tongue, he poured forth all that might be spoken against one that may be taxed of
treason, inhospitalitie, and treacherie, as the violence of choler thrust him on to strange
imprecations against them that do so deliuer vp the poore, vnjustly afflicted, which commit
themselues to the safegard of another. Notwithstanding these violent humors, he
presented himselfe before the earle of Lemos, Viceroy of Naples, with as setled a countenance
as he had done to the Senat of Venice, and the great Duke; yea (the Portugals
say) with as great majestie, as if he had beene fitting in his royall throne at Lisbone: For
at his comming in, to a great hall, seeing the Viceroy bare headed, whether it were to respect
the title of a king, which he did attribute vnto himselfe, or by reason of the heat, Couer
you Earle of Lemos; said he, with such a hardie grauitie, as it amazed the whole companie.
The Viceroy demanded of him, Whence comes this authoritie to commaund me? To whom he
answered, It is borne with me. You seeme not to know me, I know who you are: doe you not remember
that the deceased king Philip mine vncle sent you twice vnto me when I raigned in Portugall?
Declaring vnto him euery particular so precisely, as it bred some scruple in the
minds of the hearers, and did much distemper the Viceroyes thoughts: who dying some
moneths after, charged his sonne and successor to carrie himselfe discreetly and moderatly
to this prisoner, as indeed he had intreated him (as the Portugals say) with little rigour
and much courtesie. But this new keeper, whether that he had a contrarie commaundement
from his Soueraigne, or to insinuate more into his fauor, or else fearing the corruption
of some Portugals, who followed him a farre off, to see his successe, he restrained his
prisoner, and doubled his gards, giuing him no more libertie than to many others, to goe
out on Sundayes and festiuall daies to heare Masse in a chappell within the castle. Yet the
Viceroy, who would not publikely seeme to consent to the affliction of this vnfortunate
man, dispensed with himselfe to call him Impostor: who finding himselfe much toucht
with this reproch, fell to those armes which his condition did furnish him, which were as
bitter words as might be giuen to any one that would not respect his qualitie. These violent
words did not free him from a hard prison in the castle d' Ouo,D. Sebastian in the castle d'Ouo. in the which he did not
find any thing (according to the report of the Portugals) but a cord, and a long knife, fit
instruments for some desperat malefactor, who would free himselfe from some exemplarie
punishment. There he continued three daies without bread, wine, water, or bed. On
the fourth the Auditor generall being followed by two Registers, came to visit him, and
finding him safe and well (for there was no great likelyhood that with such cruell vsage
he should seeke to prolong his life, especially hauing such fit instruments to end his miseries,
and to free himselfe from a more sensible, ignominie before men) he said vnto him,
That if he did not forbeare to say and maintaine himselfe to be D. Sebastian king of Portugall,
they had not any thing to sustaine his hunger nor thirst, nor to giue him rest. Doe
what you please, said the prisoner, for I am D. Sebastian, the true king of Portugall, and no
other. God forbid that I should fall into so great a mischiefe, and so contrarie to my soules
health, that for feare of men I should denie the truth, and confesse that which is not. I am that
D. Sebastian king of Portugall, who in the yeare 1578 past into Africke against the Infidels: he
who to augment the number and power of Christians, put his life in hazard: that vnfortunat man
who for his sinnes lost a battell, which was the cause of so great alterations in Christendome. This
is the very truth, and I can say no other.

The Auditor and the Registers departed with this answere: from which time they
gaue him bread and water for his diet; but some dayes after he had fiue crownes a
moneth giuen him, and a man to serue him, without any further proceeding in his
cause, vntill the seuenteenth of Aprill 1602. Vpon which day the Viceroy sent to
know if he persisted in his first deposition, and that he should be now well aduised to
answere pertinently. This is not (said he) the right course they should take to examine
and judge my processe: present me vnto the Portugals, who haue bred me, knowne
me, and serued me; vpon whose saying and testimonie the whole profe and verification
of my cause doth depend. If I should liue a thousand yeares, yea more, I would
neuer answere otherwise. If you be resolued to put me to death without any other
profe, I take God for my onely judge, who knowes the truth of my cause. I am
D. Sebastian the true king of Portugall: you may now deale with me as you haue
heretofore pretended. After which he disposed himselfe to die, made a generall
confession, and receiued the Sacrament, still maintaining, that he was as he had
said.
Whilest that he attended the houre of his death, they sent againe vnto him to make
his last answere; that is to say, he should sing a new song, and recant the former: but
he made the same answere: And vpon this last answere he was at the instance of the
Castillans exorcised by the Bishop of Rhegium, as a Magitian, for that he had answered
very pertinently to all they had demaunded of him. During which action hee
shewed vnto the Bishop with a cheerefull countenance a Crucifix, which he carried at
his breast: Behold (said he) the Image of the Master in whom I trust, and for whom I would
die. Wherewith the Bishop went away, confounded with his conjurations, as some
report, who say they were then present. After which he was set vpon an Asse, the last
day of Aprill,D. Sebastian led ignominiously through the streets. and carried publikely through the streets, hauing three trumpets going
before him, and proclayming his sentence, by the which he was condemned to be
led ignominiously through the streets of Naples, and then put into the galleyes, for
that he had called himselfe D. Sebastian king of Portugall, being but a Calabrois. At
this crie when he pronounced this word King, he answered with a loud voice, So am I;
and when he added, being but a Calabrois, he said, That is false. Neither did any of the
officers or people hinder him, or once moue: Euerie man heared him with admiration
crying at the corners of the streets: I am in my enemies hands, let them doe with my bodie
what they please, I recommend my soule vnto God, who hath created it, and knowes the truth,
that I am as I say.
Hauing thus led him through the citie,He is put into a Galley. they put him into the royall Galley, where
they attired him like a slaue, and cut off the haire both of his head and beard, which
some gathered vp, either through reuerence or superstition, as a matter of great esteeme,
and then they fastened him to the chaine, yet aduising them that they should not force
him to rowe.
The galleyes passing from Naples to Barcelona, arriued in August 1602, at the
port of S. Lucar of Barameda, whereas the Duke of Medina Sydonia and his wife
were desirous to see him:His discourse with the Duke of Medina Sidonia and the Duchesse. who hauing deuised long with him, he demaunded of the
Duke if he had the sword which he had ginen him, when he imbarked to goe into
Barbarie. The Duke answered, It is true Don Sebastian king of Portugall presented
me with a sword, which I keepe among others. Seeing you haue it yet, said the
Gallerien, I pray you let me see it: for although it be foure and twentie yeares
since I gaue it you, yet will I know it. Whereupon the Duke caused a dozen
to be brought, but it being not among them, he sent for others. The Gallerian seeing
it in the bringers hand: behold (said he vnto the Duke) the sword which I gaue
you when as I vndertooke my voyage into Afrike. Then, turning vnto the Duchesse,
who was Anna de Silua, daughter to the prince of Eboli; Cousin, said
he (after that he had told her what secrets had passed betwixt them when he tooke
his leaue of her at Cadis) I remember that I gaue you a jewell, haue you it also?
The Duchesse made the like answere vnto the Duke her husband, That

the king D. Sebastian had giuen her a jewell: he then replyed, Shew it me; I shall know it
well, and shall tell you of a secret which it may be you know not: then hauing chosen it
out from among many, he said vnto her, That to proue his saying true, she should cause
the stone to be taken out, vnder which she should find his name and cypher grauen.
There was a Negro in the Duchesse companie, whom he knew, saying, that she had
serued him for the washing of his linnen, when he raigned in Portugall. The Duke and
Duchesse seeing these apparent things, and so conformable to truth, went away with
heauie countenances, and as it were weeping for compassion to see this miserable
prince in so wretched an estate. Many old Portugals saw him, knew him, and did aduow
him to be the true D. Sebastian, king of Portugall. Finally, the Portugals (if
wee may beleeue them) report so many particularities touching this man, as it
would require a whole volume to relate them all: adding, that they that haue seene
him, and knowne him, haue giuen this testimonie, that he is the same, or a deuill
incarnate.
But besides these probabilities,Predictions alledged by the Portugals in fauor of D. Sebastian. which they take for truth, they arme themselues
with certaine predictions or prophecies, which they say must needs haue relation to
the aduentures of this poore Gallerien, whom they maintaine with an obstinate constancie
to be their lawfull king. S. Isodore, sonne to Seuerian, the sonne of Thierry, king
of the East Gothes, and of Italie, did leaue in writing aboue a thousand yeares since,
That a hidden king, twice giuen by prayers and deuotions, shall come into Spaine vpon a
horse of wood, whom many seeing, shall not beleeue that it is he, etc. And for the vnderstanding
of this prophecie, which they attribute particularly vnto king D. Sebastian, they
say, that he was twice giuen; first, by the intercession of the people of Portugall for his
birth, when they saw his father die, leauing no other issue but what might be hoped for
from a woman with child: the second by the acknowledgement they haue made of
him at Venice, after that he had wandered twentie yeares vnknowne throughout the
world: That the woodden horse is the galley vpon the which he came from Naples into
Spaine.
Sampayo sweares, that he found this other prophecie at S. Victors Librarie at Paris:
That the king D. Sebastian shall goe out of Naples vpon a horse of wood: that out of the Mediterranean
sea he shall enter into the Ocean, and that his horse shall stay at S. Lucar of Barameda.
The which is accomplished, when as the galley passing from Naples to Barcelona,
entred into the Ocean sea.
This other was found in a Castillan Author, in his language: The vnknowne shall
come, yea without doubt he shall come: he shall enter into the garden by the gate which is
most on this side the wall: and that which seemes obscure, shall be seene clearely and plainely.
By this garden they vnderstand the countrey which is on this side Mont Calpe
vnto the riuer of Guadalquibir, which they call the garden of Spaine, for that it is
pleasant and fruitfull: the wall is Cadiz, the gate S. Lucar of Barameda.
That the labourers of Portugall did hold for a most auncient tradition, That a
time will come, when as a King, whose name shall be as Bestia, shall vanish out of sight,
and that after he and his realme haue suffered many great afflictions and miseries, the
same king, whom all the world held for dead, shall rise againe, and recouer his
throne with incredible prosperitie. Which they say must needs be applyed to their
king D. Sebastian, for that the peasants in Portugall, in stead of Sebastian, say Bestiam.
And as they hold these predictions to be accomplished in the person of this prisoner,
so it is not possible to root out this beleefe, That he is the true and naturall D.
Sebastian, king of Portugall. Sampayo after he had proclaimed this miraculous aduenture
ouer all Christendome, and runne into a thousand dangers for his sake, he went againe
into Portugall with Frier Bonauenture, a Franciscan: where publishing this opinion
as a most certaine truth, they bred such a mutinie among the people, as they were
ready to make a generall reuolt,Sampayo and Bonauenture hung for this Gallerien. if they had found any assistance with strangers: but being
in the end discouered at S. Lucar, they were degraded of their Orders, and hanged at Lisbone,
with horrible torments; the which notwithstanding could not stop their mouthes,

but they tooke earth, heauen, and all heauenly creatures, yea and God himselfe, to
whom the most hidden secrets are knowne, to witnesse of their innocencies and words,
the which they maintained vnto the last gaspe to be as true as the Gospel; so as through
compassion of their cruell tortures, and the firme beleefe which they had setled in the
hearts of their countrimen, they drew many thousands into danger. Some retired themselues
vnto their friends, to escape the search which was made for the adherents of this
noueltie: some got them away disguised, and escaped into diuers prouinces here and
there. Some comming to Paris presented a petition vnto the king in the name of the
Portugals oppressed by the tyrannie of the Castillan, beseeching his Maiestie to succour
them onely with two thousand men, commaunded by a Prince, or some great man of
Fraunce, such as he should please to name, and some store of armes to disperse among
the people at their arriuall, beeing assured (said they) of money for their entertainment,
and other munition of warre both by sea and land, which the Queene of England and the
Estates should furnish them, to restore their lawfull king, and free them from the command
of strangers. Moreouer, they gaue hope, in case they might recouer their king D.
Sebastian, vniustly detained prisoner, whenas they should cause him to be duely acknowledged,
and restore vnto him his inheritance, to marrie the duke of Vendosme with the
daughter of D. Catherina duchesse of Bragance, who had right to the succession of the
realme of Portugal, and to crowne him king of Portugal, if it should so please the most
Christian king his naturall father. But God hath not blest the voyages made into Portugal,
with a designe to drawe it from the Spaniard, who hath enioyed it quietly for many
yeares; and a wise man will not prouoke the wrath of a mightie prince, by drawing
him into warre, the end whereof must needs be doubtfull and ruinous.
The Spaniard considering the attempts of the Portugals, who would willingly trouble
heauen, earth, yea and hell it selfe, to free themselues from his subiection, hee caused
their pretended king to be taken out of the royall galley of Naples, and to be brought to
Seuile in the galley of D. Pedro de Toledo the Generall, there to be more safely kept. But
afterwards, to take all knowledge from the world, hee caused him to be shut vp in the castle
of S. Lucar.Gallerien put in the Castle of S. Lucar. The Portugals hope that hee shall come forth in despight of all his enemies,
and fulfill all the prophecies that are made of him, and recouer possession of his
realmes. It is in the power of the king of Spaine, but it is not likely that hee will seeke
to verifie the qualitie of this person by any other meanes: for if hee causeth him to bee
declared an impostor, and to be punished, the Portugals who had procured him to maintaine
himselfe to be their king,Policie of the Counsel of Spaine. might hereafter suborne another to the same end; whereas
so long as they shall beleeue this man is aliue, they will not attempt any thing infauour
of another, and this man beeing detained perpetually in prison, or in the galleys,
shall daily feele the paines of death, without dying. And if he were duely proued to be
such as he qualifies himselfe, reason and equitie would require that he should bee restored
to the iust and lawfull possession of his Estates, which is the fairest rose of the Spaniards
girland, and the rarest pearle of his cabinet.
Whatsoeuer hee bee, Donatus and Delphinus Procurators of Saint Marc at Venice,
beeing sent to congratulate the French kings victories, and his mariage, they
were demanded by the Prince of Conde, what iudgement the seigniorie of Venice
made of him who called himselfe king of Portugall; to whom they made no other answer,
but that the State had done what it might in his cause, and that he had beene ill
counselled and conducted.
This yeare the Queene of England was much troubled with her rebels in Ireland,
by reason of the aide and support they receiued from Spaine:Spaniards sent into Ireland. the king sending
D. Iohn d' Aguilar vnto them, with aboue two thousand old souldiers in sixe ships: they
came to Castel-hauen, Baltemoore, and Beer-hauen, all three important places, here
they landed their men, with an intent to fortifie them, beeing then about the end of September.
Sir Richard Leuison, who was Admiral of some of the Queens ships, lying then in
the hauen of Kinsale, and hearing of the Spaniards comming into the aboue named ports,
he drew forth his ships both against wind and weather, and went and fought with the Spaniards
within Castel-hauen, where he did so batter them, as he made 5 of their 6 shippes vnseruiceable,

most of their men were landed before he came, by reason of the weather,
who played dangerously vpon him with their ordnance from the land, whereof they were
wel furnished with great store of munition. Presently after, D. Iohn d' Aguilar put himselfe
into Kinsale with most of his Spaniards, where he fortified himselfe: whither in October
after,Kinsale besieged (...) the Spaniards in it. the Lord Montioy, Lord Deputie of Ireland, and Generall of her Maiesties
forces in that kingdome, came with an armie to besiege him; the which continued long,
in a very vnseasonable time, and was in shew very dangerous for the English: for they
within the towne were for the most part old souldiers, well armed, and in no want, as was
supposed, and without the rebels were all in armes, and had drawne their forces together,
which were the greatest that euer had bin seene together in Ireland, being sixe thousand
foot (whereof there were sixe companies of the new arriued Spaniards) and fiue hundred
horse, and began to march towards Kinsale, with an assured hope to releeue the towne,
raise the siege, and defeat the English, if they of the towne did sallie forth when as T^rone
and Odonell should giue charge vnto the campe: they had great reason to hope for good
successe, for the English were scarce so many in number, all in a manner tyred with the
miseries of a long winters siege, their horses weake and decaied, and likely to want victuals.
Notwithstanding, continuing their approaches still towards the towne, as if they regarded
not the rebels, on the twentieth of December at night, the Lord Deputie had intelligence
that Tyrone and the rebels would campe the next night within a mile and a
halfe of them, with all their forces; and so on the 21 day at night he shewed himselfe, with
most of his horse and foot, vpon the toppe of a hill, within a mile of the English campe.
I must craue pardon if I make a relation of this battell, and the ouerthrowe of the rebels
armie in this historie of Spaine,Reasen why this is inserted into the history. both for that they were then relieued by the king of
Spaine, with money, men, and munition, and supported in their rebellion; and also
for that the yeelding vp of Kinsale by the Spaniards, depended wholly vpon this action.
Tyrone shewing himselfe (as I said before) and seeing two regiments of foot, with
some horse, drawne out of the campe, and marching towards him, he retired to the other
side of the hill, where he camped that night, beeing fortified both with woods and water.
One the three and twentieth day the Lord Deputie was aduertised,Letters from D. Iohn de Aguilar to the L. Deputie. and had also intercepted
letters, written from D. Iohn d' Aguilar Generall of the Spaniards, and commaunder
within the towne, by which he did presse and importune Tyrone to make an attempt
vpon the English campe intimating his wants, and likelihood to be soone forced, putting
the rebels in mind of their faithfull promises to succour him, and of the easinesse of the enterprise,
and vndoubted successe, assuring them that the English were much decayed in
numbers, and that those which remained were much weakened with that long winters
siege; so as it was not possible they should be able to maintaine so much ground as they
had taken when their strength was full: if they on the one side, and he on the other, charged
them at one instant, which he for his part promised to doe whensoeuer they should
giue the attempt. It seemeth that vpon this aduice they resolued to put it in execution
that night, or the next following. In the meane time they gaue the English continuall
alarmes, and made sallies from the towne, keeping them still in action, that they might be
the lesse able to make resistance when they were charged. But the Lord Deputie prouided
for all inconueniences, making forts, barricadoes, and trenches, and fortifying all the
approaches to the towne, keeping good gards, and his armie ready vpon all occasions.
On the 23 day at night hee was assured that the next day the rebels would charge his
campe, whereupon he commanded the whole armie to be in readinesse.
Tyrone had an intent early in the morning to put all his Spaniards into the towne,
with eight hundred of his best Irish, vnder Tyrrell; but seeing at the breake of day
some of the English troupes aduance, hee made a stand, and then retired to the body of
their armie. The Lord Deputy giuing the charge of the camp to Sir George Carew then L.
President of Munster, to attend the Spaniards within the towne, hee drewe forth part
of his forces, beeing about foure hundred horse, and a thousand and two hundred foot,
and hearing that the enemie retired disorderly,Rebels and Spaniards defeated in Ireland. hee aduanced towards them, who
still retired with feare. In the end, (omitting euery particular circumstance touching
the marshalling of the English armie, to them that write that historie)

they ouertooke the rebells, charged them, and put them to rout. The Spaniards (being
abandoned by the Irish) were almost all slaine, D. Alonso d' Ocampo their colonell, with
three Captaines, sixe Alferez, and fortie souldiers were taken prisoners. There were
found (of Irish onely) twelue hundred bodies dead vpon the place, and about twelue
hundred hurt, whereof many died that night. The rebels lost two thousand armes which
were brought forth, all their munition, their drummes, nine ensignes, whereof sixe were
Spanish: the English had but one man slaine, and not aboue tenne hurt. Thus they got
a miraculous victorie, to the great honor of the Lord Deputie, and of all that commanded
vnder him.
After this glorious victorie, the Lord Deputie posted that present day vnto the camp,
lest the Spaniard should haue made some sally in his absence, but they had not attempted
any thing; the next day he commaunded the approaches vnto the towne should be
aduanced nearer: But after fiue or sixe daies worke, D. Iohn d' Aquilar, who commanded
the forces within the towne, offered to parle, and sent a drumme with a letter sealed vp
to the Lord Deputie, by the which he demaunded that some men of qualitie and sufficiencie
might be sent into the towne from his Lordship, to conferre with him, whom hee
would acquaint with such conditions as hee then stood vpon: whereunto the Lord Deputie
condescended, imploying sir William Godolphin in that busines; the which was managed
after this maner, according to the originall.

D. Iohn told sir William,D. Iohn d' Aquilars speech. that hauing found the Lord Deputie (whom hee termed
Viceroy) although a furious and powerfull, yet an honourable enemie, and the Irish not
onely weake and barbarous, but (as he feared) treacherous friends, he was so farre in his
affections reconciled to the one, and distasted with the other, as it did inuite him to make
an ouerture of such a composition as might be safe and profitable for the state of England
with least preiudice to the Crowne of Spaine, by deliuering into the Viceroyes power
the towne of Kinsale, with all other places in Ireland held by the Spanish, so as they
might depart vpon honourable termes, fit for such men of warre, as are not inforced by
necessitie to receiue conditions, but willingly induced vpon iust respects, to disingage
themselues, and to leaue a people, by whom their king and master had bin so notoriously
abused, if not betrayed. That if the Viceroy liked to entertaine further parley touching
this point, he would first be pleased to vnderstand them rightly, and to make his Propositions
such as might be sutable to men throughly resolued, rather to bury themselues
aliue, and to indure a thousand deaths, than to giue way to one article, that should tast
of basenesse or dishonor, being so confident of their present strength, and the royall succors
of Spaine, as they should make no doubt of yielding a good accompt of themselues,
and of their interest in this kingdome, but that a just disdaine and splene conceiued against
the nation, dissuaded them from beeing farther ingaged for it, than of necessitie
they must.

Sir William Godolphin hauing charge from the Lord Deputie, only to receiue D. Iohns
propositions and demaunds, hauing made this relation to his Lordship, and the Councell,
he was sent backe by them with this answer following.
That although the Lord Deputie hauing lately defeated their succours,Answer from the Lord Deputie to D. Iohn. did so well
vnderstand his owne strength and their weakenesse, as it made him nothing doubt of forcing
them within a short time, whom hee knew to be prest with vnresistable difficulties,
how much soeuer they laboured to couer and conceale them: yet knowing that her sacred
Maiestie out of her gratious and mercifull disposition, would think the glorie of her
victorie blemished, by a voluntary effusion and obstinate expence of bloud, was content
to entertaine this offer of agreement, so as it might be concluded vnder such honourable
Articles for her Highnesse, as the aduantage she had against them gaue reason to demaund.
The which were the same that are set downe in the Articles of Agreement following,
signed by the Lord Deputie, D. Iohn and others: sauing that there was an Article
more in them, for the leauing of his treasure, munition, ordnaunce, and the Queens
naturall subiects to her disposition; all which points he did peremptorily refuse:

Protesting
that both he and all his would rather indure the last of miseries, than be found guilty
of so soule a treason against the honor of his prince, and the reputation of his profession,

although hee should find himselfe vnable to subsist, much more now when as hee might
not onely hope to sustaine the burthen of the warre for a time, but with patience and constancy
in the end ouercome it. That hee tooke it so ill to be misunderstood in hauing articles
of that nature propounded vnto him, as were they but once againe remembred
in the capitulation, the Viceroy should from thenceforth vse aduantage of his sword
and not the benefit of his former offer: adding, that the Viceroy might rather thinke to
haue made a good and profitable purchase for the realme of England, if with the
expence of two hundred thousand ducats hee had procured D. Iohn to quit his interest
and sooting but in Baltemore alone, speaking nothing of Kinsale, Castel-hauen, and
Beerhauen: for said he, suppose that all wee with the rest of our places here had perished,
yet would that Peninsula, being strong of its owne nature, bettered by our art and industrie,
(furnished as it is with victuals, munition, and good store of ordnance) preserue
vnto the king of Spaine, a safe and commodious Port for the arriuall of his fleet, and
bee able to maintaine it selfe against a Land armie of tenne thousand, vntill Spaine
(being so deepely ingaged) did in honour releeue them: which would drawe on a more
powerfull inuasion than the first, being vndertaken vpon false groundes, at the instance
of a base and barbarous people, who in discouering their weakenesse and want of power,
haue armed the king my master to relie vpon his owne strength, being bound in honour
to relieue his people which are ingaged, and to cancel the memorie of our former misfortunes.
But this is spoken, said he, in case the Viceroy be able to force this town, as I assure
my selfe hee cannot, hauing vpon mine honour, within these walles at this instant, aboue
two thousand fighting men, which are strong and able, besides which some hauing been
sicke and hurt recouer daily; the greatest part of these consisting of old Soldiers, which
fal not but by the sword, and those that were new, being now both trained to their arms,
and acquainted with the clymate, are more able to endure than at the first: our means
as good as they haue beene any time these two moneths, such as Spaniards can wel indure,
and able to suffice vs three moneths more: wee lodge in good warme houses, haue
store of munition, and (which is best of all) stand well assured, that our succour will be
here shortly. To bee plaine, wee preserue our men, and reserue our strength the best we
may, hoping to front you in a breach, which (if our hearts faile vs not) wee haue hands
and brests enow to stop, against treble your forces: but I wil giue the Viceroy this right,
that his men are passing good, yet spent and tyred with the miseries of a Winter seege,
which hee hath obstinately maintained beyond my expectation, but with such caution,
and vpon so good gard, as hauing nicely watched all aduantages, I could neuer fasten a
salley yet vpon him, but with losse to my selfe: wherein I must confesse my hopes were
deceiued, that grounding vpon some error in his approaches, I promised vnto my selfe
the defear of at least a thousand men at one blow. But when wee meet vpon a breach, I
am confident vpon good reasons, to lay fiue hundred of your best men on the ground,
and rest hopefull that the losse of those will make a great hole in an army, which hath already
suffered so much extremity.
But to conclude our businesse: the king my master sent me to assist the Condees, Oneale
and Odonnel, presuming on their promise, that I should within few daies after the arriuall
of our forces haue ioyned with them: I expected them long in vaine, sustained the
Viceroys armie, saw them drawne to the greatest head they could possibly make, lodged
within two miles of Kinsale, fortified with certaine companies of Spaniards, euerie houre
promising to releeue vs, and beeing ioyned together to force your campe: At last
wee saw them broken with a handful of men, and dispersed into diuers parts of the world,
Odonnel into Spain, Oneale into the farthest parts of the North: so as now I finde no such
Condees in rerum natura, as I came to ioine with: and therefore haue mooued this accord
the rather to disingage the king my master from assisting a people so vnable in the^selues,
as the whole burthen of the warre must lie vpon him, and so prefidious, as perhaps they
might be drawne in the end to betray him.

Vpon relation made, by Sir William Godolphin, to the Lord deputy and Councel, of these
offers made by D. Iohn, it was thoght good, for many important reason to proceed roundly
to an accord, there being nothing propounded by him that admitted any exception,

but that he demanded to carrie away his ordnance,1601 munition and treasure, which did not so
much import, as it should breake off the treatie which concerned the common good and
safety of the kingdom: whereupon a composition was made vpon these articles following.
1 That said D. Iohn d' Aguilar shall quit the places which he holds in this kingdome, as
well the towne of Kinsale,Articles of the accord at Kinsale. as those which are held by the Spaniards, or other souldiers vnder
his command in Castell-hauen, Baltemore, and in the Castell of Beerhauen, or other
places, to the Lord deputie, or to whome he shall appoint, giuing him safe transportation
and sufficient shipping and victuals for his said Souldiers, with the which the said D. Iohn
may passe with them into Spaine, if he may, at one time, if not at two shippings.
2 That the Souldiers which are at this present vnder the command of the said D. Iohn
in this kingdome, shall not beare armes against the Queenes Maiesty of England, whensoeuer
supplies shall come from Spaine, vntill the said Souldiers be vnshipped in some of
the Ports of Spaine, being sent away as soone as may be by the Lord Deputy, as hee promiseth
vpon his faith and honour.
3 For the accomplishment whereof, the Lord deputy offereth to giue free pasport to
the said D. Iohn and his army, as well Spaniards as other nations whatsoeuer, that are vnder
his command, and that he may depart with his armes, munition, money, ensignes displaied,
artillerie, and any other prouisions for warre, or other things, both that which is in
Castel-hauen, Kinsale, and other places.
4 That they shall haue ships and victuals sufficient for their money, after such rates as
they vse here to pay. That all the Souldiers and the said things may be shipt if it bee possible
at one time, if not at two, and that to bee within the time aboue mentioned.
5 That if by contrarie winds, or any other accidents, there shall come into any of the
ports of Ireland or England, any of those ships wherein the said Soldiers shall passe, they
shall bee intreated as friends, and may ride safely in the harbour, and be victualled for their
mony, and shal moreouer haue such things as shalbe needful to furnish the^ for their voiage.
6 That during the time they shall stay for shipping, victuals shall be giuen to D. Iohns
people, at reasonable rates.
7 That there shall be cessation of armes of either side, and security giuen that no wrong
be offered to any one.
8 That the ships wherein the said Souldiers shall be transported for Spaine, may passe
safely by any of the queenes Maiesties ships, of England, and so shal the said Queenes and
her subiects by those that shal go from hence: and the said ships being ariued in Spaine,
shall return as soone as they haue vnshipt their men without any impediment giuen the^
by his Maiestie, or any other person in his name, but rather they shall shew them fauour,
and help them if they need any thing: and for securitie thereof they shall deliuer into the
Lord deputies hands three Captaines, such as he shall chose.
9 For assurance of the performance of these articles D. Iohn promiseth that hee will
confirme and sweare to accomplish this agreement, whereunto some of the captaines vnder
his charge shall in like maner sweare.
10 That the said D. Iohn shall remain within the realme of Ireland, where the Lord deputy
shal appoint, vntill the last shipping, vpon his Lordships word, and if it happen that his
soldiers be shipt all at once, the said D. Iohn may go in the same fleet without any let, but
rather the Lord deputy shall giue him a good ship wherein he may passe, and if his men go
in two shippings, then he shall go in the last.
11 And in like maner the said Lord deputy shal confirm and sweare the same, and giue his
word in the Q. Maiesties behalf and his own to keep and accomplish this accord, and that the
chiefe officers of the camp, with the councel of state, and some nobles shold sweare the like.
These were the articles of the accord made before Kinsale, for the sending the Spaniards
out of Irela^d, and freeing this kingdo^ from an imminent danger. They were signed and sworn
accordingly on both parts the 2 of Ianuary, and the towne yeelded vp on the ninth.
At such time as the duke of Birons treasons were discouered in France, the king of Spain
had an army ready to passe at Pont de Gresin,Answer made by the French king to the embassador of Spaine. vpon the frontiers of Bourgundy vnder color
of passing into Flanders: but the passages being kept by the marshal Lauerdin, Taxis
embassador for Spain dema^ded passage of the king, beseeching him to think that the king

his master had not sought to draw the duke of Biron from his obedience.1602 To whome the
king answered, you wold haue me belieue that the king your master was not acquainted
with the practises which the marshal of Biron had with the Cont Fuentes, and I tel you that
it is impossible his treasure shold haue bin so freely distributed, without the consent of his
counsel: I haue no reason to leaue my frontiers disarmed vntill that all the marshals conspiracy
^e discouered by his processe. In the mean time I do not mean to hinder the commerce
according to the treaty.
The Cont of Fuentes not able to dissemble his discontent,Earle of Fuentes takes the Marquesate of Finall. to see matters fal out so contrary
to his designes, he dischargeth his rage vpon the marquesse of Final, sometimes pretending
a donation of the said Marquisate to the king of Spaine, when as the Marquesse
was verie sicke: and sometimes that he should haue a principality in the realm of Naples
in exchange, but he first seased vpon the place, and then published his pretensions: Hee
sent D. Diego Pimentel his nephue, and D. Sancho d' Luna with some troups of soldiers, who
surprised Final, hauing corrupted the La^dsk^its which were there in garrison with a promise
of 16 moneths pay, assuring himselfe both of the countrie and Port by a garrison of
200 Spaniards vnder the comma^d of D. Pedro de Toledo. Milesimo a place nere vnto it was
by the same right purchased by the king of Spain. The Marques of Final, who is vassall to
the emperor, made his co^plaints vnto the pope, and vnto his imperial maiesty, but they had
no other effect, but that he had a pension giue^ him during his life, and so was forced to yeeld
vnto the stranger. By this prise the Geneuois did hereafter reap no profit by their Commerce
with Spain, but what pleased the go^ernor of Final. Doubtlesse that seruant loues
his masters greatnes with passion, which doth rauish another mans inheritance without
any lawfull cause, or precedent wrong, neither respecting reason nor equitie, nor considering
that God is offended with such violences.Armie of Spaniards at Sea. But king Philip did not limit and bound
his hopes with so small a purchase. That great leuie which was made at Naples, in Sicile,
in the dutchie of Milan, and in many estates of Italy, witnessed that his designes flue a
higher pitch. It was thought they wold either renew the enterprise of Alger, or make head
against Cigala, who they said was comming out of Constantinople with a fleet of 100
saile. As the designe was secret, so was it not known who should be generall. Andrew Doria
had demanded leaue to retire himselfe; he had been vnfortunat the yeare before, and therefore
he thought the Spaniards wold not willingly imploy him againe. The duke of Sauoy
seemed willing to accept of this charge, if it were offered; but it was giuen to D. Iohn de
Cordoua, who shal be no more fortunate in his enterprises than Doria. The chief designs of
this army were rather against the Christians than the Turks and Moors, althogh it were giuen
out that the king of Fez had intelligences vpon Alger, and that he had promised the K.
of Spain to make him master therof: yet this army did not forsake the sight of Europe, and
some thoght it lay houering to see what wold become of the treasons which were practised
in France. But want of money and some other discommodities made them to giue ouer
al attempts for this yere against the Turks. These were the opinions of the king of Spains
designs, and withall they added that d' Albigny was gone to Milan to the earle of Fuentes,
that the marques of Aix had past into Spaine,Duke of Sauoie resolues to send his sonnes into Spaine. and that the duke of Sauoy was ready to ingage
himself wholy to the wil of the cou^cel of Spain, to whom he did consign his 3 Sons;
That he had made them knights of his order, to prepare the^ for the voyage, and had sent an
extraordinary embassador to Rome to beseech the Pope to send them his blessing.
There were 8 great gallies made ready this yere at Seuile, the which were appointed to
be sent into Flanders to the Archduke,Gallies sent out of Spain in to the Low countries. vnder the command of Frederic Spinola, to annoy
the coast of England, Holland and Zeland. There were 400 men in either of these gallies,
besides the slaues, and 800 soldiers more which they tooke in passing by Lisbon. Two of
these gallies called the Trinity and the Occasion were sunk by sir Rich Leuison vpo^ the coast
of Portugal, the rest a while after went on their course towards the low-countries. Comming
betwixt England and France, they were first discouered and pursued by sir Robert Mansel,
being then admiral of the queens maiesties ships in those seas, who lay there of purpose
to attend them, he hauing them in chase, the States ships which lay in the downs vpon his
aduertisement came in, and in the end the said gallies were defeated, some were sunk and the
rest made vnseruiceable. This great seruice was diuersly reported according to the humors
and passions of men. the Hollanders did challenge all the honor of this action, and did publish

it in print in diuers languages. Sir Rob. Mansel finding the state interessed, and his reputation
somewhat blemished by their pamphlets, made a true relation of the whole seruice,
the which he presented vnto the lord admirall, vnder whose co^mand he was, and published
it to the view of the world, with an offer to maintaine it by any course fit for a gentleman
that professed arms. And for that the Statesmen haue left their assertio^s recorded in their
history, and haue made the French to write it after the same maner, I haue thought good
for the better satisfaction of posterity, to insert it in this history, in the same words and
phrase as hee himselfe hath set it down, speaking in his own person as followeth.
On the 23 day of September, being in the Hope, and hauing in my company, the Aduantage
only of the Q. ships, which captain Iones co^manded, and two other Dutchmen of war I
rid more the^ half chanell ouer, towards the coast of Fra^ce, vpon a northwest and southeast
line, my self being nerest that coast, captain Iones next vnto me, and the Dutch men of war
a sea-boord, and to the Westward of him. The smal force at that time present and with me remaining,
thus disposed for the intercepting of the gallies, hauing dismist the Dutch men of
war that serued vnder me, vpo^ their own intreaty to reuictual and trim: and hauing imployed
the rest of the Q. ships vpon especial seruices, I descried from my top mast heads, 6 low
sailes, which some made for gallies, others affirmed the^ to be smal barks that had strooken
their top-sailes, being bound from Diep towards the Downs. To which opinion (though
I inclined most) yet caused I the master to waie and to stand with them, that I might learne
some news of the gallies, which by your Lordships aduertisement sent me, I knew had either
past me that night, or were nere at hand, vnlesse the sea had swallowed them vp in the
stormes which had raged 3 daies before. Hauing set my selfe vnder saile, the weather waxt
thick, which caused me to lask some two points fro^ the wind, towards the English coast,
least the continuance of that dark weather might giue them power to runne out ahead of
me. About 11 of the clock the weather cleared, when I discoured them plainely to be the
Spanish gallies so long time expected; at which time with the rest, I plied to receiue
them by crossing their forefoot as they stood alongst the Chanell: which they endeuoured,
till they perceiued that by the continuance of that course, they could not
escape the power of my Ordnance.
All this time these two Fly-boats were betwixt them and me, and as the slaues report
that swamme ashoare at Douer, they determined with three gallies to haue boorded
each of those ships, and would haue executed that resolution, but for the feare of her
Maiesties great Gallion (as they tearmed the Hope) whose force that they shunned in
that kind (considering the disaduantage that twice sixe of the best gallies that euer I
saw, hath by fighting against one ship of her force) I doe as much commend, as
otherwise I doe detest their shamefull working, in that, full of cowardlinesse and weaknes,
they rowed backe to the Westward, and spent the day by running away, in hope
that the darkenesse of the night would giue them liberty sufficient to shun the onely ship
they feared, or that was indeed in the sea at that time, to giue them cause of feare, I meane
betwixt them and Dunkerk or Newport. This error only of theirs bred their confusion, as
you may perceiue by the sequel. For they no sooner began that course of rowing backe again;
but I instantly made signes for Captaine Iones in the Aduantage of the Queenes, to
come vnto me whom I presently directed to repaire to Calais road, and thence to send the
alarm vnto the States army prepared before Sluce: and to aduise such men of warre as
kept on the coast of Flanders, vpon any other occasion, to stand off to the sea, to meet with
the gallies in the night, which shold be chased by me with my lights in my top-mast heads
and a continual discharging of my ordnance. Captain Iones hauing shap't his course according
to my directions, I gaue order for hoysing and trimming of my sailes by the wind, to
keep sight of the gallies: the two Fly-boats being stil aweather of me, did the like. Which
chase we held til sunne-setting, obseruing this course following all the day. They being
a weather of me, kept their continuall boords, that the gallies were alwaies betwixt the^.
And my self being to leewa^d, made such short turns, as I kept al the afternoon in a maner,
euen in the verie eye of their course, betwixt the^ and the place of their design: euer discharging
my best ordna^ce to warn the Answere of her Maiesties, that rid by my directions at
the Downes, vpon important seruice as your Lordship knoweth; and the Flemings that
were there, hauing left the Sea vpon vnknowne groundes to mee (yet sent from

Portmouth, by the most prouident direction of her sacred Maiestie, to awaite the
comming of the Gallies, vpon aduertisements that her Highnesse receiued of their being
put to sea, to set saile, who else had receiued no vnderstanding of the Gallies,
neither came they within shot of them, till after night, how soeuer the reputation of
the seruice is wholy chalenged by them.
Hauing giuen your Lordship an accompt how this day was thus spent by me, from
eight of the clocke vntill the euening, and with these onely helpes: I beseech your
Lordship to be pleased to vnderstand, that with the setting of the Sunne, I could both
discerne the ships last mentioned vnder saile at the downes, and the Gallies to haue
set their ^alles: directing their course close aboord our shoare, each of them beeing
out of sight of the other, and my Dutch consorts by this time to haue beene left
by the Gallies to a sterne chase. When I perceiued them to hold that course, which
would bring them within shot of the Answere, and the rest that were in the Downes: I
held a cleane contrarie course from them towards the coast of France, to confirme the secure
passage they thought to find on our coast, which I continued, vntil the report of their
battery gaue me assurance of the Gallies being engaged vnto them.
How the batterie began, who began it, how it was contin^ed, how ended, and to whom
the reputation of the seruice is due, I leaue to bee considered by your Lordship, by the
perusall of the true discourse following. The Answere of the Queenes, which Captaine
Bredgate commanded, as she rid more Southerly at the Downes than the Flemings, so
came she first to the Gallies, and bestowed 28 peeces of Ordnance on them before the
Flemings came in, who at length seconded him with verie many shot.
During this batterie of ours vpon the gallies (which I so terme, because they neuer exchanged
one shot) at the very first report of the Answers ordnance, I directed the master
of my ship to bear vp with the south end of the Goodwin, with which directio^s I deliuerd
my reasons publikely, as I stood on the poope of my ship, viz. That if I stood directly into
them, the gallies, before I could recouer the place, wold either be driuen a shoa^e or sunk
and so would there proue no need of my force; or else by their nimble sailing they wold
escape the ships, of whom (once getting ahead) they could receiue no impediment: for
there was no one ship but the Aduantage in the sea that could hinder them to recouer any
port in Flanders or the East countries (Sluce onely excepted) vnlesse I staied them at
that sand head. Hauing recouered as neere that place as I desired, I staied at least a quarter
of an houre, before I could either see galley, heare or see any of those ships, their lights
or report of their ordnance, which made me and all my company hold opinion that they
had outsailed the Answere, and the rest of the Flemings, and shunned sight of mee by
going aseaboord of my ship, which I so verily beleeued, as I once directly determined to
saile for Sluce, with hope onely that the preparation which I knew the States had there,
would be able to preuent their entrance into that place. Whilst I remained thus doubtfull,
or rather hopelesse to hinder their recouerie of Dunkerk or Newport, in case they had
bin asea-boord of me, some of my company descried a single galley plying from the shoar
to get ahead of my ship. When she approached within caliuer shot, I discharged about
30 peeces of ordnance of my lower and vpper tire at her alone, my selfe with many other
in my ship saw when her maineyard was shot asunder, heard the report of many shot that
hither ^ul; heard many their most pittiful outcries, which when I perceiued to continue,
and ^nstead of making way from me, to neer me what she could; I forbare shooting, and commanded
one that spake the Portugal language, to tel them that I was co^tented to receiue
them to mercy: which I would accordingly haue performed, had not the other 5 gallies
offered to stand out ahead of me at that very instant, and thereby wold haue left me as they
had both the first two Dutch ships, and afterwards the Answer with the rest of the Flemings,
had I omitted any small time of executing the aduantage I had of their being on
my broad side, which as appeares was so effectually imployed (howsoeuer the night
wherein this seruice was performed, might hinder the particular mention of their
hurts) as none can deny but that God pleased thereby onely to worke their confusion.
For since that time none hath said or can speake of any one shot made towards
them: yet foure of them are sunke and wrecked, the fift past doing the enemy seruice,

and the sixt they are forced to new build at Dunkerke, where (if I be not much deceiued)
she will proue more chargeable than profitable, if the default rest not in our selues.
The disagreement betweene the Dutch captaines themselues touching the stemming
and sinking of the gallies (whereof one challenged before your Lordship, and in many
other publike places, to haue stemmed and sunke two himselfe) and the printed
Pamphlet containing the stemming and sinking of three Gallies, giueth the reputation
thereof to three seuerall Captaines, amongst whome no mention is made of
the first; and whereas there are but two in all sunke; I leaue to bee reconciled amongst
themselues, and to your Lordshippe, whether that the same of right appertaineth
not to her Maiesties ship the Hope, in respect of the allegations before mentioned,
euerie particular whereof being to bee proued by the oathes of my whole company
and mainatined with the hazard of my life with that which followeth.
1 As the shooting of the single Gallies mainyard asunder, my bestowing aboue thirtie
peeces of ordnance vpon that one Gallie, within lesse then Caliuer shot.
2 That they in the Gallie made many lamentable out-cries for my receiuing them vnto
mercie.
3 That I would accordingly haue receiued them, but for giuing them ouer to encounter
with the other fiue Gallies, which else had left me to a sterne chase.
To these reasons I adde the assertions of the Viceadmiral himselfe, who told me (whasoeuer
he spake in other places) that one of the Gallies, which he stemmed, had her
maineyard shot asunder before his comming aboord her: by whom soeuer she was then
stemmed, your Lordship may iudge, who ruin'd her, considering she made no resistance,
by his owne report, but by crying to him for mercy.
Touching the other galley stemmed and sunke, I haue alreadie proued how shee (as
all the rest) had got ahead the Answer of the Queenes not named, and the rest of the
States men of warre with her, who challenge the whole credit of this seruice. They (as
all other Sea-men) cannot deny but that the gallies will outsaile all ships, in such a loome
gale of wind and smooth sea, as we had that night.
The Gallies being then quicker of sale than they, how could they by any meanes possible
fetch them vp, but by some impediment? impediment they receiued none, but by
my ordnance: which amounted to fiftie great shot at those fiue which came last from the
shoare, when all the ships were aboue a mile asteme.
Some notwithstanding out of their detracting dispositions may perchance say, that
the two which were wrecked at Newport would haue perished by storme, though they
had not beene battered. Whereto though I haue sufficiently answered, first in shewing
that they might haue recouered any of the places thereabouts before eight of the
clocke that night but for mee; and then the second time before the morning, had they
not beene encountred by me alone, at the South-sand head: Yet for further proofe
that they miscaried by our batterie onely, I say that if one of the gallies which receiued
least damage by our ordnance did out-liue Fridaies storme, continuing till
Satturday noone, being driuen among the Ilands of Zealand to recouer Calais*
then surely those two (vnlesse they had beene exceedingly torne) would haue made
shift to haue recouered the ports of Newport, Graueling or Dunkerke; especially sith
from the place where I battered them, they might haue beene at the remotest of those
places about foure houres before any storme beganne. But such seemed their hast to
saue their liues, as their thought ran of a shoare, and not of a harbour.
Now that I haue deliuered vnto your Lordship the whole and true discourse of this businesse,
I shall forbeare to trouble your patience with any further relation of that night and
next daies spending my time (though the same in their chase had like to haue cost her
Maiestie her ship, and the liues of as many as were in her) and conclude with admiration
of their not holding her Maiesties ship, nor I (her vnworthiest seruant) and then
and yet by her Highnesse grace and your Lordships fauour, Admirall of the forces in that
place, are not once mentioned: especially sith the sixe Gallies might safely haue arriued
before seuen of the clock that night at any of the Ports of Flanders to the Westward
of Ostend. And that the Dutch ships had not come fro^ an anchor in the Downes, but for

the signes they receiued from me. Then that the force of her Majesties ship, wherein I
was, enforced them to keepe close aboord the English shore, whereby those ships in the
Downes had power giuen them to come to fight, which fight was begun by the Answer
of the queenes.
And lastly, sith the gallies escaped their batterie, and had gotten ahead those ships, aboue
a mile at least, and neuer receiued any impediment after, but onely by me, who lingered
them (as you haue heard) vntill the comming vp of those ships that challenge to
stemme them: which being granted, I cannot see how any other credit can rightly be giuen
them (for that stemme I meane) than to a lackey for pillaging of that dead bodie
which his master had slaine.
Thus much I haue set downe out of his owne mouth, touching the seruice that was
done vpon those six gallies of Spaine.
This yeare there was a new fleet made readie in Spaine,1603 the which bred a jealousie in
the French,Armie of Spain at sea. and made them to stand vpon their gard in Languedoc and Prouence. This
fleet was readie to set saile, the which vnder colour of renewing the enterprise of Alger
in Afrike, might frame some designe vpon that coast. Prince Doria, and D. Iohn de Cordoua,
had beene both vnfortunat in their charges. The honour of Christendome made all
men wish, that this execution might proue more succesfull than the rest. But as bad designes
do manie times prosper better than good, the successe depending commonly on
the blindnesse of fortune, this enterprise of Alger was no more succesfull than the two
former. It was managed by a Franciscan Frier, called Father Mathew, who promised as
great glorie vnto himselfe, in chasing away those peti^ kings of Afrike, as Aratus had of
freeing Sicyonia of tyrans. He had negotiated with the king of Cycco, who promised
(that for a certaine summe of money, whereof he should receiue fortie thousand crowns
in hand) not onely to fauour any designe, but to declare himselfe openly against the king
of Alger, and to reduce the towne to what condition they would: but there is a great
difference betwixt saying and doing: And it is a great simplicitie to giue credit to
an Infidell, seeing that treacherie is inseparable from his soule. The Viceroy of Majorca,
who was Generall in this action, and with whom the king of Cycco had promised to
joyne, approached with foure gallies vpon this assurance, and landed about an hundred
men,Moors treacherous. to deliuer fortie thousand crownes vnto the Moores; who receiued the money,
and deliuered the men into the hands of the Viceroy of Alger, where the Frier was slain,
and the Viceroy retiring, freed their neighbours from jealousie. They of Barcelona (who
are subiect to the king of Spaine) did no lesse apprehend this armie than the Moores:
they feared that the Catholike king would take their priuiledges from them, as hee had
done from them of Arragon;Passage of the prince of Piedmont into Spain yet the passage of the three princes of Sauoy into Spaine,
renewed their jealousie in France. The duke came with them to Nice, where they attended
the commoditie of their imbarking, the princesse Marguerite, his eldest daughter,
commaunding in Piedmont, and from thence they past to Barcelona, where they attended
the kings pleasure, and were entertained with all the honours that might be done
vnto princes of that alliance. The king of Spaine rejoyced at the dukes resolution, and
seemed to haue a great desire to see them. He sent D. Henriques de Guzman to congratulate
their arriuall, and to commaund them to take small journeyes, by reason of the heat
of the season. Being come to Court, he made prince Victor, the dukes second sonne,
Viceroy of Portugall: the which did much content the Portugals, to see the fruits of D.
Beatrix, his great grandmother, who was daughter to D. Emanuel king of Portugall and
maried to Charles duke of Sauoy. The third sonne was afterwards made Archbishop of
Toledo, and then cardinall.
The queene of England being dead this yeare,King of Spaine sends an embassador into England. and the king of Scotland come to the
succession of that Crowne, the king of Spaine sent D. Iohn Baptista Taxis, earle of Villa
Mediana, his embassadour into England, to witnesse vnto the king the great contentment
hee receiued by his happie comming to the Crowne, who after his first audience of
congratulations and ordinarie complements, made a speech vnto the king to this
effect.

The king of Spaine, my master, assuring himselfe to find the same effects and affections

of friendship in you, being king of England, which you haue alwayes made shew of
vnto him being king of Scotland,Speech of the embassador of Spain to the king of England. hath sent me vnto your Maiestie, to confirme the sinceritie,
to desire the continuance, and to preserue it by all the proofes of friendship and assistance
which he offers you, which is the same that many great princes haue desired, and
could not obtaine, and for that it is offered is no lesse necessarie, and to be wished for of
your Maiestie. If the king D. Philip the second, of glorious memorie, hath attempted
any thing against England, and queene Elizabeth against the Estates of Spaine, it was
more vpon some priuat spleene, than for any reason of State. But one tombe should
interre both their bodies and their passions. The successours doe inherit the greatnesse
and power of their predecessors, but they are not tied to their designes, which haue
no end but the ruine one of another.
The Catholike king hath such rich and goodlie Crownes in Europe, Asia, and Africke,
and at the East and West Indies, as they are sufficient to settle the desire of his ambition
within the bounds of his owne greatnesse. If hee hath dealt in the affaires of any
other princes, it was to support them and keepe them from ruine, time hauing discouered
how many things were readie to fall, if they had not beene vnderpropt by the
hand of D. Philip. The enemies of the house of Spaine haue published, That the ambition
of this prince was to make himselfe Monarch of all Christendome, and that hee
had left these designes hereditarie to his posteritie. But the wiser sort may easily judge,
that if hee had beene so affected, he would haue carried himselfe otherwise, and begun
the execution of the enterprise by Italie, in the which hee is the stronger, the conquest
whereof would be easie, hauing such aduantages.
But as hee is contented to preserue his owne, and desires no lesse to raigne justly,
than long and happily; so is hee grieued to see his friends crosse him in a thing that is
so just and reasonable. Complaints are free for all men, but they are more affectionate
among neighbours. My master, who holds you in this qualitie of a friend, and
will dow what possibly hee may that you bee neuer other, complaines to you of your
selfe. Hee cannot dissemble how much hee thinkes himselfe wronged, for that your
Majestie doth affect the defence and protection of the rebels of the Low Countries,
against their lawfull Lord, and that you haue lately graunted them a great leuie of Scottish
men. Hee assures himselfe of all friendship and justice from you, and hee intreats
you, that in calling home these Scottish men you will punish them as they
haue deserued. Hee desires to treat sincerely with you, and beleeues that your Maiestie
(considering how much the friendship of so mightie a prince should bee deere vnto you,
and will be profitable) will seeke and imbrace it, and will neuer be so carelesse of his good,
as to wish him ill.
The king returned him many good words, to witnesse the alliance which hee desired
to entertaine with the king of Spaine,King of Englands answer to the Spanish embassador. vpon the like tearmes hee had with him as king
of Scotland. But aduowing the Scottish troups which were sent to the generall Estates
of the vnited Prouinces, to be leuied by his commaundement, he said they had not deserued
any punishment; giuing leaue to king Philip to make vse of Scottishmen, if he pleased:
and letting him know, that he had not transgrest the lawes of neutralitie. And as for
their protection, he desired he should vnderstand, That the great interests which England
hath with the vnited Prouinces, as well in regard of their townes which they haue
ingaged, as for the succours which they haue receiued from thence, did bind him to assist
them, and to haue a care of their preseruation, and to second the intentions of the deceased
queene, and to build vpon the foundations which she had laied; yet he desired to
see them all well reconciled with the king of Spaine.

The embassador (as my Author sayes) answered, That whosoeuer knew the power of
the king of Spaine,Spaniards think none so powerful as their own king. were not ignorant that he can easily bring the rebelled Prouinces vnder
the yoke of his obedience, when hee shall please to make an enterprise equall to his
power: That no man should doubt, that hee that had passed the Hellespont, will easily
passe the riuer of Granique; and that a prince which triumphes ouer so many nations,
so many islands, so many seas, and so much firme land at the new-found world, will
not adde the islands of Holland and Zeland to his triumphant chariot: the wise will

alwaies giue the counsell which Phocion gaue vnto the Athenians, either to make themselues
the strongest, or to be obedient vnto them that were so. He then desired leaue to enter
into conference with some of his Maiesties Councell, and to consult of the meanes of
some treatie; which would be no lesse profitable and honourable to England, than to
Spaine: the which was granted him. After some meetings, the lords finding that he had
no power to treat, they attended other deputies, who came the next yeare with an ample
Commission, as you shall heare.
There fell out two accidents,1604 which had like to haue troubled the quiet of those two
great Monarchs of France and Spaine.Imposition exacted by the Spaniard. The yeare before king Philip and the Archdukes
had imposed thirtie in the hundred vpon all marchandise which came in or went out of
the countries that were vnder their obedience: the which did seeme directly to infringe
the treatie of Veruins. The French king commanded his embassadors to deale with those
princes touching this imposition, and to aduertise him of their resolutions. But their aunswers,
and the force they vsed afterwards to the kings subiects, to make them pay the imposition,
did witnesse sufficiently, that they had no will to exempt them. Whereupon the
French king made a defence, That no marchandise should bee carried out of France into
Spaine, or the Low Countries, that were vnder the Archdukes obedience, nor any bee
brought from thence into France, vpon corporall punishment, and losse of goods. But
this did not alter the peace, onely there were complaints made by the two kings one of
another. King Philip began: He tooke it ill that the French going vol^ntarily to serue
the Estates, did prolong their rebellion, and did hinder the reduction of Ostend: that the
king did succour them with men and money; and that hee had forbidden his subiects to
traffique into Spaine and Flanders. But the king disauowed them that went to serue
the Estates: If hee sent them money, it was (sayed he) but to pay that which hee had
borrowed: And the defence of traffique tended to no other end, but to force the king
of Spaine and the Archduke to take away that intollerable imposition, and to let him
know, that France can liue better without the commodities of Spaine, than Spain without
those of France.
The second accident,Treason of Lost. or cause of jarre betwixt these two princes grew also from
Spaine; the French king complaining, and justly, That the secrets of his cabinet were
discouered to his enemies. Will the king of Spaine neuer cease (said he) to withdraw
my subiects from their duetie and loyalties? Will hee still entertaine some traytor
within my realme? My embassadour complaines vnto me by his letters, that hee is so
slowly aduertised of our affaires, as the king of Spaines ministers know them before
him.
The king being much troubled to find out the spring from whence this pestilent liquor
of Infidelitie did flow, behold God discouered the treacherie of Iudas, by such
meanes as the wisedome of man could not find out. Villeroy, the chiefe Secretarie
of State, who managed the greatest secrets of the kingdome, had an vnder clerke,
called Nicholas Lost, in whom hee reposed much trust, and the rather, for that his father
had serued him long. This young man hauing attended on Monsieur de la Rochepot,
being embassadour in Spaine, there laied the plot of this treason, whereof you may
read the whole discourse at large in the historie of France.
There was some likelihood of a new enterprise this yeare vpon Africke.Embassadours from the king of Cusco at Valencia. The king
of Cusco, who had promised the last yeare to joyne with the Spaniards against Alger,
had receiued fortie thousand crownes vpon the bargaine, and treacherously betrayed
them that brought the money vnto their enemies, this yeare hee sent an embassadour
vnto the king, who gaue him audience at Valencia: Which made many
thinke, that hee would make another attempt vpon Alger, for that he caused him to
be conducted home by a Master of the campe, and an Enginer, giuing him great store of
munition, and fire-workes, laden in three fregats.
The king of Spaine beeing aduertise out of England, from his embassadour Taxis,
of the successe of his embassage,Constable of Castille sent into England. and of the expectation of a treatie, hee appointed
the Constable of Castille to vndertake this charge, giuing him an ample
Commission, to treat and conclude a Peace betwixt England and Spaine: hee

past through France, where he was verie honourably receiued, and so came into Flanders
to the Archdukes, from whence he went into England, for the conclusion of the
peace.
There were Commissioners appointed on either side: For the king of great Britaine
were named,Commissioners for the treatie of the peace for England. the earle of Dorset, high Treasurer of England, the earle of Nottingham,
high Admirall of England, the earle of Deuonshire, Lieutenant of the kingdome of
Ireland, the earle of Northampton, and the lord Vicont Cranborne, principall Secretarie,
and now earle of Salisburie, and high Treasurer of England; being all of his Majesties
priuie Councell.
For the king of Spaine there were deputed D. Iohn de Velasco, Constable of Castille
and Leon,Commissioners for Spaine. Duke of Frias, Earle of Haro, etc. D. Iohn Baptista Taxis, Earle of Villa Mediana
etc. and Alexander Rouidius, a Lawyer, and Senator of Milan. The Archdukes sent
for their Commissioners, Charles Earle of Aremberg, Counsellor of State, and Admirall
to the said Archdukes, Iohn Richardot Knight, President of the priuy Councel, and Counsellor
of State, and Lodowike Verreiken, Knight, their principal Secretarie. All these Commissioners,
after many consultations and conferences, in the end concluded a peace, on
the 18 of August, betwixt the two kings, their Estates and subiects, vpon certaine articles,
whereof I haue set downe the contents.
1 First it was concluded, That from thenceforth there should be a sincere and firme
league and peace inuiolably obserued for euer,Articles of the peace betwixt England and Spaine. and in all places, betwixt the most renowmed
king of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, etc. and the most renowmed king of
Spaine etc. and the most renowmed Archdukes of Austria, Dukes of Bourgondie, their
heires and successors, their countries, dominions, and subiects, of what condition or degree
soeuer they be, or may be.
2 That all acts of hostilitie should cease, and all wrongs and injuries done, during the
troubles, be forgotten, so as there should be no action pretended for any depredations or
spoiles committed, but all should be freely abolished, except such depredations as had
beene committed since the 24 of Aprill 1603: and that from thenceforth they and
their subiects should forbeare from all depredations and spoiles, and cause restitution to
be made of any that should be after that time committed.
3 That neither of the aboue named princes, their heirs or successors, by himselfe or any
other, should do, treat, or attempt any thing against the other, or against their kingdomes
or dominions, vpon any pretence, nor assist or consent vnto any warre, attempt, or
treatie, to the prejudice one of another.
4 That they should neither themselues giue, nor consent to be giuen by any of their
vassals, subiects, or inhabitants, any aid, fauour, or supplie, vnto the enemies or rebels of either
part, (whether they shall inuade their countries, or withdraw themselues from their
obedience and subiection) of souldiers, victuals, money, ordnance, and munition, or any other
aid to maintaine warre.
5 That the said princes should, and did, renounce all leagues, confederations, and intelligence,
made to the prejudice one of another, which did or might impugne this peace, and
the contents thereof: all which they shal disannull, and declare to be of no force.
6 That the said kings and Archdukes should restraine their subiects from doing any
wrong, and should reuoke all Commissions and letters of Reprisall and Mart, of what nature
soeuer, being to the prejudice of the said princes, or of their subiects, to whomsoeuer
they haue beene granted: the which they shall declare to be void and of no force. And
that whosoeuer should do to the contrary, should be punished criminally, and compelled
to make restitution to the parties damnified.
7 That as concerning the townes of Flessingue, Brill, Ramekins, and other forts
thereunto belonging, in the which the souldiers of the king of England did remaine in
garrison, forasmuch as the said king affirmed, that by contracts formerly made betweene
queene Elizabeth, of famous memorie (vnto whom his Maiestie did succeed) and the Estates
of the vnited Prouinces, hee stood bound not to redeliuer the said townes and
forts to any, but to such as had deliuered the same for caution; so as by the said contracts
his Maiesties faith and honor (which he resolued to keep religiously towards all men) being

ingaged, he might not then restore those places vnto the Archdukes; yet hee promised
to enter into treatie with the said Estates, wherein his Maiestie would assigne them ^
conuenient time to accept of conditions conformable to justice and equitie, for a pacification
with the renowmed princes, his deere brethren: which if the Estates should
refuse to accept, then his Maiestie, as beeing freed from the former conuentions,
would determine of those townes as hee should thinke most just and honourable,
wherein hee would doe all good offices for the said Princes, his louing brethren.
8 That the renowmed king of England etc. would commaund the garrison souldiers
not to serue the Hollanders, nor to succour them with victuals, armes, or any munition
for warre, or other the king of Spaines or the Archdukes enemies, vpon any colour
or pretext soeuer, nor doe any act of hostilitie against the king of Spaine, the
Archdukes, or their subiects: And in like manner the king of Spaine and the Archdukes
did promise, that no act of hostilitie should be done against the said garrison souldiers,
nor against the king of England etc. o^ his subiects.
9 That betweene the said kings, their kingdomes, vassals, inhabitants, and subiects,
there should bee free commerce in all places where it hath beene formerly vsed before
the warres, according to the auncient leagues and treaties; so as the subiects of either
partie might goe and enter freely into the others countries and dominions both
by sea and land, without any Safeconduct, or other licence, and depart from
thence with their goods and marchandises, paying the ordinarie customes and imposts.
10 That it should be lawfull to haue acesse vnto the ports of the said princes, there
to make stay, and with the like libertie to depart, not onely with ships for marchandise,
but also for warre, whether they come thither being forced by foule weather, or for
the repairing of their ships, or for prouision of victuals, so as they exceed not the
number of six or eight ships, when they come in voluntarily, nor stay longer in the hauens
than they shall haue cause, for the repairing of their ships, or to make prouision
of necessaries, least it should cause an interruption of free traffique with other nations
in amitie. And if any greater number of ships of warre than is aboue mentioned,
shall happen to haue accesse into those ports, then it shall not bee lawfull for them to
enter without the priuitie and consent of the prince. Prouided, that they should
not commit any act of hostilitie within the said ports, to the prejudice of the princes:
and that there should be an especiall care had, that vnder the pretext of traffique there
should be no victuals, armes, or munition for warre, carried by the subiects of those
kingdomes, to the enemies of the one or other king. And whosoeuer should attempt
the contrarie, should bee punished as seditious persons, and breakers of the peace.
It was also prouided, That the subiects of the one should not bee worse intreated
in anothers dominions in his sales and contracts of marchandise, than his owne naturall
subiects.
11 That the king of England etc. after the conclusion of these articles, should forbid
by proclamation, That none of his subiects, or any inhabiting within his realme, should
carrie ouer in his owne name, directly or indirectly, or colour any ships, marchandise, or any
other thing going out of Holland and Zeland into Spaine, nor any Holland or Zeland
marchant, vnto the sayd ports, vpon paine of punishment. And to auoyd fraud, all marchandise
to be sent out of England, Scotland, and Ireland, to the dominions of the
king of Spaine and Archdukes, was to bee sealed with the Towne or Citie Seale from
whence they should be laden: and that which was not so sealed, should bee taken for
good prize, and confiscated, and all Hollanders and Zelanders found in the sayd ships,
should be also taken.
12 That all English, Scottish, and Irish marchandise, might bee transported out of
those countries into the dominions of the king of Spaine, without paying the imposition
of thirtie in the hundred, lately imposed, but onely the customes and tolls vsually demaunded
before the said imposition of thirtie in the hundred.

13 That for such marchandise as the English, Scottish, or Irish marchants should
buy in Spaine, or other the king of Spaines dominions, and should carrie in their owne
ships, or in ships hired or lent them (except they be of Holland Zeland) they should only
pay such customes as were accustomed to be paied before the imposition of thirtie in
the hundred: prouided, that they should carrie the said marchandise to the realmes of
the king of England etc. or to the ports of those prouinces which obey the Archdukes.
And to preuent the transportation of the said marchandise to any other places, and especially
to Holland and Zeland, it was agreed, That the merchants should enter bond at
such time as they did lade their ships in Spaine, or in any of the king of Spaines dominions,
before the magistrat of the place where they should lade, to pay the said imposition
of 30 in the hundred, in case they carrie the said marchandise to any other countries:
and that they should bring a certificat, within one yeare, from the magistrat of the place
where they should vnlade the said goods, testifying that they haue discharged in the king
of Englands dominions, or in those prouinces which are vnder the Archdukes obedience;
exhibiting of which certificats their bonds should be deliuered vp.
14 That the king of England etc. soone after the confirmation of this accord* should
forbid his subiects to export any marchandise out of the K. of Spaines dominions, to any
other places but to his Majesties kingdoms, and the said ports of Flanders, vpon paine of
confiscation of all their marchandise, to the vse of the king of England etc. whereof the
Informer is to haue the one halfe, the imposition of thirtie in the hundred being first
deducted, the which shall be payed to the king of Spaines officers; the proofes being
lawfully receiued in Spaine, and sent into England in authenticall forme, should be credited.
15 That the magistrats of any townes or cities within his Maiesties kingdoms, which
should make certificats of the vnlading of ships, and giue testimonie of the registring of
marchandise, should not commit any fraud therein, vpon paine of the losse of their offices,
and the kings displeasure: With this prouiso, That when as the king of Spaine and
the Archdukes shall agree with the French king, or any other, touching the last Edict of
thirtie in the hundred, and the commerce betwixt them be restored, then it should bee
lawfull for the subiects of the said king of England etc. to transport their marchandise into
his or their dominions vnto whom the commerce shall be restored, without the payment
of thirtie in the hundred, paying onely the former vsuall customes.
16 That there should be free commerce betwixt the subiects of the king of England
etc. and the Archdukes, in all places where they had beene formerly accustomed to trade,
both by water and land, hauing free libertie to enter into the dominions, townes, and
ports one of another, and to buy, sell, carrie and recarrie their marchandise, repaire their
ships, prouide victuals, and all things necessarie, at reasonable prices, and should depart
with the like libertie with their goods and marchandise, paying the vsuall customes. Prouided,
that the subiects of the king of England etc. should not vse the shipping of the
Hollanders, or the vnited Prouinces, nor bring any of their manufactures into the Archdukes
countries, nor any other thing for the which any tribute was payed in Holland,
neither should they transport any thing from the Archdukes Prouinces, vnto the vnited
Prouinces, vntill a pacification were made, neither should they receiue any goods belonging
to the vnited Prouinces, into their ships, nor put any of them into the vnited Estates
ships, nor fraudulently colour the goods of any one of the vnited Prouinces: the
which being found, it should be held to be good and lawfull prize.
17 That the former Prouisos should not onely be vnderstood of ships laden for marchandise,
but also of ships of warre, which the said princes should send forth to preuent
the attempts of their enemies: which ships of warre, not exceeding the number aboue
mentioned, might freely enter into one anothers ports, being driuen by tempest, or to
repaire their ships, or buy necessaries, and there stay, so as they committed no act of hostilitie,
with the like cautions and exceptions as is contained in the tenth article.
18 As the said kings and Archdukes did religiously promise, not to giue any warlike
succours to any of the others enemies, so it was prouided, that the subiects or the inhabitants

of their realmes, of what nation or qualitie soeuer, should not vnder colour of commerce,
nor vpon any other pretext, giue any aid to the enemies of the said princes, or supplie
them with money, victuals, armour, munition, ordnance, or other warlike prouision:
and those which should do the contrarie should be seuerely punished, as breakers of the
league, and seditious persons.
19 And for the greater benefit and good of their subiects, it was agreed, that the king
of England etc. and the Archdukes, should do their endeuors, that their subiects should
haue the passages open vnto their ports and dominions, so as they might freely come and
go with their ships, marchandise, and carriages (paying the ordinarie customes) to all the
said ports, kingdoms, and dominions, and depart when they please with the like libertie.
20 As touching the ancient treaties of commerce and traffique betwixt the realms of
England, Scotland, and Ireland, and the dominions of the dukes of Bourgondie, and princes
of the Low Countries, the which during the late troubles had beene intermitted, and
it may be in some parts impaired: It was concluded by way of prouision, That they
should remaine in their auncient force, and be vsed on either side, as they had beene before
the warre. And if it happen, that by both parts, or by any one, any breach thereof
be pretended: or that the subiects shall complaine, that the conuentions were not obserued,
or that more grieuous burthens than were accustomed were imposed on them,
then there should be deputies appointed on either part, which should meet, and treat
friendly, and restore such things as should be found out of course, or to haue beene altered
by the injurie of time, or by corrupt custome.
21 And to make this peace fruitfull to the subiects of the king of England etc. it was
concluded, That such as had recourse to and from the realmes and dominions of the king
of Spaine and Archdukes, and should remaine there for trade, should not be molested in
the cause of conscience: wherefore to the intent their traffique might be safe and without
danger both by land and sea, the said king of Spaine and Archdukes should prouide, that
vsing their trade and commerce, they should not be called in question nor molested for
their consciences, so as they gaue no scandall.
22 If any goods or marchandise prohibited to be carried, should be conueyed out of
the realmes and dominions of the said kings and Archdukes, by the subiects of the one or
the other, that in such case the person offending shall onely incurre punishment, and only
the goods prohibited shall be confiscated.
23 That the goods of subiects dying within the realmes and dominions of either,
should be preserued for the right heires and successors of the deceased, alwaies reseruing
the right of any third person.
24 That graunts and priuiledges giuen by the princes to merchants of either of the
kingdomes, comming to their realmes, which priuiledges, by reason of the warres, haue
ceased, should from thenceforth be reuiued, and stand in their full force and vertue.
25 And if hereafter any vnkindnesse should grow betwixt the king of England etc.
and the king of Spaine, or the Archdukes, wherby there might grow any interruption of
entercourse and traffique, the subiects of either prince should be so aduertised thereof, as
they might haue six monethes from the time of the admonition, to transport their marchandise,
without any arrest, disturbance, or molestation in the meane season, to be offered
or done them either in their persons or goods.
26 That neither of the said princes should imbarre or stay for their prouision in war,
or for any other seruice, to the prejudice of the owners, the ships of the others subiects, lying
in their ports or roads, vnlesse one of those parties to whom the ships do belong, bee
first aduertised thereof, and yeeld his consent thereunto.
27 It was also accorded, That if during this peace and league of friendship, any thing
should happen to be attempted, or done, against the force and effect thereof, either by water
or by land, by any of the said princes, their heirs and successors, their vassals and subiects,
or by their allies comprehended in this league, or by the heirs and successors of any of
those allies, their subiects or vassals, yet notwithstanding this peace and amitie, should remaine
in his full strength and vertue, and the attempters and such as doe offend onely shal
be punished for their attempts.

28 That all prisoners taken in the warres, or condemned to the gallies, should be released
and set free, the charges of diet, of such as were not in the gallies, being first paied, and
the ransomes of such as had before compounded for the same, being discharged.
29 It was concluded, That all ciuile actions which were in force at such time as the last
warre begun, should be continued and pursued, notwithstanding any lapse of time during
the same warre, so as they should not be any way prejudiced by the continuance of
the warre: those onely were excepted which were alreadie come to the princes treasurie or
Exchequer.
30 If any action should be commenced in the realmes and dominions of any of these
princes, by any person not being subiect to the same prince, touching any depredations
or spoyles, the cause should be remitted to the Iudge of the jurisdiction vnder that
prince, against whose subject or subjects the suit is commenced.
31 If the Hollanders and the other confederat Estates, would accept of conditions of
pacification with the Archdukes, or their successours, by the meanes of the king of England
etc. the said Archdukes and their successours would alwayes willingly hearken vnto
that which should be propounded therein, and would desire, that by the helpe of the
king of England etc. they might be brought to imbrace equall conditions; wherein they
should well vnderstand how much the said Archdukes did attribute vnto the king of England.
The last three articles were for the comprehending of the allies, friends, and confederats
of the said princes in this present treatie, the which they did seuerally and particularly
name: and for the ratification, confirmation, and due obseruation of the said treatie.
There was also an order set down touching marchandise of high Germanie to be transported
into Spaine, and free from the imposition of thirtie in the hundred, whereby the
Constable of Castille, hauing speciall procuration from the Catholike king, did promise
that it should be lawfull for the subjects of the king of England etc. to conuey marchandise
out of high Germanie, being subject to the imposition of thirtie in the hundred, and
could not without paiment thereof, be carried into Spaine, the same marchandise being
first conueyed into England, and there discharged and customed, and from thence to bee
afterwards transported into Spaine, or any other of the king of Spaines dominions, without
paiment of thirtie in the hundred; so as the said merchandise had not paid any thing to
the Hollanders and Zelanders, or other enemies of the king of Spain and the Archdukes:
which marchandise they should conuey in their owne ships, and not in any belonging to
any other prince or nation. And, to auoid fraud, the marchandise of high Germany, which
should be transported out of England, Scotland, and Ireland, into the dominions of the
king of Spaine and the Archdukes, should be registred and marked with the seale of the
towne from whence it came, and a certificat sent from the magistrat of the said towne,
testifying, that the said marchandise were discharged in England, Scotland, or Ireland, and
that they had paid custome there; vpon paine of the kings displeasure, and the losse of their
offices, and other punishments, to bee inflicted at the kings pleasure vpon the magistrats
of townes vnder the obedience of the king of England etc. which are to certifie the vnlading
of ships, and the registring thereof, if they shall herein commit any fraud. And what
marchandise soeuer of high Germanie, shall not be discharged in England, Scotland, or
Ireland, and yet to be transported into Spaine, and other the dominions of the king of
Spaine, all such marchandise shall be confiscated, and reputed good prize.
There were also three articles concluded, concerning a moderation to be had in the proceedings
in the Inquisition in Spaine, against the king of Englands subiects.
First, If they exceeded in any thing before their entrance into Spaine, they should not
be called into the Inquisition for the same, neither should they bee molested for any of
those things so committed out of Spaine, neither should any account be demaunded of
them for the same.
2 That no man should compell them to enter into churches, vnlesse they would, but
if they did enter, they should performe those dueties and reuerence which are vsed towards
the holy Sacrament of the Altar, being there; and if they should see the Sacrament
comming towards them in any street, they shall doe reuerence by bowing their

knees, or else they shall passe aside by some other street, or turne into some house.
3 If any of the said persons being masters or masters mates, or any other officers of
ships which be not their owne, doe exceed in any of these things, the Inquisition proceeding
against them by office, is onely to sequester their own proper goods, and are to leaue
the ships and all other goods, not belonging to the offenders, free: and the same was to be
vnderstood for all traders and factors.
During this treatie betwixt England and Spaine,Discomodities for the cessation of traffique. the defence of traffique betwixt
France and the dominions of the king of Spaine and the Archdukes, was verie troublesome.
The French suffered great discommodities, and the Spaniards found this restraint
heauie and insupportable, for that all things grew exceeding deere, and the tradesmen
murmured, and grew almost desperat. The Pope commaunded his Nuntio to deale in
this businesse, and to reconcile these princes; but the French king would not yeeld to any
thing, vntill that the Spaniards, who had first troubled the water, had cleered it againe,
in reuoking the imposition of thirtie in the hundred, which made the libertie of traffique
a meere seruitude, and the profit an assured losse. This was verie seuere and rigorous. It
is in euerie kind bitter vnto the marchant, couetousnesse hauing changed the first cause,
as well as the quantitie of customes and imposts. At the first they were paied onely
to haue free libertie and assurance of passage from one place vnto another; and for that
princes haue vnder their protection the highwayes (for the which they are called Royall)
they did acknowledge this right of protection with some duetie. Such impositions for
so necessarie causes are just, others are not, and yet they must be borne, being not lawfull
for the subiect to murmure against the customes and imposts wherewith the prince doth
charge him. They said, That the Spaniards, which are long in their consultations, and
constant in their resolutions, would neuer reuoke this imposition, for that they would
not loose the reputation of constancie in their lawes,Co^merce set at liberty in France. and bee noted of inconstancie
and lightnesse, by applying themselues to the time and affaires. But there was no remedie,
the deputies of the two kings and Archdukes meeting, tooke off the imposition,
and set the commerce free.
The peace being fully concluded betwixt England and Spaine, and sworne by the
king of England in the presence of the king of Spaines Commissioners,Constable of Castille returns into Spaine. the Constable
of Castille hauing receiued great honour in England, both in his entertainment
and presents giuen him from the king, returned into Flanders, much satisfied
in himselfe, to carrie home with him such joyfull tidings. From thence hee past into
France, where the French king vsed him so royally, as hee afterwards said, That hee had
entertained him as a king, and intreated him as a kinsman.
In the yeare a thousand six hundred and foure the king of Great Britaine sent the
earle of Nottingham,1605 high Admirall of England,Earle of Notingham sent into Spaine. into Spaine, to take the Catholike
kings oath, for the confirmation of the peace, as hee did the earle of Hartford vnto
the Archdukes, to the same end. The sayd earle of Nottingham, being attended
on by a gallant traine of noblemen, knights, and gentlemen, arriued at the
Groine, where hee was no sooner discouered from the land, but D. Lewis de Carilla
de Toledo, marquesse of Carascena, Gouernour both of the towne and of the
countrey of Gallicia, gaue order for his entertainment, the which was verie royally
performed.
At his comming into the harbour, a fort vpon the North side of the towne,
did first salute him with twentie peeces of ordnance: then a fort lately built vpon a
rocke, with six and thirtie peeces; and lastly from the towne and castle with aboue
thirtie peeces of ordnance: And the earles ship, with the whole fleet, beeing at
an anchor, requi^ed them with all their ordnance. Presently after the Gouernour
sent foure chiefe officers of the towne, with D. Iohn de Pacheco, his brother, and
D. Lewis de Carilla de Toledo his onely sonne, to welcome the earle. After some
time spent in complements, the Gouernour himselfe came aboord the earles ship
in a barge, the ma^iners and rowers being in blew silke cassockes and cappes, and
the barge couered with blew veluet. After hee had saluted the earle, he told him,
That the king his master had giuen vnto him an especiall charge to haue a respect

who he was that came embassadour, from whom hee came, and to whom hee was sent:
and that he should doe euerie thing for the honour of these three persons, not sparing any
thing that might be fit for his Lordships entertainment. Wherefore hee did intreat
the earle to goe to land, the which he did forbeare vntill the next day; so as that night
hee sent vnto his Lordship a present of fish, fruits, bread, and such commodities as the
countrey yeelded.
On Tuesday,He lands at the Groine. the sixteenth of Aprill, the earle of Nottingham prepared to goe to
shore, to his lodging, which was appointed in the gouernours house. The gouernour
hauing taken care to receiue his Lordship in most honourable manner, had (vpon notice
of his comming to the Groine) caused a bridge of timber, being aboue fortie yards
long, to be built and painted, the which was garnished with many penciles of silke of diuers
colours. The way into the towne was set on either side with boughes of bayes and
Orange trees, and strewed with rushes and flowers. The whole garrison of the towne,
and other companies that were drawne out of the countrey, were there readie to make a
gard for him.
His Lordship being readie to land, the gouernour sent diuers of the Commaunders
to let him vnderstand, that he and the magistrats of the towne would attend him on the
bridge. Whereupon the earle tooke his barge, and (being followed by his whole traine)
went vnto the bridge, where the Spaniards entertained the English as they landed, the
haultboyes and shagbots playing all the while. Being all landed, they entred into the
towne an English man and a Spaniard marching together in verie good order. At their
entrance into the towne they were saluted with a great volley of shot, both great and
small; and so they went on foot to the gouernours house, where, when the earle entred,
there were many chambers shot off.
During the earle of Nottinghams stay at the Groine, hee solemnized Saint Georges
feast, the which was performed with the greater state, for that the people came thither
in troupes to see that ceremonie; and it was thought the gouernor (being inuited) would
haue dined with his Lordship, but hee fearing to heare something that might touch the
king, his master, in honour, excused himselfe, and so retired, hauing seene his Lordship
set downe: But hearing, after dinner, by his owne brother, that there was not any
thing that might giue cause of offence, or exception, hee was sorie, and did accompanie
his Lordship at supper, whither many ladies and gentlewomen came to see the order of
that State.
On the foure and twentieth of Aprill D. Blasco d' Arragon, nephew to the duke of Terranoua,
who had beene in England the yeare before with the Constable of Castille, came
from Court, being sent from the king his master, to salute his Lordship, and to acquaint
him with such preparations as were made for him and his traine for that journey. There
was also D. Gaspar de Bullion, the kings chiefe Harbinger, who came with commission from
the king, to prouide all things necessarie for his Lordships journey. After some conference
(notwithstanding they had promised there should be no want of any thing) they
found, that the whole countrey would not furnish mules ynow, there being six hundred
and fiftie persons, besides the carriages, which were verie many. Wherupon his Lordship
resolued to leaue some of his owne companie aboord his ships vntill his returne. There
were foure coaches and foure litters attended them at Villafranca, besides their riding
mules, whereof there was a coach and a litter for his Lordships owne vse, another coach
and a litter for sir Charles Cornwallis, who was then sent to be embassador leager in Spaine,
and the rest for the knights and gentlemen which should be sicke.
During his Lordships stay at the Groine, hee was entertained with sundrie sports, the
which were performed in a square made of purpose on the market place; as assaulting of
a castle by armed knights, and freeing a ladie from foure monsters which defended it, fighting
at barriers, and in the end verie rare fire-works, the which were generally commended
for their strangenesse.Earle of Nottingham goes from the Gr^ine. After which his Lordship, hauing all his traine furnished with
mules, began his journey towards the Court the 3 of May, the gouernor and magistrats
bringing him out of the town with musick and shot. He was accompanied by D. Blasco d' Arragon,
and D. Gaspar de Bullion, chief harbinger to the K. who had the charge of the conduct.

His Lordship past from the Groyne to Bytance, to Villa Alua Lugo, Terra Castella,
Cebrera, Villa Franca, Bubibre, Astorga (where his Lordship saw a fayre castle belonging
to the marquesse of Astorga) Banesa, Benauent, Villa Garcia: and from thence hee
had order to goe to Simancas, which was as farre as Vailledolit: To which towne his
Lordship came in twelue dayes, hauing beene honourably receiued in all places where
he past. His Lordship comming to Simancas on Tuesday the 14 of May, he had order
from the king, not to come to Court till Thursday. On the Wednesday after dinner
there came D. Pedro de Suniga, or Estuniga, newly appointed embassadour for England,
and D. Iohn de Taxis, sonne to the earle of Villa Mediana, then embassador in England;
who hauing saluted his Lordship, departed againe.
On Thursday,He goes to Court. his Lordship being appointed to goe to Court, there came to attend
him the marquesse of Camerasa, D. Pedro de Suniga, D. Iohn de Taxis* D. Blasco d' Arragon,
with diuers other knights and gentlemen of the kings house and chamber, bringing diuers
coaches with them. Simancas was not aboue six English miles from Court. Vpon the
way the earle of Nottingham was persuaded to goe into a banqueting house which
stood vpon the highway, and to see the delicacie of their orchards and gardens, and to
tast of the fruits: but it was rather to stay for the noblemen which were appointed by the
king to meet him. During his stay in this garden, there was a horse presented vnto him
from the king, which he did vsually ride on. After an houres stay, there came diuers
Grandoes,Noblemen (...) the Earle of Nottingham. and other noblemen, the chiefe whereof were, the duke of Frias Constable
of Castille (lately embassadour in England) the duke of Infantasgo, the duke of Albuquerque,
the duke of Cea, the duke of Sessa, the duke of Pastrana, the marquesse of S.
German, the earle of Chinchon, the earle of Punno en Rostro, the marquesse of Baneza,
the earle of Aguilar, the earle of Berosa, the earle of Nieua, the earle of Corunna,
the earle of Paredes, the marquesse of Carpio, the marquesse of Tauera, the marquesse
of Villanoua, the earle of Salinas, the marquesse of Seralua, the marquesse de Fuentes,
the marquesse of Alcanices, the earle of Galues, the Admirall of Arragon, with many
other lords and knights. The earle with all these nobles, and his whole traine, being
vpon the way, the weather being exceeding hot, there fell a verie great showre, which
continued vntill they came into the towne, where his lodging was appointed in the
house of the earle of Salinas, not farre from Court. There was a multitude of people,
and eight hundred coaches (as it was thought) full of ladies and gentlewomen, gotten
out of the towne to see the earle and his companie. I omit the manner of their marshalling
with the Spanish knights and lords. They entred by a gate called Puerta del
Campo, and passed through the chiefe parts of the towne, by the Court gate, the king,
queene, and ladies, standing (as they said) at certaine windowes, to take view of the companie.
That night there came diuers noblemen, and the queene sent her Major Domo
to visit his Lordship: which caused some admiration in the Spaniards, who saied, they
neuer knew the like fauour done to any embassador.
The day after, his Lordship comming to Vailledolit, D. Francisco Gomes de Sandoual,
duke of Lerma, the kings great fauourite, being accompanied by many dukes and earles,
came to visit him, and so consequently all embassadours, and most of the Grandoes and
noblemen of the Court, came to visit him, and congratulate his comming. He had his
first audience on Saturday the eighteenth of May. In the morning the king sent the earle
of Galues, and diuers of his priuie chamber, to visit his Lordship. In the afternoone the
Constable came accompanied with aboue twentie noblemen,The Earle goes to Court. wherof three or foure were
of the Grandoes, bringing many coaches with them, to conduct his Lordship and his
companie to Court. The kings gard made a way for them them to the presence chamber
doore, they being three hundred in number, Suisses, Spaniards, and Wallons, attired
in red and yellow veluet, but of seuerall fashions. At the palace gate stood the
duke of Infantasgo, and the marquesse of Vellada, with diuers noblemen, knights, and
gentlemen, to receiue his Lordship, and to conduct the companie into the presence, where
the king sat vnder a rich cloth of Estate,His Audience. and by him eight Grandoes of Spaine couered.
His Lordship hauing deliuered his message by his interpretor, and his letters into the kings
own hands, co^ming from his chaire, he gaue his Lordship a very kind and honorable entertainment

causing him to sit neere vnto him: which fauour was much obserued, as a thing
(sayd the Spaniards) neuer vsed to any embassadour before that time. After some conference,
the noblemen and gentlemen hauing kist the kings hand, his Lordship was conducted
by the Constable and others, to the queenes presence, where shee sate vnder a
rich cloth of Estate, and the Infanta by her: hee was receiued by the Major Domo to
the queene, and conducted to her presence: where hauing ended his complements,
being somewhat late, he tooke his leaue, and returned with those dukes and lords vnto
his lodging.
On the nineteenth of May,King of Spaine goes in procession. being Sunday, the king went in procession, going first to S.
Paules church neere the Court, and then through the town to S. Maries, after this maner.
First went the Monkes and religious Orders singing, and bearing crosses, banners, and other
church reliques, the Sacrament being also carried by foure officers of the Church.
Then followed diuers noblemen in their rankes, according to their degrees. And next before
the kings owne person went the younger of the princes of Sauoy. After king followed
the cardinall, being Archbishop of Toledo, and with him the prince of Sauoy
his elder brother. Then followed the prince of Maroc, with the Emperours embassador,
the embassador of France, and he of Venice: after whom followed diuers gentlemen of
the kings chamber, and the rest of the traine.
After dinner the same day there was preparation made for the Christening of the
prince.Christening of the prince of Spaine. There was a large scaffold made for their passage at the end of a long gallerie,
and joyned to the church; the timber of which scaffold was couered with rich cloth of
gold. They came vnto the church after this manner. The trumpets were set in seuerall
companies neere vnto the church, still sounding, and answering one another. About
foure of the clocke there past by this scaffold, to go into Saint Paules church, the Knights,
Lords, and Grandoes going before, and some Dukes of especiall name bearing sundrie
ceremonies, as the salt carried by one, a wax taper by another: then came the Constable,
who carried the Crowne, before whom went the king at Armes. The duke of Lerma
bare the prince in his armes, being tied vnto him with a rich scarse; he was assisted by the
prince of Sauoy, and the earle of Miranda. Then followed the Infanta in a chaire, the
which diuers gentlemen of the kings bed-chamber, and priuie chamber, carried on their
shoulders, the younger prince of Sauoy going by. At the church doore the cardinall
attended them in his pontificall robes, hauing three bishops, and other officers of the
Church with him; and so they conducted them with singing vnto the Font, the which
was richly couered with a canopie of cloth of gold. The cardinall performed the ceremonie;
the which ended with church musicke, sounding of trumpets, and other wind instruments:
and so they returned as they came, being accompanied by most of the great Ladies
of the Court and kingdome. The prince was Christened by the name of Philip Domingo
Victor. The elder prince of Sauoy was his godfather, of whom he tooke the name
of Victor, and the Infants, his sister, was his godmother. The Lord embassador of England
was placed in the earle of Ribadauias house, both to see the procession in the morning,
and the prince going to the Christening: after which he was conducted by a priuat
way into the church, to see the ceremonie.
The next day,Churching of the queene of Spaine. being Monday, the embassador leger was presented to the king, and
gratiously allowed of by him. On Tuesday the Lord embassador was conducted to S. M^ries
church by D. Blasco d' Arragon, to see the ceremonie of the queenes Churching, whither
the king and queene came together, the king being on horsebacke, and the queene in
a verie rich carroch of cloth of gold, drawne with foure horses, hauing their furnitures of
cloth of gold, with whom the Infanta sat. After which, in another carroch, came the yong
prince, in the armes of an auncient ladie: and then followed two other carroches of
blacke veluet, with diuers duchesses, countesses, and other great personages, widowes.
Then came foure other carroches, all of one fashion, with diuers ladies, the queenes
maides. This was the first day of the queenes going abroad, and as it was held, her
Churching day.
That day the Lord embassador was inuited to dine with the Constable,Earle of Nottingham feasted by the Constable where he was
accompanied by the dukes of Albuquerque, and of Sessa, and others: where there wanted not

any thing that the countrie could yeeld for his entertainment. On Friday being the 20
of May there were certaine presents,Presents sent to the king and Queen of Spain sent by the king of England, deliuered, the king and
Queene comming themselues into a priuat garden to receiue them. They were sixe horses,
three for the king, and three for the Queene, with saddles and clothes verie richly imbrodered,
two Crosse-bowes with sheafes of arrowes, foure fowling peeces, with their
furnitures, all verie richly garnished and inlaied with plates of gold, and a couple of limehounds:
which presents were kindlie receiued, the king and Queene admiring the fashion
and richnesse thereof.
On Tuesday the eight and twentieth of May,Embassador feasted by the duke of Lerma. the Lord embassador, with all the English
were inuited to dine with the duke of Lerma, where they were verie honorably entertained
to their great contentment: he was accompained at the table by the duke of Lerma,
the duke of infantasgo, and the duke of Albuquerque. They were attended on at the table
by Marquesses, Earles, Knights, and gentlemen of the kings priuy-chamber, and few
others.
Hauing receiued what pleasure could be deuised at the table, they were afterwards caried
down into a faire Court, paued with square stone, in the middest wherof was a fountaine
of cleere water; the whole Court was couered with canuas to keep them from the
heat of the Sunne: There was a stage set vp in this Court with al things fitting for a play,
which the embassadour and the rest were inuited to see. The king and Queene were also
in priuat to see this Comedie.
The day appointed for the taking of the kings Othe,King of Spaine goes in procession. was vpon Thursday the thirtieth
of May, being Corpus Christi day, on the which the king went in procession; and for that
hee would bee seene by the English, hee appointed to passe by the gate where the embassador
was lodged, after this manner.
First there came eight great Giants, three men, three women, and two Moores, with a
Taber and pipe playing, and they dauncing: Then followed certaine Pilgrimes clad in
blew: After whome fiue and twenty or sixe and twenty crosses, belonging to seuerall
Churches, with many pictures and holy relikes, Monkes, Morris dancers like Gipsies,
Beastes with fire workes, wild men, and such like vanities, as it should seeme, to draw the
people more readily to admiration: After these followed diuers other Church-relikes,
with certaine Augustine and Franciscane Friers, with their relikes. Many Church-men
had Tapers in their hands: the king Pages bare Torches: Then followed the Sacrament
carried by foure Church-men in rich Copes; after whome came the Noble men, and
Grandoes of Spaine; and then followed the king with a Taper light in his hand, of white
Virgin waxe: after whome came the Cardinals, the embassadors to the emperor, French,
and Venetians, the Prince of Sauoy, the Prince of Maroc, with others, euerie one carrying
a Taper light.
The same day D. Blasco de Arragon brought word vnto the Lord embassador that the
king expected his comming presently vnto the Court for the taking of the othe: wherefore
there was order taken that the Noblemen and Gentlemen which should attend him
thither, should be furnished with Genets out of the kings stable. Being all mounted, the
Constable D. Pedro de Suniga,King of Spaine takes the othe. with many other Lords and Knights, were sent to accompany
him: And at the court gate the duke of Lerma and some other of the Grandoes staied
to receiue him; by whome hee was conueied through a long gallerie into a presence,
and so into an inner chamber, where the king staied his comming, and receiued him with
a kind salutation, and so took him along with him. The king Sergeants at armes going
first, then followed the Noblemen and Grandoes of Spain, then the foure kings at arms,
in their coasts of armes; after whome came the duke of Lerma, bearing the sword naked,
not vpright, as the custome is in England, but lying vpon his left shoulder; and in this order
the king marcht to a verie faire banqueting house, newly built, the embassadour leeger,
the Lords, and diuers others following.
The king being set in his estate, the Lord embassadour and the Leeger were placed vpon
his left hand, the Grandoes and other Noblemen of Spaine, beeing on the right, but
two degrees lower. There was a little table set before the king, wheron lay the Bible and a
Crucifix vpon it. The Archbishop of Toledo red the othe: at one part of the othe the embassadour

held the kings hands betweene his, to which othe the king swore kneeling and
laying his hand vpon the booke, and afterwards subscribed the articles concluded by both
kings.
On the last of May there was preparation made for certaine sports,Iuego de To^o and Iuego de Cana. as Iuego de Tora, and
Iuego de Cana, where there was a careful order taken that al the English shold be placed
to see those sights. About noone the king and Queene came on Horsebacke after the
Spanish maner, being attended on by many Lords and Ladies. The Lord embassador was
in one roome with the king and Queene, and the other Lords not farre off. These sports
were performed in the market place, being built round about with scaffolds, and the ground
couered with sand. There were fourteen buls slaine that day, not without danger to many
that were actors, and the losse of some of their liues. Which being ended began their
sports of Iuego de Cana, wherein the king himselfe was an actor: First there came in
twelue Atabales or kettle drums; then followed thirty Trumpets, al clad in Cassaks of red
and white tafata; then followed twelue great mules, called Asemulaes with couerings of
crimson veluet, bearing bundles of canes, chained together with great hooks of siluer;
then followed the kings Gentlemen and Pages richly suited, being 32 in number.
For the two Princes of Sauoy, there came two Pages riding, bearing white targuets on
their armes: after whome were led three horses, with caparisons of blacke veluet, richly
imbrodered with pearle: then followed twelue other horses, their caparisons of blacke
veluet, but imbrodered with siluer. For the duke of Lerma were led six horses with caparisons
of white and red; his Groomes and Pages attending were suteable. For the Constable
were led foure and twenty horses of seruice in white and greene, his Pages and
groomes all suted alike. There were eighty horsemen which were actors that day in those
sports, being diuided into eight bands or companies: besides the king and the rest aboue
named, there were many of the Grandoes, and they were all men of speciall note in the
Court of Spaine: whose names for breuities sake I omit: At the first they came riding
in swiftly by couples, with their targuets on their shoulders, and shaking their staues after
the maner of the Moores and Arabians. Being all come in, they diuided themselues into
two parts, either side hauing foure squadrons, and euerie squadron ten in number: Being
al ready, the kings side first gaue the charge, and the others answered them, and so they co^tinued
chasing one another, squadron after squadron, and casting their canes one after
another, for the space of an houre, and so the sport ended.
On the first of Iune,Shew of the kings Horsemen the Lord embassador was inuited to see the kings horsemen in arms
in a spacious place called El Campo, consisting of launces, light horsemen and Carbines,
to the number of two thousand, of the which the duke of Lerma was generall: these
troups after some sallies one vpon another, and certaine skirmishes, drew themselues into
a ring, and so marching vnder the window whereas the king, Queene and embassadour
stood, went their way.
On the sixt of Iune he was requested to see a maske,Mask at Court. and aboue six of the clock in the euening
D. Blasco d' Arragon came to conduct his Lordship, and the rest through a priuate
gallery of the kings, to the appointed place which was the new built banqueting house,
where his Lordship and his followers were conueniently appointed. The roome was furnished
with 320 wax lights, all set in standerds of siluer of diuers fashions. Where after
some songs and musicke, the maske appeared after this manner.
There came first of al 30 musitio^s, in long roabs of crimson tafata, wel set out to shew,
playing on seueral instruments. After whome followed six Virgins dancing, one bearing
in her hand asun, another a branch of an Oliue tree, another an anchor, another a sword
with two points, on either point abunch of flowers.
Then followed a Chariot of an antick fashion, drawn by two liued horse, being exceeding
little: In the vpper part whereof sat the Infanta, with a Scepter of gold in her hand,
hauing the picture of a Doue at the vpper end of it: at her feet sat two other Virgins, who
attended her, and on either side went diuers pages bearing torches of white waxe.
At the vpper end of the hal there was a rich State built all of Masons work ascending
vp by degrees, richly guilt, and garnished with sundrie statues guilt also; in which state
there were three chaires set, two great, and one lesser, which was betwixt the other two. In

which middle chaire the Infanta being taken out of her Chariot was placed; the two virgins
neere her, and the other sixe vpon the degrees at the foot of the estate. At the nether
end of the Hall stood the maskers in a gallerie, made of purpose, who vpon drawing
of a curtaine, appeared as it were in clouds: They were eight and twentie Knights and Ladies
besides torch-bearers, whereof the king and Queen made two, the rest were (...) Grandoes,
and men of great honour; the Ladies were the Queens Maides. The gallerie being
built in maner of an arch, and set full with looking glasses, did with the light of torches
shine as if it had beene ful of Starres. The musick playing, the maskers descended by foure
and foure at a time, vpon a stage made in fashion of a cloud vntill the whole number was
come forth dancing together in good forme and measure. Hauing danced a while, they all
vnmasked themselues, the king and Queene sitting in the chaires aboue mentioned, where
after some other dances the sport ended.
On the seuenth of Iune the Lord embassadour was appointed to take his leaue of the
king, and returne for England. Before his comming to Audience, the king sent by D. Pedro
de Suniga, and some others, to the number of foureteene chaines of gold, or thereabouts,
for some of the kings Seruants, and his lordships chiefe officers: hauing likewise
sent before by the said D. Pedro, vnto the Lords, and to many knights, and other especial
men of his Lordships companie, seuerall Iewels and chaines which were verie rich. In the
afternoone the king sent vnto the embassadour a verie rich present of Iewels, both for
himself and his Lady, the which were presented vnto him by D. Blasco, and brought by the
masters and officers of the jewel house, whome he rewarded honorably.
Not long after the Constable came with some others to conduct him to his Audience,
where, after some priuate conference with the king, hee tooke his leaue, hauing receiued
many gracious words from his Maiestie, as also a ring with a Diamond, which some valued
at three thousand pounds, the which the king put vpon his finger, in token (as hee
said) of wedding him perpetually in true loue. After which the king commanded the duke
of Infantasgo, to conduct him vnto the Queen, where hauing performed all due complements
he tooke his leaue also of her Highnesse. And the same day (being accompanied, a
mile out of the Towne, by the Constable and some other Noblemen) he began his iourny
towards England, and on the fifteenth day came to Saint Andreas where his ships attended
him. Where being arriued, and all things ready for his imbarking, hee shewed his
bountie in rewarding D. Blasco, the Aposentador or chiefe Harbinger, and al the kings officers
and seruants that attended him, with great chains of gold, faire Iewels of good value,
and large sums of money, to their generall content. After which hauing feasted them on
shipboard, hee put to sea on the 25 day of Iune.
Thus haue I summarily set downe the substance of the Earle of Nottinghams honorable
entertainment at the Court of Spaine, when as he was sent thither
embassador for the swearing of the othe: with the which I will end
this Historie, and conclude my labour with his Lordships
safe returne into England.
FINIS.



@Obseruations touching the state and gouernment
of Spaine.
FOr as much as my Authour in the beginning of this Historie hath
made an exact description of Spaine, setting downe the number of
leagues the whole continent doth containe in circuit, describing
the principall riuers within the Countrie, with their Springs
and courses, setting downe the mountaines and hils, and distinguishing
the Prouinces, within the countrie, as they lye at this day,
and by whome they were in ancient time inhabited, with a declaration
of the fertilitie, riches, and commodities of the Countrie: I
haue thought good to adde something touching the gouernment of that state, with some
other obseruations concerning that subiect, the which I haue collected out of such as
haue beene curious to see, obserue, and write thereof.
The king of Spaine, as hee is a potent Prince and Lord of many countries, so hath hee
many Councels for the managing of their affaires, distinctly and apart, without any confusion,
euerie Councell treating only of those matters which concerne their Iurisdiction and
charge, and meddle not one with anothers businesse: with which Councels and with the
Presidents, being men of chiefe note, the king doth conferre touching matters belonging
to the good gouernment, preseruation, and increase of his Estates, and hauing heard euerie
mans opinion, he commands that to be executed that shall be held most fit and conuenient.
The first is,
The Councel of state;Councel of state. wheron the rest depend. They name Viceroyes for all the king
of Spaines countries, and prouide for many things for the preseruation of his realms. The
king himselfe is President of this Councell: the Counsellours, who are the chiefe men in
the court, haue no fees.
The Councell of warre.Councell of war It prouides for Generals, Colonels, Captaines, the Generall
of the gallies, and for whatsoeuer concernes the war, with the aduice of his Majestie, who
is president of this Councell. They punish all commanders and officers at warre that doe
not their duties. And in like maner they dispose of the companies of men at arms appointed
for the gard of the kingdom, and they giue order for the artillerie, munition, and fortifications,
or any thing that is necessary for the warre. The counsellors haue no wages.
The royall Councel of justice.Councell of iustice. Here they treat of the good gouernment of all Spaine,
they determine controuersies betwixt Noblemen, and ease the greeuances of other
Courts. This councell is of great preheminence: the president names al Iustices of Spain,
the Prouosts of the kings house, with many other Counsellors and Iustices. They take information
how euerie one hath behaued himselfe in his charge, punishing and changing
as they shall think good, but with the kings priuity. There is a President, and sixteen counsellors,
who haue all wages.
The Councell of Italie:Councel of Italy. which treats of matters concerning the realms of Naples and
Sicile, and the Duchie of Milan. The Constable of Castille is President: there are sixe
Counsellours, three Italians, and three Spaniards. In this Councell they dispose of the
gouernment of Italie, and giue aduancement to the Souldiers that serue in those Countries;
they appoint Gouernours, and Iudges in cities, and giue titles to Noblemen: but
they first acquaint the king with their consultations.
The Councel of the Indies. The President is of greatest esteeme next vnto the councel
royall:The Councell of the Indies. there are eight Counsellors, and haue all wages. They appoint Viceroys, for Peru,
and Noua Hispagna, and a general of the army that goes into these parts, with all other
Offices and Spirituall liuings. In this Councell they also treat of all greeuances and complaints,
that come from the Indies, by way of appellation. All which things they impart
vnto the king. They also appoint Visitors to goe into those Prouinces, to e^amine how al
Officers carrie themselues, and to heare the peoples greeuances; and they punish or dismisse
as they shall see cause.
The Councell of Orders.The Councell of Orders. It hath a President, and foure Counsellours, with wages,
hich must be Knights, of the Order of Saint Iames, Calatraua, or Alcantara. In this Councell
they treat of suits, which happen in Prouinces belonging vnto these orders, and to
see that the Knights weare their habits neatly. This Councell appoints two and twentie
Iustices in their Prouinces, wherewith the royal Councell hath not to deale. They punish
the Commanders and knights which obserue not their orders. They dispose of many Benefices,
Vicarages, Chappels, and other Offices, in the Prouinces of their Orders; but all
with the kings priuitie, and allowance.
The Councell which they call de Camera.Councell de Camera. It hath a President and three Counsellors,
of the most ancient of the Councell Royall, which haue no wages. In this Councell they
prouide superiour officers for the Realme, and they dispose of Bishopricks, Chanonries,
and other Ecclesiastical liuings, the king hauing the nomination from the Pope of Rome.
The Councell of Hazienda:Councell of Hazienda. where there is a President and three Counsellors, without
fees, wherein they treat of the kings reuenues, and of all dueties, entries and accompts, like
vnto our Exchequer in England.
There is a Counsell of accompts:Councell of Accompts. which consists of foure Counsellours, in the which
two of the kings chiefe Auditours haue place, and the most ancient Counsellor presides.
In this councell they determine of ^utes touching the subsidies and taxes, and giue order
to Collectors, for recouerie thereof.
The Councel of Cruzada.Councell of the Cruzada. It hath a President, two Counsellours and three Anditours:
Their charge is onely to diuide the Cruzado by the bishopricks, and to send forth Commissaries
to gather it.
The Councell of Arragon,Councell of Arragon. Valentia and Cattalognia. It hath a President, who is
called Vicechancellour, with sixe Counsellours, which haue wages. They treat of the
gouernment of those Realmes, and of the Ilands of Maiorca, Minorca, and Sardinia: they
appoint gouernors and Iudges, and determine suits from those places by way of appeale,
and heare their greeuances, and to giue rewards in the kings chamber of those realmes;
all with his Maiesties approbation.
The Councell of the Inquisition.Councell of the Inquisition. The President is called Inquisitor Maior, an Office of
great dignitie, which most commonly the Archbishop of Toledo holdes: hee hath six
counsellors, or Inquisitors, they appoint all the Inquisitors, Prouosts, and Secretaries
in all the Inquisitions within the Realme, which are aboue twentie, in either of which
are three or foure Inquisitors: who deale in matters of Heresie, and with such men as do or
say any thing against the church of Rome. And before they condemne any offendor they
send him to this Councell to determine of him.
The Councell of Descargos,Councell of Descargos. treates of the paying of the old kings debts, and the execution
of their last wils.
There are two Chanceries in Spaine,Chanceries of Spaine. one at Vailledolit, and another at Granado,
either of which hath a President and twelue Counsellors. They take knowledge of
all ciuil causes which come vnto them by way of appeale from other inferiour
courts. They also take knowledge of sutes, for the estates and inheritances of Noblemen,
from the which they may appeale to the Councel royall, if the matter in question
exceed the value of foure thousand ducats. There are foure Alcaldes or Prouosts of
the Chancerie, who determine of all ciuill and criminall causes, within fiue leagues; from
whome they appeale to the counsellours of the Chauncerie.
There is a Councell for the realme of Nauarre,Councell of Nauarre. where there is a Regent, sixe Councellors,
and foure Alcaldes, or Prouosts, they take knowledge of suites, both ciuil and criminall

within that Realme, and end them there, of what qualitie soeuer they be without
appeale, whereof they consult euerie weeke with the Viceroy, who determines what they
shall doe.
There is also a Regent,Councel of Gallicia. 4 Councellors, and 4 Prouosts in the realm of Gallicia, who end
all suits within that realme, but they deale not in questions of Nobilitie and Gentrie,
which goe to the Chancerie of Vailledolit.
The Citie of Seuille with the dependances,Councell of Seuille. hath a Regent, 6 Councellors, and 4 Prouosts,
who take knowledge of all ciuill and criminall matters, whereof the iudges of the
said citie or realm haue giuen sentence. There is an appeale from them to the royal councel:
all questions of Nobilitie goe to the Chancerie of Granado.
The President of the Councell royall of Iustice appoints all the Councellors,Power of the President of the Councell royall. Prouosts,
Presidents, and Regents of the Chanceries, and changeth them from one to another,
and draws them to be Councellors of that Court: Moreouer he names sixty and sixe Gouernors
of Cities and Prouinces, changing them as occasion shall require. These Gouernors
or Iudges, haue commonly two or three Lieutenants in the townes of their gouernment.
They or their Lieutenants, gouerne the cities or prouinces which are vnder their
charge, with twelue or more Aldermen which hee hath in euerie citie and towne: which
Aldermen doe onely deale with the maintenance of the citie, and with the publike works
wherein they haue a voice, but the gouernours or their Lieutenants determine of al murthers,
thefts, or other misdemeanors: and punish according to the qualitie of the fact, euerie
Gouernour hath as much power in these matters, as the king himselfe, the matter
being iustifiable, and they may deale in al matters for that their Co^missions are verie ample,
representing the kings person, from whome they doe appeale to the Chanceries of
Vailledolit or Granado.
I am afraid to enter into any discourse of the reuenues of this king,Reuenues of the king of Spaine. men write so diuersly
therof: some write that he hath but 14 millions of ducats, comming in yeerly, others
say eighteen Millions, and some bring it to 23 millions, which differences may haply with
some limitations bee reconciled: But whatsoeuer it bee, it is most certaine, that during
the warres of the Low-countries, it was too little to mainteine his charge, for although
that Naples, Sicile, Milan, Sardinia, Maiorca and Minorca, Flaunders and Burgondie,
yeeld him aboue fiue Millions yearely, yet there comes little of all this to his cofers,
being imployed in the entertainment of Viceroys, Gouernors, Captaines, Garrisons, Officers,
and other charges in those countries. The kings reuenues in Spaine, rise not from
his demeanes, as in some other Countries but from the great impositions which hee rayseth
vpon the ports of the Sea, and from his drie Ports, which bee the passages from one
kingdome to another: and of all Merchandize which is sold, hee takes ten in the hundred,
and how often soeuer it be sold. A great part of which Gabelles and Impositions in Spaine
stands ingaged vnto the Genouois and other merchants for the paiment of the kings debts.
Some hold that he hath not aboue fiue millions of ducats comming in cleerely to mainetaine
the charges of his court, and all other extraordinary expences of war, gifts, pensions,
voyages and such like.
The Impositions which are raised in Spaine, are not laid equally vpon all his Countries,
but they lie most heauie vpon the two Castilles, Leon and Andaluzia, for in the
realmes of Valencia, Arragon, and Cattelonia, hee imposeth little, but mainteineth their
priuiledges which be great, and they themselues redeiue the Gabbelles and customes, and
not the king: the profit which growes there by confiscations and pecuniarie fines, doth
scarce entertaine his Viceroys and other officers. So as it seemes hee hath but merum imperi^m
in those three countries, they being also bound to serue him in his warres.
The king reapes great commoditie, by the popes fauor, from the Clergie; he giues him
Buls of Croysadoe; he enioyes the masterships of S. Iames, Calatraua, Alcantara, and disposeth
of the Co^manderies; he hath the first fruits of Ecclesiasticall liuings, and a part of
the tythes, which comes yearely to three millions of ducats at the least; and he hath the nomination
of all Archbishops, Abbots and Priors, yet he may not giue any benefices, but
to naturall borne Spaniards, or to such as haue beene formerly naturalized.

The Realmes which they number in Spaine, are these:

The Realme of Seuille.
Cordoua.
Iaen.
Toledo.
Leon.
Nauarre.
Valencia.


The Realme of Gibraltar.
Granado.
Murcia.
Castille.
Gallicia.
Arragon.
Cattelognia.

In these Realmes (besides Arragon, Valencia, and Cattelognia) there are some Cities,
which are called to the generall Estates, and haue voices for the Prouinces in which
they are; the which be these:

Seuille.
Granado.
Cuenca.
Madrid.
Soria.
Auila.
Cordoua.
Iaen.
Toledo.
Guadalajara.
Segouia.
Salamanca.
Zamorra.
Vailledolit.
Burgo.
Toro.
Leon.
Murcia.

The names of all the chiefe Cities in Spaine and Portugall,
and in what Prouinces they are.

In Gallicia.
Compostella.
Tuye.


In Asturia of Ouied^.
Mondenedo.
Leon.
Pomperado.


In Asturia S. Ellene.
S. Ellene.


In Biscaie.
Victoria.


In Nauarre.
Pampelone.


In Cattelognia.
Barcelona.
Tarragone.
Mouson.
Seguenca.


In Arragon.
Saragossa.
Tarrel.
Du^ago.
Valencia.


In Valencia.
Cuenca.
Segoruia.
Oraguella.


In Mancha.
Alacantye.
Segure.


In Granado.
Granado.
Almerie.
Carthagena.
Murcia.
Guadix.


In (...).
Seuille.
Cadiz.
Medina Sidonia.
Esica.
Iaen.
Mallega.
Xeres.
Cordoua.
Vbeda.
Baeca.
Andujar.



In the countie.
Aymonte.
Auy^a.


In Castille.
Burgos.
Tarragone.
Guadalajara.
Segouia.
Calohorra.
Zamora.
Toro.
Medina del Campo.


In Spaine there are 57
Cities.
Salamanca.
Valentia.
Astorgo.


In Toledo.
Cuidad Royall.
Alcala de Henares.
Toledo.


In Estremed^ra.
Placentia.
Auyla.
Badajos.
Merida.


In Portugall.
Lisbone.
Euora.
Coimbra.
Porto.
Braga.
Bragance.
Cuidad Roderigo.
Beiria.
Cono.
Oliuensa.
Eluas.
Guarda.
Settuual.
Selues.
Leria.
In Portugall there are 15
Cities.

Some haue obserued in their late trauels, that the King of Spaine hath alwaies within
that continent 56000 foot, which are mustered and enrolled, and are bound to be readie
in armes at the ringing of a bell, or the sound of the drumme. The Grandos, Nobililitie,
and Prelats of the Kingdome are charged with horse, and they amount to the number
of 16000. Besides, the inhabitants of the sea coasts, and of diuers other Ports of
his dominions within land, are bound to find horse, which come to 12000 at the least,
all which must be readie at a moneths warning. This I had from the relation of a yong
nobleman, wherein he hath shewed great industrie and judgement, but it may be there
was some mistaking in the writing of these great numbers of horse.
A note of all the Hauens, Ports, and Fisher Townes vpon the coast of Spaine,
from Fontarabie in Biscaie, to Barcelona in the Mediterranean sea.

In Biscaie.
Fontarabie, a bard hauen.
Passage and Renderie, an open hauen.
S. Sebastians, a bay hauen.
Sumaye and Guittario, bard.
Montrica and Deua, fisher townes.
Mondac and Alequito, Fishers.
Vermeo and Placentia, Fishers.
Bilbao and Portugalete, bard hauen.


Asturies.
Aluredo, a key hauen.
S. Ander, an open hauen.
S. Vincent de la Barkera, fisher
towne.
Aryba de Sella, Fishers.
Villaviciosa, Fishers.
Chynchon, a kay.
Torre, Fishers.
Pe^a, Fishers.
Loarca, bard hauen.
Auiles, bard hauen.


Gallicia.
Ribadeo, bard hauen.
Vuiero and Sidera, Fishers.
Farrol, open hauen.
The Groyne, an open hauen.
Mongea, bard hauen.
Corcauiana, bard hauen.
Muros, bard.
Porta viedra, bard hauen.
Vigo and Bayone, open hauen.



In the Countie.
Aymont, a bard hauen.
Selua and Palos, Fishers.


In Andaluzia.
S. Lucar de Barameda, it stands in the
mouth of the riuer of Guadalquiuir,
which goes vp to Seuille, Fisher boats.
Seuille, bard hauen.
Rota, a kay.
Cadiz, an open hauen.
S. Marie Port, barred hauen.


Streits toward Barcelona.
Gibraltar, an open roade and kay.
Grand Malega, a kay roade.
Maruela, an open roade.
Velez Malega, a kay roade.
Almerie, Fishers.
Carthagena, a hauen.


In Valencia.
Alicante, which is the Port of Valencia,
a hauen.
Valencia, a Creeke.


In Cattel^^ia.
E^pullas
Taragona
Palamos
Empurias
Rosas
All Fisher Townes.
Barcelona, an open hauen.


In Portugall.
Camina, a barred hauen.
Viana, barred.
Villa de Conde, barred.
Auero, barred.
Porto de Portugall, barred.
Cascais, Fisher Towne.
Lisbone, an open hauen.
Sosembrie, barred hauen.
^^^^n, an open hauen.
Lagos, a kay.
Villanouas, a barred hauen.
Farouillas, barred.
Fisher Townes.FigeraTauillaCastromarin.

I will not trouble my selfe nor the Reader in setting downe what shippes and ^arkes
belong vnto these Ports and Hauens, as some haue done, being very variable and vncertaine:
but I will onely make some mention of the king of Spaines forces at sea, as I
haue learned from those that haue curiously inquired thereof, at their being in the
countrey. The king maintaines vpon the coast of Spaine and Portugall some 40 good
shippes and galleons, with 32 galleyes, besides smaller vessels. And besides all these,
he hath at Naples 25 galleyes, in Sicilie 16, and they of Genoua, which he entertaines
continually, but the galleyes are none of his.



@A Catalogue of the Princes which haue raigned in
Spaine since the euersion of the Romane Empire,
with their Alliances and Successions.

The Kings of the Gothes.

1 VAllia, first King of the Gothes, which
setled himselfe in Spaine about the
yeare of our Lord 420
2 Theodoric the first. 440
3 Torismond. 453
4 Theodoric the second. 458
5 Henry or Euric. 471
6 Alaric. 483
7 Gensalaric or Gesselaric. 508
8 Amalaric. 511
9 Theude. 526
10 Theodiscle. 544
11 Agila. 546
12 Atanagilde. 551
13 Luiba the first. 565
14 Leonigilde. 567
15 Ricarede. 585
16 Luiba the second. 601
17 Victeric vsurper. 603
18 Gundamir. 610
19 Sizebuth. 612
20 Suintilla. 621
21 Sizenand. 631
22 Cinthilla. 637
23 Tulca. 641
24 Cindasiunthe, and his sonne. 642
25 Reccesiunthe. 652
26 Bamba. 672
27 Eruinge. 681
28 Egica. 688
29 Vitiza. 701
30 Roderic. 711



During the raigne of RODERIC, last King of the Gothes,
the Arabians, Saracens, or Moores inuaded or conquered Spaine;
against whom did rise many Christian Potentates, whose
lines and descendant follow: that is,

The Line of Ouiedo and Leon. Fol. 1345
The Line of Castille. 1349
The Line of Nauarre. 1355
The Line of Arragon. 1362
The Line of Cattelogne. 1367
The Line of Portugall. 1369
The names of the Archbishops of Toledo. Fol. 1374
Moreouer, the names of the Kings and Princes
Moores which haue raigned in Spaine, Fol. 1375.




The Line of Ouiedo and Leon.
I.
PElagius first king of Ouiedo, sonne to Fafila, Gouernour of Biscaie.
Gaudiosa his wife.

Lawfull children
Fafila.
Ormisinda.


II.
Fafila sonne to Pelagius, in the yere 735, raigned two yeres, and died without children.
(...) Froleu^ his wife.


III.
Alphonso first of that name, sonne to Peter, Gouernour of Biscaie, in the yeare 737* he
raigned 19 yeres.
Ormisinda, daughter to king Pelagius, his wife.

Lawfull children
Froila.
Vimaran.
Aurelius.
Odesinde, a daughter.
Mauregat, a bastard.



IIII.
D. Froila the first of that name, sonne to king Alphonso 1. in the yeare 756: he raigned
11 yeres, 6 moneths.
Menine or Momerane, daughter to the Duke of Aquitaine, his wife.

Lawfull children
D. Alphonso.
D. Bermund, or Veremund.
D. Ximena, mother to Bernard del Carpio.



V.
D. Aurelius brother to Froila, in the yeare 768: he raigned 6 yeares, and died without
children.


VI.
D. Sillo husband to Odesinde, daughter to king Alphonso the first, in the yeare 774* the
raigned 9 yeares, and died without children.


VII.
D. Mauregat, bastard to king Alphonso the first, an Vsurper, in the yere 783: he raigned
fiue yeares and six moneths, and died without children.


VIII.
D. Bermond, or Veremund, sonne to king Froila, and first of that name, in the yere 789:
he raigned two yeares alone, and foure with Alphonso his brother.
D. Imelona his wife.

Lawfull children
D. Ramir.
D. Garcia.



IX.
D. Alphonso second of that name, sonne to king Froila* called the chast, in the yere 795:
he raigned 29 yeres after the death of D. Bermund.
D. Ber^^ia his wife, with whom he had no companie; and therefore he had no children.



X.
D. Ramir and D. Garcia, sonnes to king Bermund, raigne together in the yeare 824:
D. Ramir who suruiued, held the realme six yeares.
D. Vrraca of Castille wife to D. Ramir.

Lawfull children
D. Ordogno or Fortu^.
D. Garcia.



XI.
D. Ordogno or Fortun, first of that name, and sonne to the king D. Ramir, in the yere 831:
he raigned 10 yeres.
D. Nugn^ his wife.

Lawfull children
D. Alphonso.
D. Bermund.
D. Nugno.
D. Odoaire.
D. Froila.
D. N. a daughter.



XII.
D. Alphonso third of that name, sonne to king D. Ordogno, in the yere 841: he raigned
46 yeres.
D. Amelina, or as some say, Ximenia his wife.

Lawfull children
D. Garcia.
D. Ordogno or Fortun.
D. Froila.
D. Gonsal the Archdeacon.



XIII.
D. G^r^ia first of that name, sonne to D. Alphonso the third, in the yere 886: he raigned
three yeres, and had to wife the daughter of D. Nugno Fernandes de Castille, and died without
children.


XIIII.
D. Ordogno or Fortun, second of that name, brother to D* Garcia, in the yeare 889: he
raigned eight yeres.
D. N^gn^ or Eluira, as some say, his first wife.

Lawfull children
D. Sanch^.
D. Alphonso.
D. Ramir.
D. Garcia.
D. Ximena.

D. Arragonde, or it may be Rad^gonde of Gallicia, his second wife, repudiated.
D. S^nch^, Infanta of Nauarre, third wife to this king D. Ordogno.


XV.
D. Froila second of that name, and third sonne to king Alphonso the third, an vsurper,
in the yeare 897: he raigned one yeare six moneths, surnamed the cruell.
D. Nugn^ or M^nina his wife.

Lawfull children
D. Alphonso.
D. Ordogno, or Fortun.
D. Ramir.
D. Froila, a bastard, father to D. Pelagius the Deacon.



XVI.
D. Alphonso fourth of that name, sonne to the king D. Ordogno the second, in the yere
898: he raigned 6 yeres.
D. Vrr^ca Ximenes Infanta of Nauarre his wife.

D. Ordogno or Fortun, called the bad.




XVII.
D. Ramir, second of that name, brother to D. Alphonso the fourth, in the yeare 904: he
raigned 20 yeares.
D. Theresia Infanta of Nauarre, his wife.

Lawfull children
D. Bermond.
D. Ordogno.
D. Sancho.
D. Eluira, a Nun.



XVIII.
D. Ordogno 3 of that name, sonne to D. Ramir, in the yeare 924: hee raigned 5 yeares.
D. Vrraca, daughter to D. Fernand Gonsales Earle of Castille, his wife repudiated.
D. Eluira his second wife, by whom he had

D. Bermond.



XIX.
D. Sancho, brother to D. Ordogno, in the yeare 929: hee raigned 12 yeares, the first of
that name, and was surnamed the Grosse.
D. Theresia his wife, of whom was borne

D. Ramir.



XX.
D. Ramir third of that name, sonne to D. Sancho, in the yeare 941, he raigned 24 yeares.
D. Vrraca his wife, by whom he had no children.


XXI.
D. Bermond second of that name, sonne to king D. Ordogno the third, in the yeare 965:
he raigned 17 yeares.

D. Velasquita his wife, of whom came.
D. Christina married
to D. Ordogno the
blind, and had issue
D. Alphonso.D. Ordogno.D. Pelagius.D. Adoncia, who was wife
to D. Pelagius the Deacon
aboue named, and
had by him
D. Pedro Ordogno.D. Pelagius.D. Nugno.D. Theresia.
D. Eluira 2 wife, mother to
D. Alphonso.D. Theresia, a Nun.
Of two sisters Concubines, he had
D. Ordogno by the one:D. Eluira by the other.



XXII.
D. Alphonso fifth of that name, sonne to king Bermond, in the yeare 982: he raigned 46
yeares.
D. Eluira daughter to D. Melendo Gonsales his wife.

Lawfull children
D. Bermond.
D. Sancha married to D. Ferdinand first king of Castille.



XXIII.
D. Bermond third of that name, sonne to D. Alphonso the fift, in the yeare 1028: he raigned
9 yeares.
D. Theresia his wife, daughter to Sancho Earle of Castille, who brought him

D. Alphonso, who died an infant.



XXIIII.
D. Sancha heire to the realme, sister to D. Bermond, was maried to king
Ferdinand the first of Castille, and 24 of Leon, in the yeare 1037: he raigned 30 yeres.


Children after she came to the
succession of Leon
D. Vrraca.
D. Sancho king of Castille.
D. Eluira.


Children after shee came to
the Crowne
D. Alphonso king of Leon.
D. Garcia.



XXV.
D. Alphonso sixt of that name, son to D. Sancha, in the yeare 1067: he raigned 41 yeares
in Leon, and came to the crowne of Castille: he had many children by many wiues, specified
in the line of Castille, and among others,
D. Constance his fourth wife, a Spaniard, brought him

D. Vrraca, who was Queene of Leon and Castille, married first to D. Raymond
of Burgondie, of whom (...) D. Alphonso Raymond, king.



XXVI.
D. Vrraca had to her second husband, D. Alphonso king of Nauarre and Arragon, numbred
for the seuenth of that name among the kings of Leon, in the yeare 1108: they had
not any children.


XXVII.
D. Alphonso Raymond eighth of that name, sonne to D. Raymond of Burgondie, Earle of
Galicia: he raigned in the place of D. Vrraca his mother 35 yeares, in the yeare 1122.
D. Berenguela daughter to D. Raymond Arnold Earle of Barcelone, by whom among other
children named in the line of Castille, he had

D Ferdinand his second sonne, king of Leon.



XXVIII.
D. Ferdinand, second of that name, and second sonne to king D. Alphonso the eighth, in
the yeare 1157: he raigned 31 yeares.
D. Vrraca of Portugal, his first wife.

D. Alphonso.

D. Theresia his second wife, of the house of Lara.
D. Vrraca Lopes his third wife, mother to

D. Sancho Fernandes.
D. Garcia.



XXIX.
D. Alphonso ninth of that name, sonne to D. Ferdinand the second, in the yeare 1188:
he raigned 42 yeares.
D. Theresia of Portugall his first wife.

Lawfull children
D. Ferdinand.
D. Sancha.
D. Dolce.

D. Berenguela Infanta of Castille, his second wife, mother to

Lawfull children
D. Ferdinand, king.
D. Alphonso, Lord of Molina.
D. Constance, a Nunne.
D. Berenguela, Countesse of Brenne, and Queene of
Ierusalem.

Of a Concubine whose name is vnknowne,

D. Roderigo Alphonso of Leon.



XXX.
D. Ferdinand the third he raigned at Leon after his father D. Alphonso the ninth, but
he first seized vpon the crowne of Castille, by the diligence of D. Berenguela his mother:
in him the two realmes were vnited, and neuermore diuided, in the yeare, 1230.
D. Beatrix daughter to the Emperour Philip: their posteritie is in the line of Castille.




Line of Castitle^
D. Nugno Fernandes Earle of Castille, vnder the Soueraigntie of Leon, father or grandfather
to

D. Ximena maried to D. Gonsall Iuste.

D. Diego Porcello Earle also, or gouernour of Castille vnder the same Soueraigntie.

D. Sulla maried to D. Nugno Bellides.

These two gouernours were slaine by king Ordogno the second of Leon, in the prison
of Leon.
D. Nugno Bellides Earle of Castille.
D. Sulla daughter to Diego Porcello his wife.

Lawfull children.
D. Nugno Rasure.
D. Iuste Gonsales.

D. Nugno Rasure father to

D. Gonsal Nugnes.
D. Eluira or Theresa Nugn^s, surnamed the Faire.

D. Flauin Caluo husband to Eluira, whence comes the race of Cid Ruy Dias.
These gouerned the countrie of Castille, in qualitie of Iudges: after that it was drawn
from the obedience of the kings of Leon, during the raigne of D. Froila the second, about
the yeare 896.
D. Gonsall Nugnes sonne to D. Nugno Rasure, sole gouernour of Castille.
D. Ximena daughter or grandchild to D. Nugno Fernandes, whom wee set in the first
place in this Line, mother to

D. Fernand Gonsales their sonne.


First Soueraigne Earle.
D. Fernand Gonsales first Earle proprietarie of Castille, in the yeare 910: he gouerned
32 yeares.
D. Vrraca, his first first wife, mother to

D. Vrraca.

D. Sancha Infanta of Nauarre, second wife to D. Fernand, daughter to D. Sancho Abarca.

Children
D. Gonsal Fernandes.
D. Sancho Fernandes.
D. Garci Fernandes.
D. Pedro father to two sonnes,
D. Gonsal Nugnes.D. Fernandes Gonsales.
D. Baldwin.

It is doubtfull by which of his wiues he had these fiue sonnes.


II.
D. Garci Fernandes the third sonne to D. Fernand Gonsales, in the yeare 942: hee held
the Earldome 48 yeares.
D. Argentina his first wife, a French woman.
D. Sancha, Ogna, or Abba, his second wife, mother to

Children
D. Garci Roland.
D. Sancho Garcia.
D. Vrraca a Nun.



III.
D. Sancho Garcia the second sonne to D. Garci Fernandes, in the yeare 990: he gouerned
Castille 38 yeares.
D. Vrraca his wife, mother to

Children
D. Garcia.
D. Nugna Queene of Nauarre.
D. Theresia Queene of Leon.
D. Tigrida a Nunne.




IIII.
D. Garcia second of that name, slaine at Leon before he was maried, so as the Earldome
fell to his sister.
D. Nugna Queene of Nauarre by the right of proximitie.


V.
D. Nugna sister to D. Garcia, maried to the king.
D. Sancho, fourth of that name of Nauarre, in the yeare 1028, they held the Earldome
sixe yeares, then they gaue it to D. Fernand their second sonne, with the title of a King.

D. Fernand, second sonne.

The other children of this mariage are named in the line of Nauarre.


First King of Castille.
D. Fernand, second sonne of D. Sancho, fourth of that name of Nauarre, had Castille for
his portion, with the title of a king, being the inheritance of his mother D. Nugna: in the
yeare 1034 he vnited Leon vnto it, by his wife D. Sancha, and raigned 32 yeares.
D. Sancha sister to D. Bermund, third king of Leon, mother, among other children, to

D. Sancho Fernandes.
D. Alphonso.

Their other children are named in the line of Leon.


II.
D. Sancho Fernandes, whom we will call the second of that name, in regard of the Earle
D. Sancho Garcia, in the yeare 1067: he raigned 6 yeares, died without children, and left
his realme to his brother D. Alphonso king of Leon.


III.
D. Alphonso brother to D. Sancho, first of that name in Castille, and sixt in Leon, in the
yeare 1073: he raigned 34 yeares 8 moneths.
D. Ines or Agnes first wife to D. Alphonso a Spaniard.
D. Constance, second wife, a Spaniard, and mother to

D. Vrraca Queene of Castille maried to D. Raimond
of Burgondie first, by whom shee had
D. Sancha.
D. Alphonso Raymond.

D. Maria otherwise called Caida, a Moore, third wife to D. Alphonso, mother to

D. Sancho.

D. Berthe fourth wife, an Italian.
D. Isabell, fift, a Spaniard, mother to

D. Sancha.
D. Eluira Queene of Naples.

D. Beatrix a French woman, sixt wife to D. Alphonso.
By D. Ximena Nugnes de Guzman a Concubine, he had

D. Eluira, Countesse of Tolousa.

Of another Concubine whose name is not knowne,

D. Theresa, first Countesse of Portugall.



IIII.
D. Vrraca beeing the eldest, widow to D. Raymond Earle of Burgondie, was hereditarie
Queene of Castille and Leon, shee tooke to her second husband, D. Alphonso king of Nauarre
and Arragon, first of that name, from whom beeing diuorced, and liuing loosely in
her countrie, the Estates did choose D. Alphonso Raymond her sonne for their king, during
her life: yet we will set her in the fourth place.
D. Alphonso husband to D. Vrraca, fourth king of Castille, in the yeare 1108, where hee
raigned eight yeares.


V.
D. Alphonso Raymond, sonne to Raymond of Burgondie, and to D. Vrraca, in the yere 1122,
he raigned 35 yeares, and is numbred for the third of that name.

D. Berenguela, daughter to the Earle of Barcelone called D. Raymond Arnold, his wife,
mother to

D. Sancho king of Castille.
D. Fernand king of Leon.
D. Isabel or Constance Queene of France.
D. Sancha or Beacia Queene of Nauarre.
D. Garcia.

D. Rica 2 wife to D. Alphonso Raymond, aunt to the Emperour Frederic 1, mother to

D. Sancha Queene of Arragon.

D. Marie a concubine, mother to

D. Estiennette, wife to D. Fernand Roderigo el Castellan, whose sonne D. Pedro
Fernandes de Castro was.

D. Goutrude sister to Diego Apricio, a concubine also, mother to

D. Vrraca Queene of Nauarre.



VI.
D. Sancho* sonne to D. Alphonso Raymond, in the yeare 1157: he raigned two yeares, the
fourth of that name.
D. Blanche of Nauarre his wife.

D. Alphonso their sonne.



VII.
D. Alphonso sonne to D. Sancho 4 of that name, in the yeare 1159: he raigned 55 yeres*
D. Leonora daughter to Henrie the second king of England.

Children
D. Blanche Queene of France.
D. Berenguela Queene of Leon.
D. Sancho died an infant.
D. Vrraca Queene of Portugall.
D. Fernand died young.
D. Malfade died a virgin.
D. Constance a Nunne.
D. Leonora Queene of Arragon.
D. Henrie King of Castille.
Two daughters which died in their infancies.



VIII.
D. Henrie first of that name, sonne to D. Alphonso 4, in the yeare 1214: he raigned about
three yeares.
D. Malfada of Portugall his wife.
The king D. Henrie beeing dead without children, his sister D. Berenguela second
daughter to king D. Alphonso seized vpon the realme of Castille, to the preiudice of D.
Blanche mother to Saint Lewis king of France, who was the elder, and there setled D. Fernand
sonne to her, and to D. Alphonso ninth king of Leon.


IX.
D. Ferdinand third of that name, sonne to D. Alphonso ninth king of Leon, and to D. Berenguela
of Castille, obtained the realme of Castille, to the preiudice of Queene Blanche,
mother to Saint Lewis, in the yeare 1217, and raigned 35 yeares.
D. Beatrix daughter to the Emperour Philip, of whom was borne

Lawfull children
D. Alphonso.
D. Frederic.
D. Ferdinand.
D. Henrie.
D. Philip.
D. Sancho.
D. Emanuel.
D. Leonora not maried.
D. Berenguela a Nun.


By (...) or Adella as some write, of the house of Poictiers, his second wife, he had

Lawfull children
D. Ferdinand.
D. Lewis.
D. Leonora.

In this King the two Realmes of Leon and Castille were vnited, and were no more
diuided.


X. King of Castille. 31. of Leon.
D. ALFONSO sonne to D. Ferdinand 3, numbred for the 5 of that name, and 10 in
Leon: but they that joyne these two Lines, accompt him the 11, adding his great grandfather
Alfonso 4 of Castille, who had no interest in Leon.
D. Violant of Arragon his wife, by whom he had

Children
D. Ferdinand called
de la Cerde,
who marryed D
Blanche daughter
to ^. Lewis of
France, and had
D. Alfonso who marryed
the Ladie of Lunet, named
M^lf^da, daughter
to the Vicont of Narbone.
D. Lewis Earle of Clermont
husband to D. Leonora
de Guzman.--D. Iohn Constable of
France, named by some
Charles.
D. Lewis earl of Clermo^^D. Iohn de la Cerde.D. Isabell wife to Bernard
de Foix, base, the
stemme of the house of
Medina Celi.D. Fernand, who had
to wife D. I^ane de lara,
and had one daughter D. Blanche married to D. Iohn Manuell father to D.
Ioane Queene of Castille, wife to D. Henry the Bastard.D. Iohn called de Lara, heire to his mother.
D. Sancho 2. sonne
D. Pedro 3. sonne
D. Iohn 4. sonne to
D. Alfonso the
wi^e, who married D. Maria Lopes Dia^, heire of Biscaie, and had D. Iohn the blind, father
to one Daughter marryed to D. Iohn Nugnes de Lara.
D. Iames 5. sonne.
D. Berenguela.
D. Beatrix.
D. Isabell.
D. Leonora.

D. Maior de Gazman a Concubine, mother to

D. Beatrix Queene of Portugall.



XI. King of Castille. 32. of Leon.
D. SANCHO second sonne to the King D. Alphonso, seized vpon the realme in his fathers
life time, to frustrat the children of his elder brother D. Ferdinand deceased in the yeare 1284, and raigned about 11 yeares: wee number him for the 4 of that name in Castille.
D. MARIA of Castille, daughter to D. Alphonso Lord of Molina, his wife.

Lawfull children
D. Isabella Duchesse of Britaine.
D. Ferdinand.
D. Alphonso or Philip.
D. Henry.
D. Pedro.
D. Beatrix.



XII. King of Castille. 33. of Leon.
D. FERDINAND sonne to D. Sancho the 4 of that name, in the yeare 1295: hee
raigned 17 yeares.
D. Constance of Portugall his wife.

Children
D. Alphonso.
D. Leonora.




XIII. King of Castille. 34. of Leon.
D. Alfonso 11 of that name, sonne to D. Ferdinand in the yeare 1312: he raigned 38
yeares.
D. Maria of Portugall his wife.

Lawfull children
D. Ferdinand, died in his infancie.
D. Pedro King.

By Leonora de Guzman a Concubine he had

Bastards
D. Pedro.
D. Sancho.
Twins.
D. HenryD. FredericD. Ferdinand.D. Tello.D. Iohn.D. Ioane, who was wife to Ferdinand de Castro.



XIIII. King of Castille. 35. of Leon.
D. Pedro the cruell, in the yeare 1350: he was lawfull sonne to D. Alfonso, or as some
hold, supposed by the Queene D. Maria, who was iealous of the fruitfulnesse of D.
Leonora de Guzman: he raigned tirannously 18 yeares.
D. Blanche of Bourbon his wife.
D. Maria de Padille his Concubine.

Bastards
D. Beatrix.
D. Constance Duchesse of Lancaster.
D. Alfonso.
D. Isabell Countesse of Cambridge.

D. Ioane de Castro, whom he married in the life of Queene Blanche, mother to D. Iohn.
D. Isabella an other Concubine, mother to

Bastards
D. Sancho.
D. Diego.

D. Theresa of Ayala, vpon promise of marriage, brought him D. Maria.


XV. King of Castille. 36. of Leon.
D. Henry 2 of that name, base sonne to Alfonso 11: beeing persecuted by the king D.
Pedro, he had recourse vnto the French, by whose ayde he conquered the Realme of
Castille, and slew the king D. Pedro in the yeare 1368, and raigned 11 yeares.
D. Ioane Manuell his wife, mother to

Lawfull children
D. Iohn king of Castille.
D. Leonora Queene of Nauarre.

D. Leonora Ponce, some call her Beatrix, a Concubine: by her he had

D. Frederic duke of Benauent.

D. Eluira Inigues an other Concubine, mother to

D. Ioane marryed to D. Alfonso sonne to the Marquesse of Villena.

Of vncertaine mothers were borne

D. Alfonso Earle of Gijon.
An other daughter married to D. Pedro sonne to the
marquesse of Villena.



XVI. King of Castille. 37. of Leon.
D. Iohn 1 of that name, sonne to D. Henry the second, in the yeare 1379: hee raigned
11 yeares.
D. Leonora of Arragon his wife, mother to

Lawfull children
D. Henry.
D. Ferdinand.
A daughter which died yong.

D. Beatrix of Portugall, his second wife.



XVII. King of Castille. 38 of Leon.
D. HENRY third of that name, sonne to D. Iohn the first, in the yere 1390: he raigned
16 yeares.
D. KATHERINE of Lancaster his wife.

Lawfull children
D. Marie, Queene of Arragon.
D. Iohn, King of Castille.
D. Katherine.



XVIII. King of Castille. 39 of Leon.
D. IOHN sonne to D. Henry the third, in the yeare 1406: he raigned 48 yeares.
D. MARIA of Arragon, daughter to D. Ferdinand his vncle, his wife.

Lawfull children
D. Katherina, died yong.
D. Leonora.
D. Henry king of Castille.

D. ISABELL of Portugall his second wife, daughter to the infant D. Iohn, Master of
S. Iames.

D. Isabell, Queene of Castille.
D. Alphonso.



XIX. King of Castille. 40 of Leon.
D. HENRY fourth of that name, called the vnable, in the yeare 1454: he raigned 21
yeares.
D. BLANCHE of Nauarre, daughter to the king D. Iohn, his first wife, put away.
D. IOANS of Portugall his second wife, mother to

D. Ioane, a supposed child.



XX. King of Castille. 41 of Leon.
D. ISABELL of Castille, sister to king Henry the fourth, was Queene of Castille, as next
of the bloud, and lawfull, she married with
D. FERDINAND, Prince of Arragon, King of Sicile: they began to raigne in the
yere 1474, and had

Lawfull children
D. Isabell, Queene of Portugall, mother to D. Michel,
who had beene heire to all the realmes of Spaine, if
he had liued.
D. Iohn, who died yong.
D. Ioane Queene hei^e.
D. Maria Queene of Portugall.
D. Katherine.



XXI. King of Castille. 42 of Leon.
D. IOANE, daughter to the Queene D. Isabell, and D. Ferdinand her husband: she was
married to the Archduke
D. PHILIP of Austria: they succeeded to the Realmes of Castille and Leon, in the
yeare 1504, and raigned together two yeares, they had

Lawfull children
D. Leonora Queene of Portugall and of France.
D. Charles King and Emperour.
D. Isabell Queene of Denmarke.
D. Ferdinand Emperor.
D. Marie.
D. Katherine.



XXII. King of Castille. 43 of Leon.
D. CHARLES by the decease of his father D. Philip, succeeded to the right of the
Crowne of Castille, vnder the gouernment of the King D. Ferdinand his grandfather,

after whose death hee tooke vpon him the gouernment of the realme, by reason of
the incapacitie of the Queene D. Ioane his mother, in the yere 1516: hee raigned 42
yeres in Castille, Arragon and Nauarre.
D. ISABELL daughter to King Emanuell of Portugall his wife.

Lawfull children
D. Philip king.
D. Marie Empresse.
D. Ioane married to the Prince of Portugall.
D. Ferdinand who died yong.

By Concubines he had

Bastards
D. Marguerite duchesse of Florence, and Parma.
D. Iohn d'Austria.



XXIII. King of Castille. 44 of Leon.
D. PHILIP, 2 sonne to the Emperour Charles 5, in the yeare 1558: he raigned fortie
yeares.
D. MARIE of Portugall his first wife, mother to
D. Charles.
D. MARIE Queene of England, died without children.
D. ISABELL of France his 3 wife, mother to

D. Isabella Clara E^genia.
D. Catherina.

D. ANNA of Austria his 4 wife, by whom he had

Lawfull children
D. Charles.
D. Laurens, some say Fernand.
D. Diego, or Iames.
D. Philip.
D. N. a daughter.



XXIIII. King of Castille. 45 of Leon.
D. PHILIP 3 now raigning, sonne to Philip 2, in the yeare 1598.
D. MARGVERITE of Austria daughter to the Archduke Ferdinand of Gratz, his
wife.



Line of Nauarre.

First King in Sobrabre and Nauarre.
D. GARCIA Ximenes in the yeare 716: he raigned 42 yeares.
INIGA his wife, mother to

Garcia Inigo.



II.
D. GARCIA INIGO, second of that name, in the yeare 758: he raigned 44 yeres:
the name of his wife is vnkowne.

D. Fortun Garces his sonne.



III.
D. FORTVN GARCES, sonne to D. Garcia Inigo, in the yeare 802: he raigned 13
yeares.
D. THEVDA of Arragon daughter to D. Galinde.

D. Sancho Garces.



IIII.
D. SANCHO GARCES, first of that name, sonne to D. Fortun, in the yeare 815: hee
raigned 17 years.
The name of his wife is not found.

D. Ximen Inigo, it may be their sonne.




V.
D. XIMEN INIGO, in the yeare 832: he raigned 8 yeres.
D. NVGNA his wife.

D. Inigo Arista.



VI.
D. INIGO ARISTA, in the yeare 840: he raigned 27 yeres some hold that hee was
not sonne to D. Ximen, but issued from the Lords of Bigorre, and elected.
D. THEVDA, daughter to Zeno Earle of Biscaie.

D. Garcia Inigo.



VII.
D. GARCIA INIGO, third of that name, sonne to D. Inigo Arista, in the yeare
867: he raigned 18 yeares.
D. VRRACA, heire of Arragon, his wife.

Children
D. Fortun.
D. Sancho Abarca.
D. Sancha Queene of Leon.



VIII.
D. FORTVN, in the yere 885: hee raigned 6 yeres in Nauarre and Arragon, which
was a small thing then, and vnder the soueraigntie of Nauarre. This king made himselfe
a Monke, and left the realme to his brother.


IX.
D. SANCHO ABARCA, 2 of that name, in the yeare 901: raigned 19 yeres.
D. TODA, or THEVDA his wife.

Children
D. Garcia Sanches.
D. Vrraca Xemenes, Queene of Leon.
D. Marie Countesse of Barcelona
D. Theresia Queene of Leon.
D. Sancha Countesse of Castille.
D. Blanche married to the Lord of Biscaie.

Some hold this King had 3 sonnes more,

D. Ramir.
D. Gonsal.
D. Ferdinand.



X.
D. GARCIA SANCHES, 4. of that name, sonne to D. SanchO Abarca, in the yeare
920: he raigned 49 yeres.
THERESIA his wife.

Children
D. Sancho Garces.
D. Ramir.
D. Vrraca.
D. Ermesilde.
D. Ximena.



XI.
D. SANCHO GARCES, third of that name, sonne to D. Garcia Sanches, in the yeare
969: he raigned 24 yeares.
D. VRRACA his wife.

Children
D. Garcia.
D. Ramir father to
D. Sancho.D. Garcia.
D. Gonsal.



XII.
D. GARCIA the shaking, sonne to D. Sancho Garces 5. of that name, in the yere 993:
he raigned 7 yeres or thereabouts.

D. XIMENA his wife.

D. Sancho their sonne.



XIII.
D. SANCHO, 4 of that name, sonne to D. Garcia the trembling, in the yeare 1000: hee
raigned 34 yeres.
D. NVGNA daughter to D. Sancho Earle of Castille, which by some is called D. Maior
heire of Castille.

Children
D. Garcia King of Nauarre.
D. Ferdinand king of Castille.
D. Gonsal king of Sobrarbre and Ribagorsa.

Of D. Caya the Ladie of Ayuar, a Concubine

D. Ramir King of Arragon.



XIIII.
D. GARCIA, 6 of that name, sonne to D. Sancho 4, in the yere 1034: he raigned 20
yeres.
D. ETTIENETT^ a French woman; of the house of Cartassone, and of Beziers, his
wife.

Children
D. Sancho Garcia King.
D. Ramir.
D. Ferdinand.
D. Raymond.
D. Ermesilde.
D. Zimena.
D. Maior.
D. Vrraca, or Ogned^.



XV.
D. SANCHO GARCIA, 5 of that name, sonne to D. Garci^, in the yere 1054: hee
raigned 22 yeres.
D. PLAISANCE his wife.

D. Ramir Sanches of D. Eluira
daughter to Cid R^y Dias had
D. Garcia Ramires, who
raigned.D. Sancho Ramires.D. Eluira.
D. Garcia the elder.
D. Garcia the second.

These children did not succeed.


XVI.
D. SANCHO RAMIRES, who was 2 king of Arragon seazed vpon the realme of
Nauarre, and is nombred for the ^ of that name, in the yere 1076: he raigned 18 yeres.
D. FELI^E, daughter to the Earle of Vrgel, his wife, mother among other children
named in the Line of Arragon, to

Children
D. Pedro.
who were kings of Nauarre and Arragon.
D. Alfonso.
D. Ramir a Monke.



XVII.
D. PEDRO, 1 of that name, sonne to D. Sancho Ramires, in the yere 1094: he raigned
10 yeres 3 moneths.
D. BERTH^ or INES of Tuscaine his wife.

D. Pedro, died an infant.
D. Isabell, died also before the father.



XVIII.

D. A^Fonso, brother to D. Pedro 1 of that name, vnited all the Christian realms


of Spaine together by his marriage with D Yrraca heire of Castille and Leon, he came
to the Crowne of Nauarre, in the yere 1104, and raigned 30 yeres.
D. VRRACA, daughter to Alfonso 6 of Leon and Castille, his wife, by whom he
had not any children.


XIX.
D. GARCIA RAMIRES, 7 of that name, sonne to D. Ramir Sanches, and grand-child
to D. Sancho Garcia, 5 of that name, he was chosen by the Estates, in the yere 1134, and
raigned 16 yeres.
D. MERGELINA or MARGVERITE, as some say, daughter to Rotron Earle of
Perche, his wife.

Children
D. Blanche.
D. Sancho king.
D. Alfonso Ramires.
D. Marguerite Queene of Naples.

D. VERACA, base daughter to D. Alfonso, 8 king of Leon and Castille, his second
wife, mother to

D. Sancha Vicontesse of Bearn, and then wife to D. Pedro de
Molina, of which second marriage came Americ Vicont of Naborna,
for D. Pedro his father was sonne to Ermisenda Vicountesse
of Naborna.



XX.
D. SANCHO, 7 of that name, called the wife, sonne to D. Garcia Ramires, in the
yere 1150: he raigned 46 yeres.
D. BEACIA or BEATRIX, or as some say D. Sancha, daughter to D. Alfonso Raymond,
king of Castille and Leon, his wife, by whom he had

Children
D. Sancho King of Nauarr^.
D. Ferdinand.
D. Ramir Bishop of Pampelone.
D. Berenguela Queene of England.
D. Thersa, or Constance.
D. Blanche Countesse of Champaigne and Brie.



XXI.
D. SANCHO, 8 of that name, called the strong, sonne to Sancho 7, in the yere 1194:
he raigned 40 yeres.
D. CLEMENCE, daughter to Raymond, 4 Earle of Tolousa, his wife

D. Ferdinand, who died before the father.

Of a Concubine whose name is vnknowne, this king had

William a bastard.

By the death of the king, the Crowne of Nauarre past into the house of Champaigne,
D. Blanche his sister, wife to Cont Thibaud, remayning sole of the race, hauing issue.


XXII.
D. THIBAVD, 1 of that name, sonne to D. Blanche of Nauarre, succeeded his vncle
D. Sancho 8, in the yere 1234* and raigned 19* yeres.
His first wife was of Metz.
The 2, was daughter to Guichard Earle of Beausieu, and had

D. Blanche Duchesse of Britaine.

The third wife, was daughter to Archembaud, Earle of Foix, named Marguerite mother
to

Children
D. Thibaud.
D. Henry.
D. Leonora.
D. Pedro.




XXIII.
D. THIBAVD, second of that name, sonne to the first, in the ye^r 1253: he raigned 18
yeres.
D. ISABELL of France, daughter to S. Lewis, by whom he had not any children.
D. Marquise Lope de Rada ^ Concubine, brought him

D. Marquise a bastard, who was wife to Pedro Fernandes of Ixar,
base sonne to D. Iames the first, King of Arragon.



XXIIII.
D. HENRY, brother to Thibaud the second, in the yeare 1271: he raigned three yeres,
the first of that name.
D. IOANE, daughter to Robert Earle of Artois.

Children
D. Thibaud, died an infant.
D. Ioane Queene.

By a Concubine of the house of Lacarra, he had

D. Henry, bastard, Marshall of Nauarre.



XXV.
D. IOANE, sole daughter to D. Henry the first, married to Philip the faire, king of France,
and raigned in Nauarre, in the yere 1274, the space of 31 yeres: of which mariage issued

Children
D. Lewis Hutin.
D. Philip the long.
D. Charles the faire.
D. Ioane.
D. Isabell Queene of England.



XXVI.
D. LEVVIS HVTIN, King of France and Nauarre, first of that name, in the yere 1305:
he raigned 10 yeres in Nauarre.
D. MARGVERITE daughter to Robert of Burgundie.

D. Ioane of Nauarre.

His second wife was Clemence, daughter to the King of Hungarie.

D. Iohn an after-birth, who liued but eight dayes.



XXVII.
D. PHILIP the long, king of France and Nauarre, second of that name, in the yere 1315:
he raigned fiue yeres.
D. IOANE daughter to Othelin Earle of Burgundie.

Children
D. Ioane Duchesse of Burgundie.
D. Marguerite Countesse of Nemours.
D. Marie, wife to the Daulphin Himbert.
D. Blanche, a religious woman.



XXVIII.
D. CHARLES the faire, first of that name, king of Nauarre and France, in the yere 1320:
he raigned about eight yeres.
D. BLANCHE, daughter to Othelin Earle of Burgundie, his first wife.
D. MARIE of Luxembourg his second wife, mother to

D. Blanche Duchesse of Orleans.
A sonne, which died in his infancie.

D. IOANE, daughter to Lewis Earle of Eureux, by whom (some say) D. Blanche was
borne.


XXIX.
D. IOANE, daughter to King Lewis Hutin, heire of Nauarre, in the yere 1328: she raigned
with her husband 21 yeres.

D. PHILIP Earle of Eureux, husband to D. Ioane, the third of that name, among the
kings of Nauarre: of which marriage descended

Children
D. Charles king.
D. Philip Earle of Longueuille.
D. Lewis Earle of
Beaumont.
This D. Lewis married the heire of the house of
Beaumont le Roger in Normandie, and were the
stemme of the Earles of Lerin.
D. Ioane Countesse of Rohan.
D. Marie Queene of Arragon.
D. Blanche Queene of France.
D. Agnes Countesse of Foix.



XXX.
D. CHARLES second of that name, sonne to D. Philip the third, in the yeare 1349: he
raigned in Nauarre 37 yeares, and was surnamed the bad.
D. IOANE of France, daughter to king Iohn, his wife: of which marriage descended
these following.

Lawfull children
D. Charles King.
D. Philip died yong.
D. Pedro Earle of Mortaing, from whom descended D. Pedro of Peralta,
Constable of Nauarre, the stemme of the Marquesse of Falses.
D. Blanche.
D. Ioane, Duchesse of Britaine, and Queene of England.
D. Marie Countesse of Denia: it is doubtfull whether she were
daughter to this Queene.


D. Leon or Lionell a bastard, the beginning of the Marquesse of Cortes,
Marshals of Nauarre.



XXXI.
D. CHARLES third of that name, sonne to Charles the second, in the yeare 1386: he
raigned 39 yeares.
D. LEONORA of Castille his wife.

Children
D. Ioane Countesse of Foix.
D. Marie.
D. Blanche Queene of Sicile and Nauarre.
D. Beatrix Countesse of Marche.
D. Isabell.
D. Charles.
D. Lewis.

By a Concubine whose name is vnknowne.

Bastards
D. Godefray Earle of Cortes.
D. Ioane maried to D. Inigod Ortis of Estuniga.



XXXII.
D. BLANCHE, daughter to D. Charles the third, had to her second husband D. Iohn of
Arragon, and began to raigne in the yere 1425, and lasted 17 yeres: then after her decease
D. IOHN, who was king of Arragon and Sicile, continued his raigne vnto the yere 1479,
who had by D. Blanche

Children
D. Charles.
D. Blanche Queene of Castille.
D. Leonora, Countesse of Foix, and afterwards Queene of Nauarre.

This King Iohn had a second wife, and other issue which is set downe in the Line of
Arragon.


XXXIII.
D. LEONORA, Countesse of Foix, wife to Gaston the fourth, came to the Crowne of
Nauarre, suruiuing her brother and sister, in the yere 1479, and died the same yere.

D. GASTON Earle of Foix, called Prince of Viana, husband to D. Leonora, by who*
he had

Children
D. Gaston, of whom and of Marguerite
of France descended
D. Iohn, Vicount of Narbona.
D. Pedro, Cardinall.
D. Iames.
D. Marie, Marquesse of Montferrat.
D. Ioane, Countesse of Armaignac.
D. Marguerite, Duchesse of Britanie.
D. Katherine, Countesse of Candalle.
D. Leonora died a maid.
Francis and
Katherine.



XXXIIII.
D. FRANCIS, sonne to Gaston, surnamed Phebus, and grandchild to D. Leonora, his father
being dead before her decease, he succeeded her in the realme of Nauarre, in the yere
1479, and raigned foure yeares: he died without any children.


XXXV.
D. KATHERINE, sister to Francis Phebus, raigned after her brother in the yeare 1483:
she married with
D. IOHN of Albret: of which marriage issued

Children
D. Iohn.
D. Andrew.
D. Henry king of Nauarre.
D. Charles, or rather Francis, who died at Naples in Monsieur
de Lautrecs voyage.
D. Katherine.
D. Anne.
D. Quiterie.
D. Magdelaine.
D. Isabell.
And fiue other children which died young.

During the time and raigne of these Kings, D. Iohn of Albret and D. Katherine,
D. Ferdinand and D. Isabella his wife, kings of Castille and Arragon, seized on the
realme of Nauarre beyond the Pyrenees, and joyned it to Castille.


XXXVI.
HENRY, the second, of Albret, successor to the rights of Nauarre, second of that name,
in the yere 1517.
MARGVERITE of France, sister to king Francis the first, his wife.

Ioane, whom Bertrand Helie calls Charlotte.



XXXVII.
IOANE, daughter to Henry the second, succeeded in her fathers rights, married to
ANTHONIE, Duke of Vendosme, of the noble house of Bourbon.

Henry.
Katherine.



XXXVIII.
HENRY the third of that name in Nauarre, and the fourth in France, in the yere 1572,
and raigned 38 yeares.
MARGVERITE of Valois, from whom he was diuorced, hauing no children.
MARIE de Medicis, daughter to the duke of Florence, his second wife, by whom he had

Lewis, with diuers other children.



XXXIX.
LEVVIS now raigning, the second of that name in Nauarre, and the thirteenth in
France: he succeeded to his fathers rights in the yere 1610.




Line of Arragon.

I.
There is mention made about the yeare 775, of Aznar the sonne of Aznar, and grand-child
to Ende, Duke of Aquitaine, who had two sonnes.

Galinde and
Ximenes Garces.



II.
D. Galinde obtained some lands of the Soueraigntie of Nauarre, and had his dwelling
and seat at Iaca: This was the beginning of Arragon.

D. Theuda, who was Queene of Nauarre.
D. Ximen Aznares.
D. Endregot.



III.
D. Ximen Aznares, sonne to D. Galinde, the third Earle of Arragon.


IIII.
D. Ximen Garces, brother to D. Galinde, fourth Earle of Arragon, in the yeare 803.

D. Garcia Aznares his sonne.



V.
D. Garcia Aznares, sonne to D. Ximen Garces, fift Earle of Arragon.

D. Fortun Ximenes his sonne.



VI.
D. Fortun Ximenes, sixt Earle of Arragon.
D. Vrraca, as some say daughter to this D. Fortun, and others to Endregot aboue named,
vnited the Earledome of Arragon to the Crowne of Nauarre, bringing it in dowrie
to the King D. Garcia Inigo, second of that name.


VII.
D. Garcia Inigo king of Nauarre, and seuenth Earle of Arragon, in the yeare 867.
D. Vrraca aboue named, his wife.

D. Fortun their eldest sonne: the rest are named in the Line
of Nauarre.



VIII.
D. Fortun king of Nauarre, second of that name, and eight Earle of Arragon, in the
yeare 885.


IX.
D. Sancho Abarca king of Nauarre, and ninth Earle of Arragon, brother to D. Fortun,
in the yeare 901.


X.
D. Garci Sanches, sonne to D. Sancho Abarca, king of Nauarre, and tenth Earle of Arragon,
in the yeare 920.


XI.
D. Sancho Garces, sonne to D. Garci Sanches, eleuenth Earle of Arragon raigning in
Nauarre, in the yeare 969.


XII.
D. Garcia the shaking, sonne to D. Sancho Garces, king of Nauarre, and twelfth Earle
of Arragon, in the yeare 993.


XIII.
D. Sancho the Great, sonne to D. Garcia the shaking, thirteenth Earle of Arragon, in
the yeare 1000. This king of Nauarre erected the Countie of Arragon to a Realme, and
gaue it to his base sonne D. Ramir, as appeares by the discourse by the Historie.




First King of Arragon.

D. RAMIR, first of that name, sonne to D. Sancho the great, king of Nauarre, was the
first king of Arragon, in the yeare 1034: and raigned 42 yeares.
D. ERMISENDE, daughter to the Earle of Bigorre, by some named Guberge, his wife.

Children
D. Sancho Ramires.
D. Garcia Bishop of Iaca.
D. Sancha Countesse of Tolousa.
D. Theresa Countesse of Prouence.


He had by a concubine
D. Sancho Lord of Ayuar, Atares, and Xauierre.



II.
D. SANCHO RAMIRES, king of Arragon, in the yeare 1076: he raigned 18 yeares, and
vsurped the realme of Nauarre.
D. FELICE daughter to the earle of Vrgel, his wife.

Children
D. Pedro king.
D. Alphonso king.
D. Ramir a Monke, and then a king.

By a concubine, whose name is not extant,

D. Garcia, Bishop of Iacca.



III.
D. PEDRO, first of that name, sonne to D. Sancho Ramires, in the yere 1094: he raigned
14 yeres.
D. BERTHE, or IGNES, his wife, an Italian.

They died both before the father.
D. Pedro
D. Isabell



IIII.
D. ALPHONSO first of that name, brother to D. Pedro, in the yeare 1108, and raigned
26 yeares: he married D. Vrraca the heire of Castille, and died without children: after
him Nauarre was separated from Arragon.


V.
D. RAMIR a Monke, sonne to D. Sancho Ramires, and brother to the last kings, was
king of Arragon, in the yeare 1134, by election of the Estates: his raigne was vncertaine:
for hauing for the most part led a Monkish life, he gaue ouer the gouernment of
the realme vnto his sonne in law, D. Raymond Berenger Earle of Barcelona.
D. AGNES sister, or daughter, as some hold, to William Earle of Poictiers, his wife,
mother to

D. Petronilla, heire of Arragon.

D. Petronilla, daughter to D. Ramir, did not raigne, as some hold, but her sonne D. Raymond,
whom she had by the Earle of Barcelona.
D. Raymond Berenger, who gouerned the realme in qualitie of a Regent, and was called
Prince of Arragon, who had by his wife Petronilla, among other children which are named
in the line of Cattelogne, this sonne

D. Raymond, who changed his name, and was called
Alphonso.



VI.
D. ALPHONSO, second of that name, called before Raymond, sonne to the Earle
D. Raymond Berenger, and of the Princesse D. Petronilla, in the yeare 1162: he raigned
34 yeares.
D. SANCHA, daughter to D. Alphonso Raymond, king of Castille and Leon, and of
D. Rica, she was mother to


Children
D. Pedro king of Arragon.
D. Alfonso Earle of Prouence, who had to wife
D. Maria de Folcaquier, whence descendedD. Raymond Berenger who was married to Beatrix
daughter
to Thomas Earle
of Morienne,
who had
Marguerite queene
of France.Leonora Queene of
England.Sancha Queene of
England and Empresse.Beatrix Queene of
Naples.Ioane, who had the
countie of Proue^ce,
as the Arragonois
say.
D. Ferdinand a Monke.
D. Constance Queene of Hungarie
and then Empresse.
D. Leonora Countesse of Tolousa.
D. Sancha Countesse also of Tolousa.
D. Doulce a Nunne.



VII.
D. Pedro 2 of that name, sonne to D. Alfonso the 2, in the yeare 1196: he raigned about
18 yeares.
His first wife was of the house of Folcaquier, by whom he had

D. Raymond Berenger.

D. Marie daughter to the Earle of Mompellier, who had beene marryed to the Earle
of Cominges: by this second wife he had

D. Iames king.

By a Concubine not named

D. Constance marryed to William Raymond of Moncado, Seneschall of Cattelogne.



VIII.
D. Iames first of that name, sonne to the king D. Pedro the first, in the yeare 1213: hee
raigned 43 yeares.
D. Leonora of Castille, daughter to king D. Alfonso the 9. by whom he had

D. Alfonso who dyed before the father.

D. Violant daughter to the king of Hungarie his second wife, mother to

Children
D. Pedro king of Arragon.
D. Iames king of Maiorca, who
married Esclermond of Foix,
who brought him
D. Iames a Monke.D. Sancho king of Maiorca.D. Ferdinand.D. Philip.D. Sancha.
D. Sancho Archbishop of Toledo.
D. Isabell Queene of France.
D. Ferdinand.
D. Violant Queene of Castille.
D. Constance wife to D. Manuell.
D. Sancha.
D. Maria.


Of D. Ferdinand 3. sonne to D. Iames of Maiorca, and
of Isabell heire of Morec, issued
D. Iames king of Maiorca.D. Frederic.


And of his 2. wife of Cypres
D. Ferdinand.


D. Iames sonne to D. Ferdinand had by Constance of Arragon
Isabell Marquesse of Montferrat.Iames heire of Maiorca.

King Iames had also by D. Theresa Gil de Bridaure, whom hee had married secretly,


D. Pedro, Lord of Ayerbes.
D. Iames, Lord of Xerica.

D. Berenguela, a concubine.

D. Pedro Fernandes, Lord of Ixar.

Of the daughter of D. Sancho d' Antilla^, a concubine,

D. Ferdinand Sanches.



IX.
D. PEDRO, third of that name, son to D. Iames 1, in the yere 1276: he raigned 9 yeres.
D. CONSTANCE, daughter to Manfroy, bastard to the Emperour Frederic 2 his wife,
mother to

Children
D. Alphonso, King of Arragon.
D. Iames, King of Sicile, and then of Arragon.
D. Frederic, King of Sicile.
D. Pedro.
D. Isabel, Queene of Portugall.
D. Constance or Violant, queen of Naples.

D. Maria Nicolosa, a concubine, brought him

D. Iames Perez.

D. Anne Zapate, a concubine, mother to

D. Ferdinand.

By another concubine not named,

D. Sancho.



X.
D. ALPHONSO, third of that name, sonne to D. Pedro, in the yeare 1285: he raigned
six yeares, and died without children.


XI.
D. IAMES, second of that name, brother to D. Alphonso, in the yeare 1291: he raigned
36 yeares.
BLANCHE, daughter to Charles King of Naples, called the Lame, his wife, mother to

Children
D. Iames, who became a Monke.
D. Alphonso.
D. Pedro, Earle of Ampurias.
D. Raymond Berenger, Earle of Prages.
D. Iohn, Archbishop of Toledo.
D. Constance, wife to D. Iohn Manuel.
D. Maria, wife to D. Pedro of Castille.
D. Blanche, a Nunne.
D. Violant, Princesse of Tarentum.
D. Isabel, wife to the Emperour Frederic the third.

This King had first of all maried D. ISABEL, daughter to D. Sancho King of Castille* but
the Pope dissolued this mariage.
D. MARIA of Cypres was his third wife*
D. ECLISENDE, sister to Othon of Moncado, his fourth wife.
By a concubine, not named,

D. Iames of Arragon, Earle of Luna.



XII.
D. ALPHONSO fourth, sonne to D. Iames 2, in the yere 1328, and raigned 8 yeres.
D. THERESA ENTENZA, Countesse, heire of Vrgel, his wife.

Children
D. Pedro, King.
D. Iames, Earle of Vrgel.
D. Constance, Queene of Majorca.
Some write hee had fiue other children which died.

D. LEONORA of Castille, his second wife, mother to

D. Ferdinand, Marquesse of Tortosa.
D. Iohn.




XIII.
D. PEDRO, 4 of that name, son to D. Alphonso 4, in the yere 1336: he raigned 51 yeres.
D. MARIA, second daughter to Philip 3, King of Nauarre, his wife.

Children
D. Constance, Queene of Sicile.
D. Ioane, Countesse of Ampurias.
D. Maria.
A sonne which dyed young.

D. LEONORA, or ELVIRA of Portugall, his second wife.
D. CONSTANCE, or LEONORA of Sicile, sister to King Lewis, his 3 wife, mother to

Children
D. Iohn, King.
D. Alphonso.
D. Martin, who was King.
D. Leonora, Queene of Castille.

D. SIBILLE FORTIA, widow to Artolde Fosses, his 4 wife, by whom he had

D. Isabel, Countesse of Vrgel.



XIIII.
D. IOHN, 1 of that name, son to D. Pedro 4, in the yere 1387, and raigned 8 yeares.
D. MATTHEA, daughter to the Earle of Armaignac.

D. Iames, who dyed.
D. Ioane, wife to Mathew of Castelbon, Earle of Foix.

D. VIOLANT, second wife to D. Iohn, mother to

Children
D. Violant, wife to Lewis
of Anjou, mother to
Lewis.Rene.--
Iohn, Duke of Calabria.Nicholas, Marquesse of Pont.Marguerite, Queene of England.Violant, Duchesse of Lorraine.Charles, Earle
of Mayne.
One sonne, who dyed
young.



XV.
D. MARTIN, brother to D. Iohn deceased, for want of heires male by him, succeeded, by
election of the Estates, and by will, to the realme of Arragon, to the prejudice of D.
Ioane, Countesse of Foix, and against her matrimoniall conuentions, and the promises
made by her father and grandfather, to Mathew of Castelbon, her husband.
D. MARIA de Luna was his first wife before he came to the Crowne, by whom he had

D. Martin, who was King of Sicile, and dyed before his father,
without any children.

D. MARGVERITE de Prades, his 2 wife, by whom he left no issue.


XVI.
D. FERDINAND* first of that name brother to Henrie 3, king of Castille: hee obtained
the realme of Arragon by election of the Estates, all other pretendants being rejected, in
the yeare 1412, and raigned about foure yeares.
D. LEONORA d' Albuquerque, a Princesse of the bloud of Castille, his wife, mother
to

Children
D. Alphonso, King of Arragon.
D. Iohn, King of Nauarre and Arragon.
D. Henrie, Master of S. Iames in Castille.
D. Sancho, Master of Alcantara.
D. Pedro.
D. Marie, Queene of Castille.
D. Leonora, Queene of Portugall.



XVII.
D. ALPHONSO, 5 of that name, sonne to D. Ferdinand, in the yere 1416: he raigned 42
yeares.
D. MARIE of Castille, his wife, but without children.

By concubines not named, he had

D. Ferdinand king of Naples.
D. Maria Marquesse of Ferrara.
D. Leonora Princesse of Rossano.



XVIII.
D. IOHN second of that name, brother to king Alphonso fift, for want of lawfull heires,
succeeded to the Realme of Arragon, in the yeare 1458: and raigned one and twentie
yeares and sixe moneths.
D. BLANCHE of Nauarre his first wife, in whose right he was king of Nauarre, and had
by her three children

D. Charles, who died before his
father, and had these base
children,
D. Philip Master of Montesa.D. Iohn Bishop of Huesca.D. Anne duchesse of Medina Celi.
D. Blanche Queene of Castille.
D. Leonora Queene of Nauarre.

D. Ioane daughter to D. Frederic Henriques Admirall of Castille, his second wife, mother
to

D. Ferdinand king of Arragon, Castille, Nauarre, etc.
D. Ioane Queene of Naples.

By concubines whose names are vnknowne,

Bastards
D. Alphonso Earle of Vilhermosa.
D. Iohn Archbishop of Saragosse.
D. Leonora Countesse of Lerin.
D. Ferdinand.
D. Maria.



XIX.
D. FERDINAND second of that name, sonne to king Iohn, in the yeare 1479: he raigned
37 yeares in Arragon.
D. ISABEL Queene of Castille his wife, by whom the realmes of Arragon and Castille
were vnited.

D. Ioane mother to the Emperour Charles the fift.
The other children of D. Ferdinand and D. Isabel, are mentioned in the
Line of Castille.

D. GERMAINE second wife to king Ferdinand.

D. Iohn, who died an infant.

The Vicountesse of Eboli a concubine, mother to

D. Alfonso of Arragon Arch-bishop of Saragosse.

Of another concubine

D. Ioane of Arragon wife to D. Bernardin de Velasco, Constable.

Of D. Tota of Bilbao, a concubine

D. Marie of Arragon a Nun.

By a Portugall of the family of Pereira.

D. Marie of Arragon a Nun.




Line of Cattelogne.
BERNARD, Earle, Duke and Marques of Spaine vnder Charles the great, confirmed by
Lewis the gentle, gouerned Cattelogne about the yere 795.
D. GEOFFREY d' Arria Earle of Barcelona, vnder the French, in the yeere 839.
D. ALMIRA his wife, a French woman, mother to

D. Geoffrey the hairie.

D. SALOMON Earle of Cerdagne, an vsurper, in the yere 8^8.


First proprietarie Earle.
D. GEOFFREY the hairie obtained Cattelogne in proprietie, vnder the Soueraigntie
of France, in the yeare 884, of Charles the Gro^^e.
D. N. a Fleming, his wife.

Children
D. Rodolphus, Abbot of Ripol, and Bishop of Vrgel.
D. Geoffrey.
D. Myr.
D. Seniofrid, Earle of Vrgel,
who was father to
D. Borel, Earle etc.D. Armingol, Bishop of Vrgel.
One daughter.



II.
D. MYR, sonne to D. Geoffrey, in the yere 914: he held the Countie 15 yeres: his sonnes
were

Children
D. Seniofrid,
earle.
D. Oliban, called
Cheurette,
earle of Cerdagne
and Besalu,
father to
Bernard, called
Breake-yron,
father to
William the fat,
earle of Besalu,
father to
Bernard Guillen, also Earle
of Besalu.
D. Myr, Earle
and Bishop of
Girone.
D. Geoffrey, earl
of Cerdagne,
who had fiue
sonnes.
Raymond Geffroy,
earle of
Cerdagne,
father to
VVilliam Raymond,
earl of
Cerdagne,
father to
D. William
Iourdaine,
Earle of
Cerdagne.D. Bernard.D. William.D. Henry.D. Geffrey Guinard,
Archbishop
of Narbone.D. Berenger Geoffrey, Bishop of Girone.D. William Geoffrey, Bishop of Vrgel.D. Geoffrey, Earle of Bergade.
D. Oliban, Bishop
of Vic,
of Ossone.



III.
D. SENIOFRID, sonne to D. Myr in the yere 919: he ruled vnder the gouernment of
his vncle the Earle of Vrgel, and alone, about 38 yeres.
D. MARIA, Infanta of Nauarre, daughter to the King D. Sancho Abarca, his wife, by
whom he had not any children.


IIII.
D. BORELL, sonne to D. Seniofrid, Earle of Vrgel, succeeded his cousin D. Seniofrid in
the Countie of Barcelona, by right of intrusion: yet some pretend an insufficiencie in
D. Oliban, brother to the deceased, in the yere 967.
D. LEODEGA^DE his first wife, mother to

D. Raymond Borel.

D. ARMERVDE, or as some write, Engelrade his second wife.

Children
D. Ermengauld, Earle of Vrgel.
D. Borella, a Nunne.



V.
D. RAYMOND BOREL, sonne to the Earle D. Borel, in the yere 993, and held the Earledome
24 yeres.
D. SANCHA his wife, mother to

D. Berenger Borel.



VI.
D. BERENGER BOREL, sonne to D. Raymond, in the yere 1017: he ruled 18 yeres.
The name of his wife is vncertaine.

Children
D. Raymond Berenger.
D. William Berenger.
D. Sancho Berenger, a Priot.




VII.
D. RAYMOND BERENGER, sonne to D. Berenger Borel, in the yere 1035: he ruled 41
yeares.
D. RADALMVRS his first wife.

D. Pedro Raymond.
D. Berenger Raymond.

D. ALMODIA, a French Ladie, descended from those Lords which ruled then in Languedoc,
by whom the house of Barcelona got the rights it hath had to Carcassone, and
other lands in that countrey: by her D. Raymond had

D. Raymond Berenger, Earle.
D. Lucia, Countesse of Paliars by her mariage with the Earle of Ar^al.



VIII.
D. RAYMOND BERENGER the Young, and third of that name, sonne to D. Raymond
Berenger 2, in the yere 1076: he held the Earledome of Barcelone six yeres.
D. ALMODIA, daughter to Robert Guichard, Duke of Ponglia, his wife, mother to

D. Raymond Arnould.



IX.
D. RAYMOND ARNOVLD, sonne to D. Raymond Berenger, and 4 of that name, in the
yeare 1082: he ruled 48 yeares.
D. DOVLCE, Countesse of Prouence, daughter to Cont Gilabert, or Gibert, his wife,
mother to

D. Berenguela, Queene of Castille.
D. Raymond Berenger, Prince of Arragon.
D. Berenger Raymond, Earle of Prouence.
One daughter, maried to Amery, Vicont of Narbona.
Another daughter, maried to Cont Roger, some cal him Bernard de Foix.



X.
D. RAYMOND BERENGER, fift of that name, sonne to D. Raymond Arnould, in the yeare
1131: he ruled 31 yeares.
D. PETRONELLA, daughter to the king D. Ramir the Monke: by which mariage the
realme of Arragon and the Earledome of Cattelogne, or Barcelone, were vnited, they
had

Children
D. Raymond, who was afterwards called Alphonso, king of Arragon.
D. Pedro.
D. Sancho.
D. Adoncia, Queene of Portugall.
One daughter, maried to the Earle of Vrgel.

D. RAYMOND, afterwards Alphonso, sonne to D. Raymond Berenger the fift, king of Arragon,
and Earle of Barcelone, in the yeare 1162: his posteritie is in the line of Arragon.



Line of Portugall.
HENRIE of Besanson, or of Lorrain, was first Earl of Portugal, about the yere 1090, by
his mariage with D. THERESA, daughter to D. Alphonso the sixt, king of Leon and Castille,
to whom that countrey was giuen in dowrie: Their children were

D. Alphonso Henriques, King.
D. Theresa Henriques.
Another daughter, maried to D. Ferdinand Mendes.


First King of Portugall.
D. ALPHONSO HENRIQVES succeeding his father in the Earldome of Portugal in the
yere 1112, tooke vpon him the title of King about the yere 1139, and held that country 72
yeres.

D. MALFADA MANRIQVE de Lara, his wife.

Children
D. Sancho, King of Portugall.
D. Vrraca, Queene of Leon.
D. Theresa, Countesse of Flanders.
D. Malfada.


Bastard D. Pedro Alphonso.



II.
D. SANCHO, first of that name, sonne to D. Alphonso, in the yeare 1184: he raigned 28
yeares.
D. A^^ONCIA, or DOVLCE, daughter to D. Raymond Berenger, Earle of Barcelone,
mother to

Children
D. Alphonso, King.
D. Ferdinand, Earle of Flanders.
D. Pedro, Earle of Vrgel in Arragon.
D. Henrique.
D. Theresa, wife to D. Alphonso of Leon.
D. Malfada, Queene of Castille.
D. Sancha, a Nunne.
D. Blanche.
D. Berenguela.

By D. Maria Aires, a concubine, he had

Bastards
D. Vrraca.
D. Martin of Portugall.

By D. Maria Peres of Ribera, another concubine,

Bastards
D. Theresa Sanches.
D. Gil Sanches of Portugall.
D. Constance Sanches.
D. R^y Sanches of Portugall.



III.
D. ALPHONSO, second of that name, son to the King of D. Sancho, in the yere 1212:
he raigned 11 yeares.

D. Sancho.
D. Alphonso.
D. Ferdinand.
D. Leonora, Queene of Denmarke.

By a concubine, a Moore,

D. Alphonso Martines.



IIII.
D. SANCHO, called Capello, second of that name, sonne to D. Alphonso the second, in the
yeare 1223: he raigned in troubles vnto the yeare 1257; for then by reason of his incapacitie,
D. Alphonso, his brother, was called to the gouernement of Portugall.
D. MENCIA LOPES, his wife, by whom he had no children.


V.
D. ALPHONSO, third of that name, brother to D. Sancho, of a Regent and Gouernor
he made himselfe king of Portugall, about the yeare 1257, and raigned two and twentie
yeares.
MAHAVLT, or MATIIDE, Countesse of Boullen, his lawfull wife, mother to

D. Ferdinand, or Peter.
D. Robert.

This king D. Alphonso, to be supported in his designes to raigne by the fauour of Castille,
left his lawfull wife Mahault Countesse of Boullen, and maried, in her life time, with
the daughter of D. Alphonso, called the Wise, king of Castille.

D. BEATRIX, a bastard, his wife, by whom he had

D. Denis, king.
D. Alphonso.
D. Blanche, a nun.
D. Constance.

By a concubine, or by diuers, he had

D. Leonora.
D. Ferdinand Alphonso of Portugall.



VI.
D. DENIS, sonne to D. Alphonso the third, in the yeare 1279: hee raigned 46 yeares.
D. ISABEL of Arragon, daughter to the king D. Pedro, his wife, mother to

Children
D. Constance, Queene of Castille.
D. Alphonso, king of Portugall.
D. Pedro, Earle of Portalegre.
D. Alphonso Sanches, a bastard.

Some write, that the lawfull children of D. Denis and D. Isabel, were,

Isabel.
Constance.
Alphonso.

By concubines,

Bastards
D. Alphonso, author of the familie of Albuquerque.
D. Peter, who gaue himselfe vnto learning, and made a booke of
the great houses of Spaine.
D. Iohn.
D. Ferdinand.
A daughter maried to D. Iohn de la Cerde.
Another daughter, a Nunne.



VII.
D. ALPHONSO the fourth, sonne to D. Denis, in the year* 1325: hee raigned thirtie
two yeares.
D. BEATRIX of Castille, his wife, mother to

D. Pedro, King.
D. Maria.
D. Alphonso.
D. Denis.
D. Iohn.
D. Leonora, or Fluira, Queene of Arragon.



VIII.
D. PEDRO, 1 of that name, son to D. Alphonso 4, in the yere 1357: he raigned 10 yeres.
D. BLANCHE, daughter to D. Pedro king of Castille, whom he put away, and then maried
D. CONSTANCE, daughter to D. Iohn Manuel, mother to

D. Lewis, who died an infant.
D. Ferdinand, King.
D. Marie, wife to D. Ferdinand of Arragon.
D. Beatrix died young.

By AGNES de Castro, a clandestine mariage,

D. Alphonso.
D. Iohn.
D. Denis.
D. Beatrix, Countesse of Albuquerque.

D. Theresa Gallega, a concubine.

D. Iohn, who was King.




IX.
D. FERDINAND, sonne to D. Pedro, in the yere 1367: he raigned seuenteene yeres.
D. LEONORA TELLES de Meueses, his wife.

D. Beatrix, queene of Castille.

By a concubine he had

Isabella Countesse of Gijon.



X.
D. IOHN first of that name, base sonne to the king D. Pedro: he got the realme by his
sword, and also by election, in the yere 1385, from D. Iohn king of Castille and D. Beatrix
his wife. He was before master of Auiz. He raigned 49 yeres.
D. PHILIP of Lancaster, an English woman, his wife, mother to

D. Blanche.
D. Alphonso.
D. Edward king.
D. Pedro duke of Coimbra, who maried
D. Isabel of Arragon, and had
D. Pedro Constable, who thought to be
king of Arragon.D. Iohn king of Cypres.D. Isabel queene of Portugall.D. Philip a Nunne.D. Iames a Cardinall.D. Beatrix, wife to the Lord of Rauestaine.
D. Henrie duke of Viseo.
D. Isabel duchesse of Bourgondie.


D. Iohn Master of Saint Iames, father to D. Isabel, who was queene of Castille.
D. Ferdinand Master of Auiz.

Besides these lawfull children, the king D. Iohn had by D. Agnes a concubine,

D. Beatrix Countesse of Arundel.
D. Alphonso Earle of Oren and Barcellos, and duke of Bragance.



XI.
D. EDVVARD sonne to D. Iohn the first, in the yere 1433: he raigned fiue yeres.
D. LEONORA of Arragon, daughter to D. Ferdinand the first, his wife, mother to

Children
D. Alphonso king.
D. Ferdinand Duke of Viseo,
who maried D. Beatrix, daughter
to his vncle D. Iohn Master
of S. Iames, and had
D. Leonora queene.D. Dominike.D. Emanuel king.D. Isabel, Duchesse of Bragance.
D. Philip a daughter.
D. Leonora, wife to the Emperour Frederic the third.
D. Katherine.
D. Ioane queene of Castille.



XII.
D. ALPHONSO fift of that name, sonne to D. Edward in the yeare 1438, and raigned
43 yeres.
D. ISABEL, daughter to his vncle D. Pedro Duke of Coi^bra, his wife, mother to

D. Iohn, who died young.
D. Ioane.
D. Iohn king, whom some call Ferdinand, and make him father to Iohn which
raigned, and adde a third sonne,
D. Henrie.



XIII.
D. IOHN, second of that name, son to D. Alphonso the fift, in the yere 1481: he raigned
foureteene yeres.
D. LEONORA, daughter to D. Ferdinand Duke of Viseo, mother to

D. Alphonso, who died before his father.

By D. Anna de Mendosa, a concubine,

D. George, Master of S. Iames and Auiz.




XIIII.
D. EMANVEL Sonne to D. Ferdinand duke of Viseo, by right, and also by the nomination
of king Iohn, was king of Portugal, in the yeare 1495, and raigned 26 yeares: he maried
first:
D. ISABELL, eldest Daughter to D. Ferdinand and D. Isabell Kings of Castille and Arragon,
mother to

D. Michel who liued little.

D. MARIA, Sister to the said D. Isabell his second wife, by whome hee had

D. Iohn king.
D. Isabell Queene of Castille, and Empresse.
D. Beatrix Duchesse of Sauoy.
D. Lewis, father to D. Anthony the Bastard chosen king after
Cardinall Henry his Vncle.
D. Henry Cardinall.
D. Alfonso Cardinall.
D. Catherine.
D. Ferdinand.
D. Edward husband to
Isabell, daughter to
Iohn or Iaime, duke
of Bragance, and had
Marie duchesse of Parma.Catherine duchesse of Bragance, wife
to Iohn second sonne to Theodosius.Edward an after birth died in the yere
1576.


D. Anthony, he died soone after he was borne.

D. LEONORA, sister to the Emperour Charles the fift, mother to

D. Charles, he died an Infant.
D. Marie, who being 56 yeres old, died at Lisbone in the
yeare 1578.



XV.
D. IOHN, 3 of that name, Sonne to D. Emanuell king of Portugall in the yeare 1521;
he raigned thirty and sixe yeares.
D. CATHERINE, sister to the Emperour Charles, his wife, mother to

D. Alfonso.
D. Marie Princesse of Castille.
D. Catherine.
D. Beatrix.
D. Emanuell.
D. Philip.
D. Iohn Prince, father to D. Sebastian, and husband to D. Ioane,
daughter to the Emperour Charles.
D. Anthonie.



XXI.
D. SEBASTIAN Sonne to the Prince D. Iohn, in the yeare 1557, hee raigned one and
twentie yeares, and died in Afrike, leauing no heires.


XVII.
D. HENRY, Cardinall, Archbishop of Ebora, sonne to the King D. Emanuel, in the
yeare 1578, he raigned about a yeare and a halfe.


XVIII.
D. PHILIP 2, king of Castille vnited the Realme of Portugall to Castille by force, after
the Cardinals death, in the yeare one thousand fiue hundred and eighty, and held
it eighteene yeares.


XIX.
D. PHILIP the third doth now hold this Realme.




@Archbishops of Toledo.

Eugenius, first Archbishop.
Pelagius.
Patruuius.
Turibio.
Quince.
Vincent.
Paulacius or Pauiat.
Natalis.
Audens.
Astur.
Isicius.
Maioran.
Castin.
Melancius.
Campeius.
Cintuacinus.
Patron.
Paramacius.
Peter 1.
Celsus.
Montanus.
Iulian 1.
Bacchand.
Peter 2.
Eufemius.
Excipius.
Adelphius.
Aurasius.
Heladius
Iustus.
Eugenius 2.
Eugenius 3.
Illefonsus.
Quiricius.
Iulian 2.
Sesebert or Sicarius.
S. Felix.
Gunderic or Guttiere.
Sinderic.
Opas.
Vrbain.
In the time of
the Moores.Peter,Cixilas,


After the Conquest of the Citie of Toledo from the Moores.
Bernard Abbot of Sahagun.
Raymond.
Iohn 1.
Celebrun.
Gonsal 1.
Martin.
Roderigo Ximenes.
Iohn 2.
Guttiere 2.
Pascal.
Sancho 1.
Sancho 2, Infant of Arragon.
Gensal 2, Cardinall.
Guttiere 3.
Gonsal 3.
Iohn 3, Infant of Arragon.
Ximene de Luna.
Gill Carillo d' Albornos, Cardinall.
Blaise.
Blasco.
Gomez Manrique.
Pedro Tenorio 4.
Pedro de Luna 5
Sancho de Roias.
Iohn de Contreras 4.
Iohn de Cerezuela 5.
Guttiere Gomes, de Toledo.
Alfonso Carillo de Acugna.
Pedro Gonsal de Mendosa, a Cardinal
Francis Ximenes a Cardinall.
William of Croy.
Alfonso Fonseca of Azeneda.
Iohn Tauera, Cardinall.
Iohn Martines Siliceo, Cardinall.
Frier Barthelmew Carranza de Miranda.
76. Archbishops.



Moores.

Gouernors vnder the Miralmumins or kings of Affrike.
Musa in the yeare 714
Tarif.
Abdulazis tooke the royal diademe
at Seuille.
Aiub, who restored the ancient Bilbilis,
and called it Calataiub.
Alabor.
Adam.
Abderrahamen.
Iahea.
Adaifa Alcazazin.
Hieman.
Autuman.
Alhatan.
Manes.
Mahumet.
Abderrahamen.
Abdimelic.
Abubacar.
Redoan.
Toaba.
Ioseph.




Soueraigne kings at Cordoua ouer the other Princes Moores, in Spaine, and
did no more acknowledge the Miralmumins of Afrike.

Abderrahamen 1. yeare 757
Hizen his sonne. 787
Haliathan, sonne to Hizen. 794
Abderrahamen 2. 819
Mahumet. 839
Almundir. 874
Abdalla. 876
Abderrahamen Almansor 3. 889
Hali Hatan 2. 939
Aizen 2. 956
Zuleima. 989
Mahumet 3. 993
Hali. 1001
Cacin. 1003
Hiaia. 1007
Abderrahamen. 1007
Mahumet 4. 1007
Hizen 3. 1009
Ioar. 1011
Mahumet 5. 1014



After these there were great alterations and changes among the Moores in Spaine,
sometimes free, sometimes vnder the kings of Maroc and Fez: in the end the realme
of Granado was erected, the which continued aboue two hundred
and fiftie yeares vnder the kings which follow.

GRANADO.
Mahumet Aben Alhamar. 1236
Mahumet Mir Almus his sonne. 1272
Mahumet Aben Alhamar Aben Azar. 1302
Mahumet Azar Aben Leuin. 1309
Ismael. 2319
Mahumet Sonne to Ismaell. 1322
Ioseph Aben Amet. 1334
Mahumet Lagus. 1354
Mahumet the Vermeil raigned two yeres, but
Mahumet whom he had expelled returned
Mahumet Guadix. 1379
Ioseph his Sonne. 1392
Mahumet Aben Balua. 1396
Ioseph. 1407
Mahumet Aben Azar. 1423
Mahumet the little. 1427
Ioseph Aben Almao. 1432
Mahumet Aben Ozmen. 1445
Ismael. 1453
Muley Alboacen. 1462
Mahumet Boabdelin the little. 1482
Muley Boabdelin. 1485

This king being expelled from Granado by Mahumet aboue named retained Malaga,
Basa, Almerie, Guadix, and some other places, which were taken from them by the kings
D. Ferdinand and D. Isabell, some by force, some by composition, Boabdelin, remaining sole
king of Granado, whereof he was dispossest by the same kings.


The Titles and families of all the Dukes, Marquesses* and
Earles of Spaine.
THe duke of Lerma and of Cea,They are called Grandes to whome the king giues leaue to stand couered before him. All dukes be Grandes. Marquesse of Denia and Villamisar, Earle of
Ampudia, of the Councel of state, cup-bearer to king Philip 3. and master of
his horse, commander Maior of Castille, captain general of the horse of Spain
and of the holy church of Toledo, Adelantado, or Lord President of Casorla,
the head of the house of Roias and Sandoual: he holds his estate in Castille the old, and his
house in Vailledolit, and in Denia.
2 The duke of Frias, Marques of Berlanga, earle of Haro, Lord of the house of the seuen
Infants of Lara, Constable of Castille, Iustice Maior and high Chamberlain, he is the
chiefe of the Velascos: his house is in Burgos, and his estate in Castille the old, in the mountains
of Biscaie, and the hils of Soria; hee is of the Councel of State and President of the
Councell of Italie, he had a daughter which was married to the duke of Bragance.
3 The duke of Medina of Riosecco, Marques of Modica, earle of Melgar, Vicont of
Esterlin, Admiral of Castille, head of the Enriques: he holds in house in Vailledolit, and
his estate in the Prouince of Campos, Catalonia and Sicilia.
4 The duke of Alua and Guesca, marques of Coria, Earle of Saluatieria, Vico^t of Saldic^s,
and lord of Valde Comeia, the chiefe of the familie of the Toledos: he holds his house
in Salamanca, and his estate in Castille the old, towards Portugal, and the realm of Granado,
he is Constable of Nauarre, and a knight of the order of the Golden fleece.
5 The duke of Infantado, Marques of Cenete, and Santillana, earle of Saldanes, Lord
of the royaltie of Mansanares, and head of the Mendosas: he hath his house in the citie of
Guadalajara, and his estate in the kingdome of Toledo, and in the mo^ntaines of Castille
the old, and in the Prouince of Alaua, he is of the Councell of State.
6 The duke of Medina Celi, Marques of Cogolludo, Earle of Port Sa^cta Maria, chief
of the familie of Los Cerdas: his house is in Medina Celi, and his estate in the Realm of Toledo,
and Seuille, he is of the bloud Royall of Castille.
7 The duke of Medina Sidonia, Marques of S. Lucar of Barameda, Earle of Niebta,
head of the family of Guzmans: he holds his house in Seuille, and S. Lucar, and his estate
in the country of Seuille.
8 The duke of Escalona, Marques of Moya, earle of Esteuan, hee hath his house in the
citie of Toledo, and his estate in the realmes of Murcia, and in la Mancha, he is chiefe of the
Pachecos, he was married vnto the sister of the duke of Bragance.
9 The duke of O^una, Marques of Pegnafiel, earle of Vrena, head of the familie of Girones:
he hath his house in Pegnafiel, and his estate in the realm of Seuille and in Castille.
10 The duke of Bejar, Marques of Gibraleon, earle of Benalcacar, head of the Zunigas,
and of the familie of Soto Maior: he holds his house in Seuille, and his estate in the realme
of Seuille and in Castille the old he is of the bloud royall.
11 The duke of Albuquerque, Marques of Biedma and Cuellar, earle of Ledesina, head
of the familie of the Cueuas: he hath his house in Cuellar, his estate in Estremadura, and in
Castille the old.
12 The duke of Alcala de los Gasules, Marques of Tarisa, earle of Hornos and Villamartin,
chiefe President of Andalusia, he is of the familie of the Enriques and Riberas: hee
hath his house in the citie of Seuille, and his estate in Andalusia, hee hath married with a
daughter of the Marques of Castell Rodrigo, Verrey of Portugall.
13 The duke of Sesa and Terranoua, Earle of Cabra and Baena, head of the Cordouas and
of Aguilar: he holds his house in Cordoua and Granado, and his estate in the kingdome
of Naples, and in the realme of Cordoua: he is of the Councel of state, and chiefe steward
to the Queene.
14 The duke of Najara, earle of Treuigno and Valencia, of D. Iohn, hee is head of the familie
of the Manriques de Lara: he hath his house at Najara, and his estate in the Prouince
of Rioje, and in the realme of Leon.
15 The Duke of Maqueda, Marques of Elche, head of the Cardenas: hee hath his house
in Toledo, and his estate in the realm of Seuille.
16 The duke of Feria, Marques of Safra, head of the familie of the Figeroas: he hath his
estate in Estremadura, and his house in Safra.
17 The duke of Arcos, Marques of Lara, earle of Marchena, head of the house of Pances:
hee hath his estate in Andalusia, and house in Seuille.
18 The duke of Gandia, marques of Laiba, head of the family of the Bor^as: hee hath
his estate and house in the Realme of Valencia.
19 The duke of Sogorue and Cordoua, marques of Comares, lord of Lucena, of the
bloud royall of Arragon, and of la Cerde: hee hath his house in the citie of Valencia, and
the Duchie of Sogorue in the realme of Valencia, and that of Cordoua, in Cattelonia, and
his greatest estate in the realme of Cordoua.
20 The duke of Soma, earle of Panamos, admiral of Naples, his of the family of the Cardonas:
he hath he is house at Belpuche and his estate in the Realme of Naples.
21 The duke of Villahermosa, earle of Ribagorsa, head of the house of Arragon: he hath
his house at Saragosse, and his estate in the realme of Arragon.
22 The duke of Veraguas Admirall of the Indies, of the house of Toledo: hee keepes his
house in the city of Saragosse, and his estate in the realme of Arragon:
23 The duke of Pastrana, prince of Eboli, of the familie of Siluas in Portugall: he hath
his house and his estate in Pastrana.
24 The duke of Franca villa, Prince of Melito* of the house of the Mendosas: hee hath his
house in Franca villa, and his estate in the realme of Naples.


Marquesses that be Grandes.
1 The Marques of Astorga, Earle of Trastamara, Lord of the house of Villa Lobos, head of
the familie of the Ossorios: he hath his house in the citie of Astorga, and his estate in the realm
of Leon, and in the prouince of Campos.
2 The Marques of Aguilar, Earle of Castagneda, of the house of the Manriques of Lara: he
holds his house in Carrion and in Aguilar del Campo, and his estate in the mountains of Leon,
and in the prouince of Campos.
3 The Marques of Mondejar, Earle of Tendilla, one of the house of the Mendosas: he holds
his house in Mondejar, and his estate in Alcaria.
4 The Marques of Tauarres, master of Montesa, of the house of Borias: he may giue the habit
of Montesa in Arragon and Valencia, and hath his estate and house in the said realmes.
5 The Marques of Pliego, Lord of the house of Aguilar, of the familie of Figeroas: he hath
his house in Cordoua, and his estate in the said realme, and in base Andalusia.
6 The Marques of Los Velez, Adelantado or President of Murcia, of the familie of the Fa^ardos:
he hath his estate and house in the realme of Murcia.
7 The Marques of Villa Franca, of the house of the Toledos: he keeps his house in Villa, franca,
and his estate in the realme of Leon and Naples.
8 The Marques of Sancta Cruz, of the familie of the ^asanes: he hath his house in Viso, and
his estate in the realme of Toledo.
9 The Marques of Frichilla, and of Malagon, he is brother to the duke of Bragance: he hath
his estate in Castille, and is of the bloud royall of Portugall, and liues in the city of Ebora, in
the same realme.


Marquesses which be not Grandes.
1 The Marques of Ayamonte, of the familie of Sunigas: he hath his estate and house in Seuille.
2 The Marques of Benesa, of the house of Auellenada.
3 The Marques of Viana, of the familie of the Pimentelles: he hath his house in Vailledolit,
and his estate in Galicia.
4 The Marques of Cameraca, of Sauiote, and Earle of Riscla, he was Adelantado of Casorla:
he is of the house of Cobos and Mendosa.
5 The Marques of Cortes, he is of the Toledos: he hath his house in Cortes, and his estate
in the realme of Nauarre.
6 The Marques of Monte-maior, of the house of Siluas.
7 The Marques of Guardia, Earle of Sancta Euphemia; he is the chiefe of the familie of the
Mexias: he hath his house in Salamanca, and his estate in Andalusia, and in the realm of Iaen.
8 The Marques of Montes Claros, of the house of the Mendosas: he hath his house in Guadalajara,
and his estate in Alcaria.
9 The Marques of Las Nauas, he is chiefe of the house of Auilas: he hath his house in
the city of Auila, and his estate in the mountaines of Auila.
10 The Marques of Posa, he is of the familie of Roxas: he hath his house in Posa, and his estate
in Castille the old.
11 The Marques of Stepa, of the house of the Centuriones at Genoua: he hath his estate
and house in the realme of Seuille.
12 The Marques of Tabara, he hath his estate in Castille the old, and his house in Vailledolit.
13 The Marques of Villanoua del rio, of the familie of the Enriques: he holds his estate in
Extremadura, and his house in Seuille.
14 The Marques of Villa noua of Barca rota, he is chiefe of the familie of Fuerto c^^reros:
he holds his house in Seuille, and his estate in Extremadura.
15 The Marques of Ladrada, of the familie of Los Cueuas: he holds his estate in the realme
of Toledo.
16 The Marques of Canete, of the familie of Mendosa: he hath his house in the city of Cuenca,
and his estate in the said prouince.
17 The Marques of Falces, head of the Peraltes: he hath his house in Nauarre, and his estate
in the said kingdome.

18 The Marques of Fiomesta, of the familie of the Benanid^s and Enriques: he hath his
house in Fiomesta, and his estate in the prouince of Campos.
19 The Marques of Valle, sonne to Fernando Cortes, who conquered Noua Hispania: hee
hath his house in Seuille and in Mexico, and his estate in Noua Hispania.
20 The Marques of Aunon, he is of the Herceras: he hath his house in Madrid, and his estate
in Alcaria.
21 The Marques of Ardale, Earle of Teba, of the house of Guzman: he keepes his house in
Malaga, and his estate in the realme of Seuille.
22 The Marques of Beret^a, of the familie of the Cardenas: he hath his house in Herena,
and his estate in Estremadura.
23 The Marques of Villa Manrique, of the house of Suniga: he hath his estate and house in the
realme of Seuille.
24 The Marques of Motta, of the house of Vlloa: hee holds his estate and house in Castille.
25 The Marques of Alcanices, of the familie of the Henriques: he hath his estate and house
in Castille.
26 The Marques of Auila Fuente, of the house of the Sunigas: he holds his estate and house
in Castille.
27 The Marques of Molina.
28 The Marques of Fuentes.
29 The Marques of Villada, Maior domo, maior or chiefe Steward, to the king: he is one of
the Grandes.
30 The Marques of Laguna, chiefe steward to the Queene: he is a Grande.
31 The Marques of Sarraluo.
32 The Marques of Caracena, of the familie of the Carrillos and Toledos.
33 The Marques of Cuellar.
34 The Marques of Saint Germain, of the house of Mendosas, his Marquisate is in Sauoy,
and his house and estate in Castille: He is a gentleman of the kings chamber, and Lieutenant
generall of his gards and of all the horse in Spaine.


Earles which be Grandes.
1 The Earle of Miranda, Marques of Baneza: he is head of the Auellanedas, and is of the familie
of Sunigas and Basanes: he holds his house in Peneranda villa suya, and his estate in Castille
the old, and the mountaines thereof: he is of the Councell of State, and President of the
chiefe of Castille.
2 The Earle of Benauent, the head of the Pimentels: he holds his house in Vailledolit, and his
estate in the prouince of Campos: he is the greatest Earle in Spaine.
3 The Earle of Alua de Lista, of the familie of the Henriques: he hath his house in Zamora,
and his estate in Castille the old, and Estremadura: he is of the Councell of State, and chiefe
huntsman to the king, and of his chamber.
4 The Earle of Lemos and Andrada, of Castro and Villalua, Marques of Sarria, and Lord
of Vlloa, he is head of the house of Castros, and gentleman of the kings chamber, he is president
of the councell of the Indies: he hath his house in Lemos and Sarria, and his esate in the realm
of Galicia.
5 The Earle of Oropeza, he is of the house of Toledo and Pachecos: he hath his house at Talauera,
and his estate in the realm of Toledo, he had one daughter and heire, who was married to
a brother of the Duke of Bragances.
6 The Earle of Sancta Gadea, he is head of the familie of the Padillas, he is a gentleman of
the kings chamber, and Adelantado maior of Castille: he hath his house and state in Castille.


Earles which be not Grandes.
The Earle of Salinas and Ribadeo, of the house of Auellaneda and Mendosa: he hath his house
in the city of Burgos and his estate in Biscaie, and the mountaines, who (for that his predecessors
did helpe much in the winning of Toledo) haue this priuiledge, to dine on twelfe day with the
King, and the apparell, which the King weares that day, is his, with his best horse, and a Cup of
gold. This house fell by mariage to R^y G^mez de Silua, Duke of Pastrana, who was second brother

to him that died in Flanders, and Vncle to him that holds the state at this day, he is president
of the Councell of Portugall.
2 The Earle of Aguilar, head of the Arrelanos, and Lord of Los Cameros^ he hath his house
in the towne of Nilda, which is his, and his estate is in Rioja, and the Mountaines of Sona.
3 The Earle of Aranda, Lord of Almuerin.
4 The Earle of Alcaudette, of the house of the Cordouas: he keepes his house in Alcaudette,
and his estate in the realme of Cordoua, he is also of Aluaida, of the house of Milan.
5 The Earle of Altamira, of the house of Roxas, and Moscoso: he hath his house in Altamira
and his estate in Galicia.
6 The Earle of Citona, of the house of Moncada and Heredia.
7 The Earle of Buendia, Lord of Duenas, of the house of Acugna: he hath his house in Acugna,
and his estate in the Territorie of Campos.
8 The Earle of Ayllon, of the house of Leon and Cordoua.
The Earle of Belohite, of the house of Yiar: he holds his estate in Valencia and Arragon.
10 The Earle of Castellar, he is the chiefe of the Sayauedras: he hath his house in Seuille, and
his estate in the same realme.
11 The Earle of Castro Xeris, of the house of Mendosa, and Manriques: he hath his house in
Castro Xeris, and his estate in the realme of Leon.
12 The Earle of Chinchon, head of the house of the Bobadillas: he hath his house in Madrid,
and his estate in the realme of Toledo.
13 The Earle of Cifuente, he is the head of the Silu^s: hee hath his house in Toledo, and his
estate in Alcaria.
14 The Earle of Corunna, of the house of Mendosa: his house is in Guadalajara, and his estate
in Alcaria.
15 The Earle of Fuen salida, he is the head of the Ayalas, his house is in Toledo, and his estate
in the same realme.
16 The Earle of Gelues, he is chief of the house of the Portugals, he hath his house in Seuille,
and his estate in the same realme.
17 The Earle of Gomera, which is in the Iland of the great Canarie, hee is of the house of
the Ayalas.
18 The Earle of Gajan.
19 The Earle of Oliuares, he is of the house of Guzman: his house is at Seuille, and his estate
in Andalusia.
20 The Earle of Ier^a, of the familie of the Carios.
21 The Earle of Costania in Valencia.
22 The Earle of Coruino.
23 The Earle of Fuentes of the house of Heredia: hee hath his estate in Arragon, and his
house at Fuentes.
24 The Earle of Luna, he is head of the Quignones and Villafanes, he hath his house and estate
in the realme of Leon.
25 Earle of Medellin, of the house of Puerto Carreiro: hee hath his house in Medellin, and
his estate in Estremadura.
26 Earle of Monteagudo, he is of the house of Mendosa: he holds his estate in Raca of Arragon,
and his house in Almasa.
27 Earle of Monterey, of the house of Azuedo: he hath his house in Salamanca, and his estate
in Galicia.
28 Earle of Osorno, he is of the Manriques, his house is in Vailledolit, and his estate in Castille
the old.
29 Earle of Onante, head of the Gueuares: he hath his house in Onante, and his estate in the
prouince of Guipuscoa.
30 Earle of Oliua, of the house of Gentillas.
31 Earle of Morata, of the house of Luna.
32 Earle of Orga, he is of the house of Ayala and Mendosa: and some say hee is the head of
the Mendosas.
33 Earle of Puebla, of the house of the Cardenas: he hath his house in Llerena, and his estate
in Estremadura.
34 Earle of Paluia, of the house of Puerto Carriero, he holds his house in Eccia, and his estate
in the Realme of Cordoua.
35 Earle of Pliego, of the house of Carillo and Mendosa: hee hath his house in Guadalajara,
and his estate in the mountaines of Cuenca.
36 Earle of Puno in Rostro, he is head of the Sarrias: he hath his house in Madrid, and his
estate in the Realme of Toledo.
37 Earle of Paredes, of the house of Manriques: his house is in Paredes, and his estate in the
prouince of Campos.
38 Earle of Ribadauia, of the house of Auellaneda: he hath his house in Vailledolit, and his
estate in Gallicia.
39 Earle of Ciruela, of the house of Velasco.
40 Earle of Sastago and Pina, of the house of Arragon: hee hath his house in Saragosse, and
his estate in the realme of Arragon.
41 Earle of Saint Esteuan, the head of the Benauides: his house is in the citie of Vuida, and
his estate in the realme of Arragon.
42 Earls of Nauarre, of the family of the Toledos, and by his wife, by whom he had the estates, of
the bloud of Nauarre, and of the Beaumonts: he hath his house and estate in the realm of Nauarre.
43 Earle of Bargas, he is head of the house of Capatas, his house is in Madrid.
44 Earle of Puebla of Montaluan, of the familie of the Telles, Girones and Pachecos: hee holds
his estate in Estremadura.
45 Earle of Baileu, hee is of the Ponsos of Leon: his house is in Baileu, and his estate in the
realme of Iaen.
46 Earle of Nieua, of the house of Valasco: he hath his house in Nieua, and his estate in Rioja.
47 Earle of Saluatierra, of the house of Ayala: he holds his estate in Castille the old.
48 Earl of Cosentaina, of the house of Corella: his estate and house is in the realm of Valencia.
49 Earle of Galuas, of the house of Los Cerdas.
50 Earle of Delda, of the familie of the Colomas: his estate and house are in the realm of Vale^cia.
51 Earle of Ficallo, of the house of Gandia and Borias: his countie is in Portugall, but his
estate and house in the Realme of Valencia.
52 Earle of Cuba, he is of the Henriques of Almanca: he hath his countie in Portugall, and
his estate and house in the realme of Castille.
53 Earle of Villamediana, he is of the familie of Taxis.
54 Earle of Barraja.
55 Earle of Mayalde
56 Earle of Mirabel.
57 Earle of Galue.
58 Earle of Villaflor.
59 Earle of Cassarubios.
60 Earle of Los Arcos.
61 Earle of Salasar.
62 Earle of Villalonso.
63 Earle of Risco.
64 Earle of Malpica.
65 Earle of Torrejon.

Viconts; Admirals and Adelantados.
Vicont of Peralta.
Vicont del Buli.
Vicont of Altamira.
Vicont of Chelba.
Admirall of Castille.
Admirall of Arragon.
Admirall of Valencia.
Adelantado Maior of Castille.
Adelantado Maior of Andalusia
Adelantado of Galicia.
Adelantado of Canaria.
Adelantado of Carsorla.
Adelantado of the house of Mendosa.


Masterships of Orders of Knights.
The great Mastership of Saint Iames.
The Mastership of Alcantara.
The mastership of the Calatraua.

These three are annexed to the Crowne, and the king is perpetuall Gouernor and Administrator
of them.
These be the Dukes, Marquesses, Earles, Admirals, and Adelantados, which are in the realms
of Castille, Leon, Arragon, Nauarre, Galicia, Valencia, and Cattelonia, and the other estates of
Spaine, except Portugal. Some haue precisely set downe the reuenues of euerie one of these
Noblemen in their relations, as if they were immutable; but, being subiect daily to increase and
decrease according to the disposition and frugality, of the persons that enioy them, I haue wittingly
omitted it: But thus much I dare boldly say, that the nobility of Spain are exceeding rich
in their yerely feuenues, and, if I be not much deceiued, they are the richest subiects in reuenues
of any country of Christendo me.
FINIS.


